* 1932418
* CPS: Small: Naming, Twinning and Observing - Towards Scalable, Reliable and Resilient CPS
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Henning Schulzrinne, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 516,000.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) is increasingly used to control systems that can
cause serious harm to human health or damage property, replacing more
traditional hardwired systems for controlling buildings, alerting authorities to
fire and gas leaks or managing rail systems. Such systems also likely operate
for years, even as the physical environment changes and sensors and actuators
are replaced. For example, both the Merrimack Valley gas explosion and the Notre
Dame fire may have been partially caused or made worse by IoT/CPS systems that
either malfunctioned or misled the operators at crucial instants. Today,
programming such systems is error-prone, particularly if devices and networks
can change over time. Also, testing such systems and training operators is much
more difficult than for regular information technology systems, as one cannot
easily reproduce dangerous or rare physical conditions such as gas over-pressure
or a fire or determine what would happen if a sensor is replaced with a new
model, the network is re-engineered to use different network addresses or time
synchronization fails. Improved programmability and better testing will help
engineers design more dependable IoT/CPS systems and predict their behavior and
thus reduce the likelihood of catastrophic
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to improve
dependability of Internet of Things (IoT) and cyberphysical systems in two ways:
first, by creating a naming and directory mechanism that allows programmers to
create reliable software for controlling such systems, by avoiding reliance on
low-level names such as MAC (Ethernet) or network (IP) addresses and thus making
it easier to reason about system properties. The project envisions creating a
naming and directory mechanism that can provide a variety of logical naming
mechanisms, including administrative hierarchies, geospatial relationships,
civic addresses, function and access rights. The second part of the project will
develop an emulator for large-scale heterogeneous IoT/CPS called FuzzIoT. This
system will combine network emulation and simulation, automated fuzzing (random
variation) of key network and system characteristics, and the modeling of
physical components. For example, domain experts can inject the physics-driven
time-dependent behavior of buildings or vehicles, either derived from models or
real-world measurements. The emulator will be designed to integrate real-world
components, and allow the integration of constraints and assertions. The
emulator is envisioned to be useful for software development, system assurance
and operator training. The project includes multiple broader impacts including
the potential for integration of the research artifacts into IoT
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.