* 1932900
* Multi-decadal year-round CO2 and CH4 fluxes to understand long-term impact of climate change on the Arctic carbon balance
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Walter Oechel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2025
* USD 999,890.00

Organic carbon in northern soils is more than double the current atmospheric
pool. An increasing fraction of this organic carbon is vulnerable to conversion
to carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4). However, there are still large
uncertainties in the potential rates of carbon loss from the Arctic with climate
change because of the sparse spatial and year-around data from Arctic
ecosystems. Temperatures in far northern latitudes have increased by 0.6 °C in
the last 30 years, which is twice the global average with the largest increase
in the non-summer seasons. This increase has been linked to increased
atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gas (GHG) fluxes in high latitude
wetlands but the drivers of this renewed growth are still largely uncertain. It
is impossible to predict or attribute changes in atmospheric greenhouse gas
concentration to increased carbon loss from Arctic ecosystems without a long-
term record from tundra ecosystems. Particularly unknown is the response of cold
season carbon loss from the Arctic, given the sparse data available outside of
the summer period. This project will generate the long-term continuous data
critical to identify temporal changes in GHG balance from the Arctic and will
attempt to identify how changing cold season climatic conditions may alter
annual Arctic greenhouse gas release to the atmosphere. This knowledge is
required to inform current and future models and help ensure rigorous
predictions of future GHG emissions from the Arctic. This project will support
continued engagement of under-represented students in the Arctic. The project
will conduct outreach at the local middle and high schools in Utqiagvik, Alaska,
and will continue to collaborate with Ilisagvik College to involve the local
students into research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes
long-term, year-round field observations to better understand the controls on
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the Arctic at time scales that will
encompass climate change and variability. This project will allow creating the
longest running year-round Arctic eddy covariance network, and to standardize,
upgrade, and apply the network to improve understanding of the long-term effects
of climate variability and change on trace gas feedbacks from the Arctic. This
project will make existing data more useful and will expand an already large
user base. A special emphasis will be on the fall zero curtain period when an
unfrozen soil layer hovers around 0°C supporting significant CO2 and CH4
releases to the atmosphere. Zero curtain processes plausibly explain how upland
tundra can be a larger emitter of CH4 than low-lying, wet tundra, and how the
cold seasons might emit more CH4 than the summer. Five Arctic eddy covariance
flux towers will be used to evaluate the long-term changes in the CO2 and CH4
fluxes across three moisture environments in Utqiagvik and a ~300km latitudinal
gradient passing through Atqasuk and Ivotuk. These measurements are intended to
be of sufficient duration and breadth to capture and interpret the effect of
extreme and/or unexpected events on GHG fluxes in the Arctic. This project will
allow expansion of the time-series to a more than 20-year record of CO2 and
11-year record of CH4 fluxes, resulting in an unprecedented dataset critical to
refining our analytical and predictive ability of the controls of CH4 loss from
the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.