* 1932932
* Collaborative Research: Mixed Traffic Dynamics Under Disturbances: Impact of Multi-Class Connected and Automated Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Soyoung Ahn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 10/31/2022
* USD 203,449.00

Connected and Automated Vehicle (CAV) technologies have garnered huge interest
across private industry, academia, government, and the public. A wide range of
benefits are predicted when these ground-breaking technologies become mature,
including higher road efficiency, improved safety, and better energy consumption
and emissions. However, these benefits will be open to question until the
technologies sufficiently mature. Specifically, a major uncertainty in benefits
lies in mixed traffic of CAVs and human-driven vehicles (HDVs), where
interactions between them remain largely unknown. Therefore, in the foreseeable
future, traffic will likely be mixed with multiple classes of CAVs and HDVs.
This project will aim to better understand the anticipated behavior of this
mixed traffic system, and its impact on traffic in order to help fully utilize
the potentials of the CAV technology. The results will guide the development of
traffic management strategies, policies, and long-term planning for the future
transportation system. This project will also engage in a range of integrated
research, educational and outreach activities that will extend the knowledge
obtained from this research to a broader audience, including developing
simulation-based educational modules, organizing workshops, sharing simulation
platform for mixed traffic, and engaging undergraduate and graduate students,
particularly underrepresented groups, in the research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to understand how HDVs and
different classes of CAVs will interact under traffic disturbances that cause
(momentary) reductions in speed and affect traffic flow performance.
Specifically, this project will aim to (1) characterize discernable differences
in the car-following behavior of HDVs and CAVs of different classes under
disturbances; and (2) elucidate their effects on traffic flow throughput and
traffic flow stability. To this end, this research will develop a systematic
method to bring together different control modeling paradigms for CAVs into a
unifying framework to unveil their individual and collective impacts on traffic
flow throughput and stability. Three CAV control paradigms will be considered in
this study: linear control, model predictive control (MPC), and artificial-
intelligence-based control. The vehicle-level investigation of complex
interactions among CAVs and HDVs will unveil the interaction mechanisms and
elucidate how they scale up to the collective behavior of traffic stream, which
will inspire new modeling paradigms to describe mixed traffic flow dynamics and
control CAVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.