* 1932451
* CPS: Medium: Emulating Emerging Autonomous Vehicle Technologies to Understand Their Impact on Urban Congestion
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jorge Laval, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Self-driving cars are here to stay, and this emerging automated vehicle (AV)
technology will transform our transportation system. Potential benefits of AV
technology include improved safety and greater capacity for more vehicles to
travel on the road (by forming a platoon of vehicles with very close distance
with each other). But how AV technologies will evolve in the future is highly
uncertain, and so is our understanding of their impacts on our transportation
system. For example, none of the AV models in the literature have been validated
with empirical data, which makes existing predictions about their impacts highly
questionable. Recent studies on a platoon of Tesla vehicles suggest that traffic
congestion might actually increase. To address this problem, this project will
conduct measurements using commercially available AV vehicles and come up with
mathematical models that replicate their behavior. These models will allow us to
better understand how AV vehicles behave when they form a platoon with each
other and come up with methods to address undesirable consequences such as
congestion. The educational component of this project will expose both undergrad
and graduate students to a thriving ecosystem where car manufacturers,
technology companies and application developers foster innovation via open
source software, learning material and data sets to train the machine learning
models needed for AV technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective
of this project is to develop an analytical and numerical framework to emulate
the impacts that current AV technologies will have on the transportation
networks of the near future. The research approach will be based on the
collection of large amounts of empirical data from Level 2/3 AVs currently on
the market to train the type of machine learning models that the industry is
implementing, consisting of a combination of deep neural networks and expert
domain knowledge. Given the recent empirical evidence revealing that these
vehicles may exhibit more string instability than human drivers, the project
will identify stability constraints that can be incorporated during training to
avoid instability. Additionally, the corresponding car-following models that
will establish macroscopic dynamics at the network level will be formulated. The
project will focus on the longitudinal acceleration/deceleration component since
it plays the major role in string stability, network capacity and congestion. It
also makes it possible to train machine learning models with a fraction of the
data needed for general scenarios, and understanding this simplified driving
scenario is the first step towards a successful analysis of more general cases.
The impact of this project is expected to be significant as it will establish
the connection between machine learning models and car-following models, and
will steer research and development of future AV technologies towards artificial
intelligence models that are guaranteed to be stable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.