* 1932975
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Modeling of Damage Tolerance in Hexagonal Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ahmed-Amine Benzerga, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 288,706.00

Hexagonal close-packed crystalline (hexagonal) metals are widely employed in
industrial and biomedical sectors, e.g. as fuel rods in nuclear power plants
(zirconium alloys); medical stents and dental applications (titanium and
magnesium alloys); compressor and turbine disks and blades in power generation
systems and jet engines (titanium alloys) and in cryogenic fuel tanks and space
telescope mirrors (beryllium alloys) among many others. Yet, there currently are
no material modeling frameworks that can be used to make robust engineering
projections regarding their durability and damage tolerance. This award supports
fundamental research addressing this critical gap and focus is laid on
predictive modeling of strength and ductility limits. The outcomes of this
research will not only advance life assessment procedures but also avoid
material waste in processing and manufacturing operations. The models and
simulation tools to be developed will provide engineers with means of predicting
the mechanical response of metallic structures under complex loading conditions,
both during manufacturing and in service. In addition, fundamental understanding
gained from this research will help alloy and microstructure designers develop
damage-tolerant materials by defeating the controlling mechanisms rather than
following trial-and-error approaches. In addition, the PIs will engage
undergraduate students in this research program and develop lectures and
accompanying material for a summer school aimed at empowering the next
generation of mechanical engineers with computational mechanics and materials
science tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding of the slip and
twinning mechanisms in hexagonal metals has led to advances in constitutive
modeling of their damage-free plasticity. However, micromechanics-based models
that couple plasticity with damage remain to be developed. One challenge is to
assess the extent of crystallographic detail that must be incorporated in a
damage model. Another, equally important issue is one of representation of the
damage process. Recent experiments have clearly shown that hexagonal alloys do
fail by void nucleation, growth and coalescence. With the goal of a parameter-
free formulation of damage and fracture, this collaborative research aims at
fundamental investigations of ductile damage in hexagonal materials under
general stress states by - (i) investigating the role of deformation mechanisms
on micro-void growth and coalescence using three-dimensional crystal plasticity
unit cell simulations, (ii) formulating a novel, computationally efficient
micromechanics-based anisotropic porous multi-surface model, fully assessed
against the unit cell calculations, and (iii) critically assessing the so-
developed anisotropic damage model against existing experimental data for
magnesium alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.