* 1932004
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Illegal Crop Cultivation on Agrobiodiversity Change, Social Vulnerability, and Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Karl Zimmerer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2021
* USD 17,998.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project investigates how
cultivation of illegal crops (e.g. drugs) transforms agricultural
biodiversityâ€“also known as agrobiodiversity. Illegal-crop cultivation among
agriculturalists is found throughout the world. Such activities transform
landscapes, impacting the environment, security and human wellbeing. The project
draws on and will further develop theories of social and ecological
vulnerability and resilience regarding small farmer agrobiodiversity
interactions. Results will be widely disseminated to researchers, local
partners, and the public. As part of this research, a Pennsylvania State
University undergraduate student will participate as a research assistant,
receiving valuable training in geographic research. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish an independent research career.

The project will contribute to the geographic analysis of agrobiodiversity loss
(a growing global problem) and agrobiodiversity conservation with innovative
theoretical and methodological insights on the interactions between
agrobiodiversity and shocks and stressors that impact both nature and society.
The main research questions are: 1) How do small farmers perceive and manage the
risks and opportunities of growing illegal crops as part of their livelihood
strategies? 2) How does the cultivation of illegal crops transform the land use
and land cover of small farmers, and consequent agrobiodiversity? and 3) What
are the social and environmental impacts of illegal crop cultivation on small
farmer vulnerability and resilience? To answer these questions, the research
project will triangulate three different methods for data generation: semi-
structured interviews with agriculturalists, secondary social, demographic, and
agricultural data, and remote sensing with satellite imagery. The results will
contribute to a framework and methodology for studying cross-scalar
relationships between illegal crop cultivation, agrobiodiversity, and social
vulnerability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.