* 1932192
* Engineering Neuron-Innervated Muscle with Stimulus-Responsive Contraction and Myokine Secretion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Martha Gillette, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

Muscle is a unique tissue that can contract, allowing for movement and essential
involuntary actions such as breathing, heart pumping, and digestion in humans
and animals. Muscle can also secrete various chemicals, called "myokines," which
are involved in proper function of the immune system and brain. Neurons are
responsible for transmitting signals between the brain and muscle tissues that
control muscle contraction and secretion activity. These signals travel through
neurons and then transferred to the muscle through the neuromuscular junction.
Many injuries and muscle diseases are due to the loss of connection between
neurons and muscle. Therefore, reproducing muscle connected to neurons in vitro
(in the lab) would enable better understanding of the role/importance of the
neuromuscular junction, and this understanding could lead to better treatments
for muscle injuries and diseases. Thus there is an urgent need for creating an
in vitro physiologically relevant model of muscle connected with/innervated by
neurons. To this end, the investigators aim to engineer and validate muscle that
contracts and secretes myokines in response to bioelectrical signals from
neurons. The project proposes that these neuron-induced muscular activities
depend on size, number, and alignment of the muscle fibers in the engineered
muscle. This hypothesis will be studied by co-culturing neuron-forming cells on
engineered muscle tissue. The quality of neuron-innervated muscle will be
evaluated by monitoring contractions and myokine secretion of muscles in
response to a neural impulse. In parallel, the investigators will utilize the
research program to train undergraduate and graduate students who are involved
in bioengineering-related research. The research program will be incorporated
into various outreach activities that aim to attract future young scientists and
engineers to the biomedical area. Overall, the project will significantly impact
efforts to recreate biologically functional muscle tissues and also educate the
next generation of biologists and biomedical engineers in diverse
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on engineering and validating
motor neuron-innervated human skeletal muscle that contracts and, in turn,
secrets myokines in response to neurotransmitters (e.g., glutamate). Experiments
are designed to test the hypothesis that controlling the expression of
acetylcholine receptors on engineered muscle is key to enhancing formation of
the neuromuscular junction and that the topology and softness of a matrix on
which skeletal myoblasts form muscle fibers modulate acetylcholine expression of
muscle fibers. The hypothesis will be examined via three aims. The FIRST Aim is
to assess the extent that topology of myoblasts-adhered substrates modulates
neural innervation and contraction of muscle in response to neural impulse.
Human skeletal myoblast cells will be cultured on grooved substrates with
grooves (2 to 100 micrometers in width) patterned onto a collagen conjugated
PEDGA gel. Studies are designed to answer to what extent the groove-patterned
substrate modulates maturity and expression of acetylcholine receptors of
myofibers, modulates the alignment and innervation of motor neurons, and
influences the neurotransmitter-respondent muscle contraction. The SECOND Aim is
to study the effects of softness of the myoblast-adhered substrate on the neural
innervation into muscle. The elastic modulus of the gel will be varied from 5 to
40 kPa. Studies are designed to answer to what extent the gel softness and
topology orchestrate maturity of muscle and expression of acetylcholine
receptors, modulate neural innervation into muscle fibers, influence the
neurotransmitter respondent muscular contraction and if neural innervation is
related to the mechanotransduction. The THIRD Aim is to evaluate the extent that
neuron-innervated muscle produces myokines in response to a neural impulse.
Motor neuron progenitor cells will be plated on the myofibers formed on the
grooved substrates and differentiated to motor neurons. The focus will be on
analyzing mRNA expression and protein secretion levels that lead to increased
secretion of myokines. Studies are designed to answer to what extent the neural
impulse increases protein and myokine expression by the innervated muscle, to
what extent the innervated muscle increases glucose uptake and fat oxidation in
response to the neural impulse and to what extent the neuromuscular junction
serves to increase the volume of the innervated muscle. The end result is
expected to be a neuron-innervated muscle that will actively express and secrete
myokines and, in turn enhance metabolic activity and increase muscle volume over
time when the muscle is regularly contracted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.