* 1932220
* The use of distributed ledger technology in climate governance
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Leandros Tassiulas, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,068.00

This research project examines the potential for distributed ledger technology
(e.g., blockchain) to create a scientific knowledge base and innovative tools
that support multi-level climate governance and policy. Cities, states and
regions, business, investors and civil society (non-state actors) are
increasingly recognized for their ability to catalyze, implement, and innovate
climate actions. In some cases, these efforts go beyond or are more ambitious
than national governments' commitments. Quantitatively assessing and tracking
these efforts, however, is fraught with difficulties, due to heterogeneous data
sources and gaps in data coverage. These data challenges inhibit the capacity of
non-state actors and national governments to acquire and integrate knowledge --
about effective strategies or potential opportunities to coordinate or
complement efforts -- into their policy processes. Blockchains are decentralized
and immutable ledgers that have the potential to address accounting and
knowledge gaps, including double-counting problems (e.g., most prominently in
digital currencies). To date, however, there is a lack of a clear understanding
and concrete frameworks for how this technology can be applied to the challenge
of establishing accountability and incentives for climate actors. A blockchain
or distributed ledger approach could fill a critical gap in the understanding of
how non-state climate actions are implemented, what they achieve, and how to
build a sustainable system that lowers measurement and reporting burdens to be
more inclusive globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
trusted and decentralized data management and accounting scheme for non-state
action pledges as a way of enhancing the scientific basis for non-state and
subnational climate action and policy. Using an interdisciplinary approach that
will leverage insights from academic researchers, industry partners, non-state
and subnational climate action practitioners, and policymakers, it will innovate
a novel framework and architecture for Blockchain Climate Action Tracking
(B-CAT). This framework, developed in both theory and tested in proof-of-concept
prototypes, will be used to define if and where blockchain and complementary
technologies (e.g., internet-of-things) can improve upon existing efforts
tracking climate policy. The project will answer four main questions: 1) Who are
the primary actors, verifiers and users that will participate in the B-CAT
ecosystem and what requirements might they have for engagement? 2) How can
distributed ledger technology (e.g., blockchain) be applied to automate
incentive schemes and protocols that can address identified data and knowledge
gaps in non-state climate action? 3) What are the potential impacts and
challenges in the science of tracking climate action with this new blockchain
framework? 4) Where can blockchain tools provide significant value in climate
use-cases, and what issues and architectural considerations would need to be
addressed for these to be applied effectively and at scale? Identifying explicit
limitations and positive implications of the technology will also be an
important output of this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.