* 1932664
* Immigration and integration in rural Arctic communities
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Unnur Skaptadottir, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 895,806.00

Integration is widely discussed in the context of immigration, yet there have
been few studies that explore precisely what integration means to both
immigrants and the long-term, native residents. Even less studied is what
integration means within rural communities, since immigration rates to these
communities typically are not large enough to constitute sites that would be
generalizable. In exploring a context where small, rural communities experience
relatively high rates of immigration, this research examines the activities and
services that both natives and immigrants incorporate into their communities for
integration and analyzes the strengths and weaknesses of those strategies. Data
about how both native residents and immigrants identify integration and the best
methods to achieve it will advance anthropological science and assist
policymakers, social service agencies, and other groups dealing with the effects
of immigration into rural areas at local, national, and international levels.
Project data and outcomes have the potential to inform and strengthen policies
related to immigration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research involves two three-
month-long periods of anthropological fieldwork over three years and takes place
in villages within six different rural areas. These villages vary in terms of
economic base, population size, history of immigration, and percentage of
immigrant population allowing for comparable contexts. The size and social
structure of the villages allows for the use of snowball technique to solicit
participants, leading to a high percentage of the population being interviewed
through both individual and focus group conversations. The research team also
conducts participant observation in social interaction venues. Resulting data is
analyzed using Grounded Theory and Discourse Analysis methodologies, and
outcomes include public presentations, conference papers, publications, and
reports to U.S. and Arctic governments. Results from this research will be
useful for people living in small, rural communities, both within and outside
the Arctic as they integrate immigrants into their
villages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.