* 1932611
* CPS: TTP Option: Small: Adaptive Charging Network Research Portal
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Steven Low, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 506,840.00

This project is motivated by challenges in future energy cyber-physical systems
(CPS). It will build a one-of-a-kind research facility that will enable new CPS
research on smart grid and electric vehicles. It will advance the state of the
art in the clean-energy space and facilitate the development and adoption of
these technologies. The result of this project will be integrated with the power
system analysis course at California Institute of Technology (Caltech).
Preliminary work on this project has already been used at Caltech and other
places around the world for classroom projects as well as smart grid research.
This project will equip a new generation of students with the passion and the
interdisciplinary knowledge for tackling one of the biggest challenges of our
time. A seed community of contributors and users has already formed organically.
This project will grow this open-source community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI's Lab has been working with a Caltech startup and Caltech Facilities
department to design, deploy, and manage an Adaptive Charging Network (ACN) for
electric vehicles at one of Caltech's parking garages. The primary goal of this
project is to develop a suite of open-source software and hardware that will
make Caltech ACN not just a production facility, but also a live testbed for CPS
researchers at, and outside, Caltech. A secondary goal is to use the ACN
Research Portal to study the joint optimization of distributed energy resources
to provide both charging service to electric vehicles as well as energy services
to electricity markets and utility companies. The key idea is to treat the
production ACN as a physical layer and create an inter- mediate layer, called
the ACN Research Portal, to allow safe, secure and easy access to charging data
as well as push of charging commands for real-world testing of new algorithms on
ACN. It will make large high-resolution charging data, data-driven simulator and
experimental platform publicly available for the first time. This will allow CPS
researchers to learn detailed statistical models, perform data analysis of real-
world charging behavior, and easily and fairly compare control algorithms in a
common platform driven by detailed real data. This is currently
impossible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.