* 1932595
* CPS:Small:Data-driven Re-configurable Swarm of Autonomous Underwater Vehicles for Underwater Wireless Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* M.-Reza Alam, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,987.00

The goal of this project is to achieve high-bandwidth underwater wireless
communication using a flock of small Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) that
relay a laser beam from the seabed to the surface of the ocean. The approach is
advanced control of specially-designed AUVs, along with prediction of ocean
currents, so that each AUV unit can reliably receive the signal from a unit at a
lower depth, amplify the signal and send it to the next unit above, until the
signal reaches the surface where it can easily reach satellites and hence
anywhere in the world. Underwater wireless data communication is one of the most
important outstanding problems in ocean engineering, impeding nearly all major
research expeditions and inhibiting industrial development. This is because
radio waves are heavily absorbed by water (e.g. no cell phones, Wi-Fi, or Global
Positioning System (GPS) underwater), and acoustic waves have low data-transfer
rates. A real-time seabed monitoring technology, as proposed here, gives
researchers and engineers a novel and unique tool to carefully perform, watch,
and assess deep ocean explorations and operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
technical objective is to demonstrate the first proof-of-concept of wireless
high-bandwidth underwater data communication via a flock of AUVs. Maximum range
(minimum absorption) of electromagnetic waves in water is obtained for visible
light. Therefore, pointing precision and agility of AUV units are the key
challenges to success. The proposed controlled swarm motion uses a hierarchical
control architecture comprising a combination of centralized and decentralized
controllers to maximize the communication line's autonomy, reliability, and
robustness. The fabricated AUV units feature a three-layer stabilization system
that provides the needed agility, attitude accuracy, and stability for each
unit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.