* 1932761
* STEM Teacher Leadership Network
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Brian Drayton, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,689,269.00

STEM teachers are remarkable collaborators within their schools, sharing their
insights and best practices, and developing lessons and curricula that challenge
their students. That's what great teachers do. Online interaction among teachers
in our digital world, however, is largely episodic and sometimes, in the case of
social media platforms, all too brief. Our project will develop and facilitate
an interactive learning community and collegial network for STEM teacher leaders
and aspiring teacher leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our STEM Teacher Leadership
Network (STEMTLnet) builds on past work for NSF and will allow teacher leaders
to access and benefit from a trusted community that provides up to date
resources related to leadership, mentoring, classroom innovations and
interventions as well as content and pedagogical knowledge across broad STEM
topics. Teacher leaders will benefit from a support system, engaging those from
their own and other leadership programs. Leaders will benefit by having a forum
to share queries, requests for advice, and by providing expertise. Aspiring and
newly recognized teachers will learn from and with those having more experience.
This interactive community for teacher leaders will serve multiple teacher
leadership communities, including, but not limited to: (a) Presidential Awards
for Excellence in Mathematics and Science Teaching (PAEMST), as well as the
Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering
Mentoring (PAESMEM); (b) Principal investigators and participants in NSF's
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program and teacher leaders developed through
multiple NSF Math and Science Partnership projects; and (c) Fellows and
recipients of multiple other programs, including: Albert Einstein Fellowship
program, Knowles Science Teaching Fellowships, Math for America Teacher
Fellowship Program, Fulbright Distinguished Awards in Teaching Program, STEM
Teachers of the Year, NSTA/NCTM STEM Ambassadors program, and alumni of the
National Academies Teacher Advisory Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although our
primary audience will be Presidential Awardees, our vision is inclusive, and we
will invite those who are, or have been, part of any of the above programs as
they have much to offer. We envision this interactive professional learning
community as a place where teacher-leaders share with each other their paths to
leadership; their emerging capacity to influence school, district, state and
national policy for positive change; their challenges, strategies, lessons
learned, resources, and the impact they have had. The multi-modal network will
facilitate cross-talk between groups, while also providing the possibility for
leaders of particular programs to create groups for their own constituents.
Research and evaluation will inform the field of the potential benefits of an
online community to promote, facilitate, and support teacher leadership of many
kinds. In addition, we will study the benefits accrued to a particular subgroup
that of PAEMST awardees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award comports with NSF
Strategic Goal 1: Expand knowledge in science, engineering, and learning; and
NSF Strategic Goal 2: Advance the capability of the Nation to meet current and
future challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is provided by
the Excellence Awards in Science and Engineering program and the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.