* 1932377
* CPS: Small: Real-time spatial audio on the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Robert LiKamWa, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,944.00

As the Internet of Things proliferates, many networked devices fill the home,
the office, and public spaces, often with speakers for auditory response. This
project strives to use such speakers to perceptually place auditory sounds in
arbitrary virtual spaces. Towards this goal, the project studies networked
software systems for auditory crosstalk cancellation. The research project
investigates practical foundational issues regarding: (i) the design of a visual
tracking-driven feedback system for calibration and utilization of sound
propagation models, (ii) the design of sounds that optimally spatialize on the
spatial audio system, and (iii) the design of a networked system infrastructure
to generate spatialized sounds from a computationally heterogeneous variety of
Internet of Things devices. To approach such issues, the project designs and
characterizes a family of system methods that invoke human-in-the-loop
calibration of acoustical models through augmented reality technologies and
interfaces, as well as leveraging cloud-based virtual audio propagation
simulations for real-time decision-making. The project evaluates designs and
methods through user studies on a prototype testbed that includes simulation
frameworks, prototyped wireless audio systems and integration with existing
Internet of Things devices and environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
offers transformative capabilities to the Internet of Things by enabling audio-
based spatial guidance systems and spatial personal assistance. Such systems
would be beneficial in assistive technologies for visually impaired and memory
impaired individuals. The spatial guidance could also assist first responders in
navigating emergency personnel towards spatially tracked individuals in foreign
environments. Finally, spatial audio systems could greatly enhance commercial
Internet of Things capabilities, offering the ability to place responsive sounds
to allow users to e.g., locate misplaced objects, respond to spatially
positioned virtual assistants, and provide auditory feedback from speaker-less
devices, e.g., books, electrical outlets, exercise equipment, etc. To promote
broader utility, the project integrates findings in custom open source software
frameworks. Towards broadening access to computing, the project exercises
outreach activities, including integrating the research into a high school
summer camp, university curricula, and web-based and/or augmented reality
demonstrations of audio propagation models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.