* 1932825
* 77th Device Research Conference 2019. To Be Held At The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, June 23-26, 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2019
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The proposed project seeks financial support to increase the diversity of
speakers and enhance student participation at the 77th Device Research
Conference (DRC) to be held from June 23 to 26, 2019 at the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor. The conference will focus on a variety of devices including
those based on organic and inorganic semiconductors, as well as spin and quantum
devices. The Conference will host world-renowned researchers in advanced devices
as invited speakers, whose expertise range from design, to fabrication
characterization and applications. In addition to technical talks, short courses
on highly relevant topics presented by renowned world experts will greatly
enhance the usefulness of the conference to attendees. The technical program
will provide student participants with the opportunity to gain exposure to new
materials and devices, their basic physics, and their engineering applications.
Exposing the next generation of researchers to these important disciplines is
critical to maintain the supply of STEM workers with the skillsets necessary to
address emerging commercial trends. The information will be disseminated through
the conference proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.