* 1932788
* EAGER: Periodic Binding Energy Modulation for Electrochemical Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Omar Abdelrahman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Catalysts are materials that accelerate chemical reactions and thereby reduce
the cost, energy consumption, and capital equipment demands of chemical
manufacturing processes. Most catalyst research focuses on discovering
combinations of materials that are optimal for accelerating the targeted
reaction. Fundamental limitations exist, however, regarding the extent to which
materials alone can accelerate reactions. The study will side-step such
materials limitations by introducing dynamic perturbations to the catalyst's
operating conditions at the timescale of reaction events. The radically new
concept will be demonstrated on the water splitting reaction - an important
reaction for generating hydrogen by renewable means. Preliminary theoretical
analysis has suggested that reaction rates can be increased by orders of
magnitude via the dynamic perturbations, while also opening the door to less
expensive catalysts for a wide range of chemical reactions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The catalytic activity of materials is dictated by the binding
energetics of key reaction intermediates, described through energy scaling
relationships, which predicts a maximum in the catalytic activity -
characterized by the well-known Sabatier principle - achievable through only
material design. The electrochemical splitting of water to produce renewable
hydrogen suffers from this limitation, where rates of hydrogen evolution
reactions are dictated by the binding energy of hydrogen. The problem is further
exacerbated by the fact that optimal hydrogen binding energies are found on
precious metal catalysts, placing strain on an already economically challenging
process. The study will investigate the extent to which the application of
periodic oscillations in applied potential, on the timescale of turnover events,
can alter the binding energetics of hydrogen on the electrode surface. Operating
catalysts under a constantly oscillating applied potential, where binding
energetics of reaction intermediates are constantly changing, allows a single
catalyst to mimic the performance of multiple materials in a periodic fashion.
This will allow for the design of catalysts that break past the current
limitations imposed by scaling relationships, to reach unprecedented levels of
catalytic activity. Implementing this transformative method of operation is
currently limited by our experimental ability to alter binding energetics on
catalytic materials with precision under reaction conditions. Specifically, the
project will explore the use of alternating potentials in standard
electrochemical cells for efficient water splitting. This experimental design
will also be used to investigate coupling thermocatalysis with electrochemical
systems that serve as a binding energy modulation platform. The approach is
potentially applicable to a broad range of catalytic reactions of commercial and
environmental importance. The dynamic catalysis concept will also be introduced
to graduate students via an elective course developed by the principal
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.