* 1932844
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Functional Role of Antarctic Plants during Terrestrial Succession
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sarah Eppley, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2024
* USD 520,768.00

Part I: Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic Peninsula warmed very
rapidly in the late part of the 20th century, much faster than the global
average, and this warming is predicted to resume and continue over the rest of
the 21st century. One consequence of this rapid warming is the melting and
subsequent retreat of glaciers, leading to an increase in newly-exposed land on
the Peninsula that was previously covered with ice. Once new terrain is exposed,
the process of ecological succession begins, with the arrival of early-
colonizing plants, such as moss and lichens, and soil organisms - a process
commonly referred to as the “greening” of Antarctica. Early stages of succession
will be an increasingly common feature on the Antarctic Peninsula, but the
mechanisms by which they occur on the Antarctic continent is not well
understood. Once the plants have established on the newly-exposed soil, they can
change many important properties, such as water dynamics, nutrient recycling,
soil development, and habitat for microscopic organisms, which will ultimately
determine the structure and functioning of the future ecosystem as it develops.
These relationships between vegetation, soil, and the associated microorganisms,
referred to as “plant-soil” interactions, are something we know virtually
nothing about. This project will be the first to make a comprehensive study of
how the type of colonizing plant, and the expansion of those plants from climate
change, will influence terrestrial ecosystems in Antarctica. Understanding these
processes is critical to understanding how the greening Antarctica is occurring
and how soil communities and processes are influenced by these expanding plant
communities. Through this work the research team, will also be intensively
training undergraduate and graduate students, including training of students
from underrepresented groups and collaborative training of students from Chile
and the US. Additionally, the research groups will continue their focus on
scientific outreach with K-12 schools and the general public to expand awareness
of the effects of climate change in Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II:
Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;In this study, the researchers will use surveys
across succession sites along the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Arc as well as
a manipulative field experiment at glacier succession sites to test how species-
specific plant functional traits impact soil properties and associated microbial
and invertebrate communities in a greening Antarctica. In doing so, they will
pursue three integrated aims to understand how Antarctic plant functional traits
alter their soil environment and soil communities during succession after
glacial retreat. AIM 1) Characterize six fundamental plant functional traits
(thermal conductivity, water holding capacity, albedo, decomposability, tissue
nutrient content, and secondary chemistry) among diverse Antarctica flora; AIM
2) Measure the relative effects of fundamental plant functional traits on soil
physical properties and soil biogeochemistry across glacial succession gradients
in Antarctica; and AIM 3) Measure the relative effects of fundamental plant
functional traits on soil microbial and invertebrate communities across glacial
succession gradients in Antarctica. They will explore how early-colonizing
plants, especially mosses and lichens, alter soil physical, biogeochemical, and
biological components, potentially impacting later patterns of succession. The
researhcers will use intensive surveys of plant-soil interactions across
succession sites and a manipulative transplant experiment in the South Shetland
Islands, Antarctica to address their aims. The investigators will collect data
on plant functional traits and their effects on soil physical properties,
biogeochemistry, biotic abundance, and microbial metagenomics. The data
collected will be the first comprehensive measures of the relative importance of
plant functional types during glacial retreat and vegetative expansion from
climate change in Antarctica, aiding our understanding of how plant functional
group diversity and abundance are changing in a greening
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.