* 1932965
* Thermo-Kinetic Modeling of Asphaltene Flocculation during Gas Miscible Injection Flow in Shale Oil
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Angela Lueking, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 410,000.00

In recent years, the development of unconventional oil reservoirs has played a
critical role in the rapid increase of oil production in the United States,
thereby decreasing the dependence on foreign oil. Although unconventional oil
reservoirs can be tapped using hydraulic fracturing in horizontal wells,
production with this technology typically recovers only 4 to 6% of the available
oil. Gas injection technologies currently used to unlock the remaining oil are
limited by changes that occur in the oil properties when the gas is injected.
This leads to deposition of heavy organic solids known as asphaltenes that are
suspended in the oil. Deposition of asphaltenes ultimately requires more wells
to be drilled, as it reduces rock permeability, damages the formation, and plugs
the formation pores and well tubing. This project is expected to develop and
experimentally validate a model capable of predicting the thermodynamics and
kinetics of asphaltene flocculation under injection of miscible gas mixtures,
extending past studies based on continuous gas injection to the promising new
mode of cyclic injection. This modeling work is expected to aid in the
development of new gas injection processes that will improve U.S. shale oil
recovery rates, decrease the energy needed for oil extraction, and reduce the
need for drilling new wells. Educational activities involving high-school
students and teachers will enhance understanding of oil production
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current models do not fully describe how
shale oil composition, gas composition and pressure, and injection timing affect
asphaltene flocculation, one of the critical components impacting oil production
and recovery efficiency. In this research program, two sets of experimental
studies will explore asphaltene flocculation in shale oil. First, batch studies
will be used to determine the minimum miscibility gas pressure (MMP) for gas
mixtures of carbon dioxide and nitrogen at temperatures and pressures that
extend beyond prior studies. The analysis of the flocculation kinetics of
asphaltene colloidal particles will be carried out using confocal microscopy
imaging techniques and the size distribution of flocculated asphaltene as
function of time will be used to validate a newly developed kinetic model.
Parametric analysis of the MMP and colloidal particles will allow quantification
of flocculation kinetics. Second, a flow-through filtration apparatus will be
used to quantify asphaltene thermodynamic and kinetic flocculation properties
during cyclic and continuous gas injection under miscible injection conditions,
extending and validating models developed during the batch studies. The newly
developed thermo-kinetic model will be the first model of its kind that combines
thermodynamic and kinetic descriptions of asphaltene aggregation in one model.
These research efforts will lead to a new, simple, accurate, and universal
mathematical model that can be used to minimize asphaltene deposition upon
miscible gas-injection in the field, compensating for variations in oil
composition, pressure, temperature, time, and gas injection
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.