* 1932854
* Researching the Integration of Robotics into Middle School Physical Science Courses:  Examining Instructional and Learning Outcomes
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Karen Mutch-Jones, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,441,401.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (PreK-12). Robotic
technologies provide innovative ways of engaging students in computational
thinking (CT) practices within STEM fields, but teachers may be reluctant to use
robotics if they do not feel confident with the technology, or when they feel
unprepared to make the technology relevant to their subject areas. This project
responds to such reluctance by designing, testing, and refining a professional
development program for middle school physical science teachers to: 1) develop
and strengthen skills in robotics, programming, and identifying ways of using
robotics to enhance the teaching and learning of physical science concepts, and
2) design integrated curriculum units that advance student CT skills and support
learning in the physical sciences. The project will develop a comprehensive,
50-hour professional learning experience for middle school teachers who will
develop learning modules that integrate computational thinking with physical
science. After the professional learning experience, teachers will be supported
in revising an existing physical science unit to incorporate computational
thinking and robotics using a Hummingbird Bit robotics kit. The professional
learning plan will begin with a 5-day summer session where teachers will examine
exemplars of robotics integration in STEM lessons, explore robotics resources,
and consider ways that robotics and CT can be used to enhance student learning
in a curriculum unit on force and motion. During the following academic year,
teachers will design and implement a lesson that integrates robotics with study
of force and motion, and this experience will be followed by two professional
learning days where teachers will discuss the successes and challenges of the
implemented lessons. Prior to spring semester, teachers will meet together again
for a day of lesson planning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance
knowledge about how to support teachers as designers of technology-enhanced
instruction that integrates computing and CT with topics in physical science.
The specific goals of project are to: 1) Design, test, and refine a professional
development model that enables middle school physical science teachers to design
instructional units that incorporate robotics to enhance student CT practices
and support disciplinary learning objectives, 2) Identify the types and levels
of supports that enable teachers to successfully implement integrated robotics
units to increase engagement and interests among diverse learners, and 3)
Conduct research to refine the professional development model and document the
impacts of engaging students with computational technologies on learning of
physical science and CT. Over the course of three years, the project will engage
22 teachers and approximately 1,120 middle school students. Project research
will proceed in a design-test-revise cycle in pursuing answers to the following
research questions: 1) How can a professional development intervention enable
integration of robotics into physical science courses? 2) To what extent does
teacher enactment reflect the goals and principles of the approach to
integration, and what challenges do teachers face during enactment? 3) How does
participation in integrated robotics lessons support student learning in the
discipline? And 4) What opportunities does participation in integrated robotics
lessons provide for students to engage in computational thinking practices? A
variety of data sources will be used to collect the quantitative and qualitative
data to be used in the mixed-methods analysis of teacher, student, and classroom
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.