* 1932796
* Exotic Phases and Their Interfaces in Correlated Many-Particle Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Kun Yang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2023
* USD 343,273.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on exotic properties of many-particle systems with strong
interactions. It is known that strong interactions between particles can
stabilize various phases of matter that can be very different from those
familiar from daily life, like solid, liquid and gas. Understanding such phases
is an important goal of condensed matter physics, which may pave the way to
technological applications like quantum computation. The PI and his team will
study how to reveal the properties of some new phases by probing the interfaces
that separate them. Theoretical results are expected to help guide associated
experiments and simulations. The research may also be of interest to other
fields of physics, including high-energy and gravitational
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities supported by this award
will introduce graduate students to the frontier of condensed matter physics.
Recently the PI has published a new graduate level condensed matter textbook,
that reflects the transformative developments of this field in the last few
decades. He will continue his work in this direction, including working out a
solutions manual for its homework problems. Such work will further facilitate
education of students in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research on exotic quantum
phases of many-particle systems with strong interactions. Some of these phases
are of topological nature. A main focus of this project is to investigate
physical properties of interfaces separating different topological phases, and
their relationship to the topological properties of the individual phases.
Examples include interfaces between Abelian and non-Abelian quantum Hall phases,
and between different non-Abelian phases at the same filling factor but with
different topological order. The PI and his team will study both the static and
dynamical properties of such interfaces, and the possibility of phase
transitions triggered by quantum fluctuations at the interfaces. Another focus
of this project is to characterize typical and atypical excited states using
concepts from quantum information theory, including entanglement and Kolmogorov
complexity. The goal here is to gain deeper understanding of thermalization in
isolated quantum systems. A third focus of the project is to understand
supersolidity in quasi-one-dimensional systems, using the coupled-wire
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team will use a combination of
theoretical and numerical tools in their studies, including mean-field theory,
renormalization group, bosonization, and exact diagonalization. They will also
attempt to borrow insights and methodology from other fields, including string
theory and black hole physics, in which related issues have been studied
extensively. These will provide valuable training opportunities for graduate
students, as well as stimulating synergy among different
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.