* 1932803
* New Microlasers: Structuring and Twisting Laser Radiations at a Microscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Liang Feng, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 370,000.00

Non-technical description: Laser is the key driver in the field of optics and
photonics over other photonic components. Since its discovery, laser technology
has demonstrated strong impacts on a broad variety of applications, especially
in today's information technology supporting fast growing cloud computing and
communication. However, with the limited electromagnetic spectrum available for
information channels, the current information infrastructure based on the
wavelength division multiplexing is approaching its bottleneck. Novel
technologies leveraging the orbital angular momentum of light as a new degree of
freedom for carrying information become promising to further advance modern
information systems. In this project, utilizing the state-of-the-art integrated
photonics technology, a disruptive microlaser technology will be investigated to
directly encode information on the orbital angular momentum of the microlaser
radiations. The capability of creating new forms of microscale lasing generation
and executing complex optical responses offers an unprecedented perspective to
advance both fundamental laser science and the next generation of photonic
devices and systems for computing and communication. This research is closely
integrated with the existing educational activities, stimulating undergraduate
and graduate students to pursue engineering career by exposing them to the
exciting development of active nanophotonic devices solving important societal
problems in optical communication and information processing. The educational
outreach activities will also be provided to promote the interests and
participations of K-12 students and broaden the participations from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
Transformative technologies based on the angular momentum in structured light
beams can enable the implementation of entirely new high-speed secure optical
communication systems in a unique multidimensional space. A critical problem in
moving this unique angular momentum-based information space into the
communication system, however, lies in the laser sources. In this project,
development of new integrated nanophotonic laser sources will be carried out to
enable storing and processing information in the orbital angular momentum of
photons. The objective of this project is, from a symmetry point of view, to
identify the interplay between the topology of optical fields and the symmetry
of photonic structures to design prescribed light-matter interactions in
microlaser actions. Through the designed light-matter interaction, the symmetry
of the photonic system can be effectively tailored to reshape the density of
states of photons; thereby leading to on-demand meta-control of light emission
at the micro/nano-scale. Therefore, the rich nature of light can be fully
explored on a photonic integrated chip including spin (i.e. circular
polarization), chirality, angular momentum, and spin-orbit coupling, delivering
new forms of micro/nano-lasing carrying a large variety of different and
reconfigurable orbital angular momenta.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.