* 1932651
* Engaging and Retaining Women Veterans in the STEM Workforce: An NSF INCLUDES DCL Conference to Broaden the Pipeline from Service to STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Sarita Nair-Pillai, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Atchison
* 09/30/2022
* USD 282,599.00

This NSF INCLUDES Conference on Engaging and Retaining Women Veterans in the
STEM Workforce is created in response to the NSF INCLUDES program's Dear
Colleague Letter (DCL): Supporting the Re-Entry of Women and Women Veterans in
the STEM Workforce through NSF INCLUDES (NSF 19-038). The Education Development
Center (EDC) will develop and host this convening to address the unique barriers
and opportunities for women veterans, particularly those from populations
underrepresented in STEM fields, to (re)engage in the STEM workforce. While much
is known about the needs of veterans and the transition from service to civilian
life, including the specific needs of women veterans, there is still much work
to be done to ensure that those who have served the United States can leverage
their experiences and leadership expertise into economic opportunities. This
convening will raise awareness and provide information to advance services to
women veterans and the STEM workforce by providing an opportunity for the
various stakeholders to review and analyze the body of knowledge that currently
exists, stimulate new ideas and development, and facilitate collaboration across
the different stakeholder groups and efforts aimed at helping women veterans
transition to civilian life and careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This convening
will bring together researchers, practitioners, and policymakers; leadership
representing universities and community colleges, nonprofit organizations, and
federal agencies that serve veterans; and women veterans to address issues
through an intersectional lens. The multi-stakeholder group will take a
comprehensive approach toward bringing actionable change toward strengthening
the pipeline from service to STEM for women veterans. The goals of this
convening will be to (1) synthesize the disparate constellations of services
available to women veterans, especially those regarding STEM workforce reentry,
(2) develop products and publications that will galvanize industry and academia
to approach veteran workforce reentry with renewed purpose, and (3) inspire
transformative innovation through thoughtful and wide-reaching dissemination of
these products. The effort will ultimately lead to a comprehensive report and
webinar series that will further the national dialogue about the importance of
policies and programs to support women veterans in seeking greater economic
opportunities through STEM work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.