* 1932690
* Sustainable and Durable Calcium Sulfoaluminate Binders Enabled by Multi-Physics Characterization and Theory-Guided Machine Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Aditya Kumar, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 532,000.00

On a global scale, Portland Cement (PC) concrete is one of the most widely used
material. While the continual development of infrastructure warrants that demand
for concrete is increasing, the production of PC consumes considerable energy
and produces large amount of carbon dioxide that is detrimental to the
environment. Cements based on calcium sulfoaluminate compositions (CSACs) have
been considered as sustainable alternatives to PC. Production of CSAC yields
significantly less carbon dioxide than PC and can be produced using low-cost and
widely-available raw materials. Studies on use of CSAC binders (CSAB), however,
are limited. This research aims to pursue fundamental material research to
enhance the utilization of CSAC to formulate sustainable and durable binders for
concrete. Techniques of machine learning (ML) and experiments that are guided by
thermodynamics will be employed to reveal mechanisms, and underlying
composition-performance links, that drive the physicochemical behavior of CSABs.
In addition, synergistic interactions between CSAC and abundant waste materials
such as calcined clay and fly ash to produce CSABs that exhibit superior
strength and durability will be investigated. This study has potential of
advancing practical utilization of CSAC for infrastructure. Knowledge
dissemination activities, including training of underrepresented and female
students and outreach activities to inform professionals and public of
socioeconomic impacts of sustainable concrete, will extend the impact of this
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research strategy is premised on two themes.
The first research theme focuses on optimization of CSAB microstructure. Towards
this theme, a comprehensive thermodynamic model that is validated against
experiments, and in conjunction with theory-guided machine learning (ML) will be
employed to provide guidance on regulating chemistry of CSAC, such that CSABs
with optimum phase assemblages are obtained. The term 'optimum' pertains to
CSABs featuring optimal distribution of both ettringite and AFm phases.
Additionally, for optimization of CSAB microstructure, novel active
microstructure design methods that use relevant nano-seeds to enhance inter-
locking of acicular ettringite crystals and nucleation, and growth of low-
density AFm phases will be developed. The second research theme will develop
experimental datasets of performance metrics of CSABs encompassing large numbers
of different precursor chemistries using ASTM methods as well as embedded fiber-
optic physical (e.g. strain sensors) and chemical (e.g. in-situ Raman
spectroscopy) sensors. The datasets of CSABs performance, in relation to
precursor chemistry, mixture design and curing conditions, will be processed
using theory guided ML. The platform will enable high-fidelity prediction of
CSAB performance, using readily measured physicochemical information pertaining
to the binder as inputs. The ML platform will ultimately be leveraged to
determine optimum chemistry and processing conditions of CSABs that exhibit
superior strength and durability compared to their PC counterparts, while
restricting the CSAC content of CSABs to 50%. By enabling prediction and
optimization of performance, this effort will stimulate practical utilization of
CSABs in construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.