* 1932639
* Leaf-to-leaf communication during acclimation to multiple stresses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ron Mittler, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,080,011.00

Plants grow and reproduce within a highly dynamic environment that can see
abrupt changes in conditions such as light intensity, temperature, humidity, or
the presence of different pathogens and insects. To achieve maximal yield, each
leaf of the plant, and the plant as a whole, needs to rapidly adjust to these
conditions, and the response of each of the different leaves within the same
plant must be coordinated with each other. Such coordination is mediated by
rapid signals that are transmitted between the different leaves and coordinate
their individual responses, resulting in a synchronized overall response. This
project aims to decipher the code used by plants to coordinate their response to
different stresses, by studying how different leaves within the same plant send
and receive signals to orchestrate the overall response of the plant. Unraveling
these mechanisms would enable us to breed better plants with heightened
tolerance to different environmental conditions. These could mitigate some of
the multi-billion dollar losses to agricultural production, inflicted by
environmental stresses, insects and pathogens, each year. The project provides
training to 1 postdoctoral fellow, 2 graduate students, 16 undergraduates and 12
high school students including minorities. Outreach-based learning opportunities
will be offered to thousands of K-12 students, as well as the general public,
through programs such as Wheels of Science, Partnership for Research and
Education, and the Elm Fork Education Center. In addition, educational videos
focusing on the importance of science to our society will be developed and
posted online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stress-induced systemic signaling and
systemic acquired acclimation (SAA) play a key role in the acclimation of plants
to different environmental conditions. To date, numerous studies have shown that
in response to a particular abiotic stress applied to a single leaf (local
tissue), plants mount a stress-specific SAA that includes the accumulation of
many different stress-specific transcripts and metabolites, as well as more
recently shown, a coordinated stress-specific canopy-wide stomatal response. In
nature and under field conditions, however, plants are simultaneously subjected
to a combination of different abiotic stresses that could have opposing effects
on plant physiology, metabolism and acclimation, raising a new fundamental
question in plant biology: How are different stress-specific systemic signals
integrated in plants during stress combination? The overall hypothesis of this
project is that different stress-specific systemic signals, generated at the
same or different sites/tissues of the plant during stress combination, converge
to induce a SAA response that is unique to the stress combination. Different
omics tools in combination with computational methods, mutants, physiological
measurements, acclimation studies and novel imaging techniques to detect
systemic reactive oxygen species (ROS) waves in whole plants will be used to
identify the site(s) and mode of integration of different stress-specific
systemic signals in plants during stress combination. In addition, the different
plant tissues involved in propagating systemic ROS signals during stress
combination, transcriptional regulators and transcriptional networks, as well as
plant hormones involved in the SAA response of plants to stress combination,
will be identified and studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.