* 1932138
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Automated Discovery of Data Validity for Safety-Critical Feedback Control in a Population of Connected Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Cindy Chen, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 501,150.00

Our world is currently experiencing an incredible increase in the amount of
real-world data available, yet that data remains useful or valid only for a
finite period of time. For example, detour information provided to drivers
during traffic construction loses its utility upon completion of the
construction assignment. This project develops methods to determine the validity
of data accumulated in databases, to answer the question: when do data expire?
Knowledge of data validity is even more important in the context of safety-
critical applications in the physical world: how much of the past data should be
trusted to make safety-critical decisions in the present? Can data from nearby
locations be trusted to accurately reflect local context and conditions?
Answering these fundamental questions will impact a wide-range of applications,
including traffic management, national defense, weather forecasting, etc., since
data is a universal feature of modern society. The methods developed in this
project are implemented and tested for control of connected autonomous vehicles
in safety-critical scenarios such as driving on potentially icy roads. This work
has significant potential to not only ensure safety in the imminent deployment
of connected autonomous vehicles, but also improve certainty and confidence in a
wide range of data- and information- intensive applications. This collaborative
research will support development of graduate and undergraduate researchers at
Penn State University, Bucknell University, and the University of Massachusetts
Lowell. The project also includes Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
(STEM)-focused outreach activities for middle-school students to broaden
participation within the field of cyber-physical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of the project is to create methods
to determine how the validity of data decays over time, and over increasing
distances away from where the data was collected. The research is conducted in
the context of safety-critical systems, namely fleets of connected autonomous
vehicles (CAVs) driving on potentially icy roads, where safety-critical road
friction information is shared via a wireless data link to a central
spatiotemporal database that mediates data averaging. This data is used to
estimate the roadway friction coefficient (i.e. the presence of ice) and is
transmitted to other connected vehicles in the vicinity. The time duration of
data trust and validity of the friction estimates within the database are
evaluated using Allan variance analysis, enabling the database to internally
model and monitor data timeliness and quality. The investigators also study
performance metrics (e.g., stability) of the coupled fast and slow feedback
loops, where the fast loop acts at the vehicle level to ensure safe CAV
operations in icy conditions using database-mediated preview of friction
measurements. The slow loop is the spatial, multi-vehicle data averaging in the
database using current measurements provided by a fleet of CAVs. These
functionalities are then examined in the context of CAV fleets operating on road
networks with large spatiotemporal extents. While implemented in a CAV context,
these methods can be used in any application that synthesizes actionable
information from spatial, temporal, or spatiotemporal data
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.