* 1932734
* Enabling Light-Driven Microfluidics with Laser Streaming
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jiming Bao, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 397,586.00

Microfluidics deals with flow of small volumes of fluids in a network of tiny
channels. Microfluidic devices have the potential to transform several fields
including medicine and healthcare, from drug delivery to cancer treatment.
Similar to the piping system in your house, the function of a microfluidic
device relies on pumps and valves. Because of their small dimensions, such
components are complex and costly to fabricate. This is considered a bottle-neck
to the wide-spread use of microfluidics. As a novel solution, light-driven
microfluidics uses light to drive and control the flow. At present, the light-
based methods only work with special types of fluids that do not even include
water. This project will create a new approach, called laser streaming, to make
the light-driving method in microfluidics possible for all types of fluids.
Through this project, training opportunities will be offered to students, from
K-12 to graduate levels, to prepare them for future STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to lay the scientific and technological
foundation for laser streaming by elucidating the underlying physics, addressing
the tunability of light-matter interactions, and demonstrating its efficacy for
microfluidic operations. This project will focus on four specific aims: (i)
Experimentally validating the hypothesis that laser streaming is the synergy of
laser-induced photoacoustics and Eckart-type acoustic streaming with resort to
particle image velocimetry and acoustic measurements, (ii) Numerically modeling
the multi-physical processes involving photothermal, thermoelastic and acoustic
streaming interactions, (iii) Developing optical methods to modulate light-to-
sound energy conversion and optimize the controllability of laser streaming flow
by using laser-induced grating techniques, and (iv) Experimentally showcasing
the efficacy of laser streaming in microfluidic pumping, mixing and valving
operations. On the practical aspect, this work will unleash light-driven
microfluidics from its fundamental constraints for practical applications in a
myriad of industries. On the intellectual aspect, this project will set the
cornerstone for a new discipline called opto-acoustofluidics, which may go
beyond conventional optofluidics and acoustofluidics to foster various new
opportunities in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.