* 1932920
* Learning Trajectories for Everyday Computing: Integrating Computational Thinking in Elementary Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Maya Israel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2022
* USD 2,185,461.00

Learning Trajectories for Everyday Computing: Integrating Computational Thinking
in Elementary Mathematics, is a multidisciplinary effort that will study
integrated mathematics and computational thinking (CT) instruction in elementary
school. The project is a partnership involving the University of Illinois-Urbana
Champaign, University of Chicago STEM Education at the University of Chicago,
and the Learning Sciences Research Institute at the University of Illinois-
Chicago. Investigators will use prototype learning trajectories (LTs) for CT in
grades K-5 to design instructional materials that integrate CT into fractions
instruction in grades 3-5. By studying implementation of these materials in
elementary school classrooms, the project will (a) refine the LTs, (b) better
understand how synergies between elementary mathematics and CT might be
leveraged to create effective and efficient integrated instruction, and (c)
generate evidence related to the effect of CT-infused mathematics instruction on
students' understanding of fractions. The project is funded by the
STEM+Computing Program, which seeks to study the applied integration of
computational thinking and computing within disciplinary STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to facilitate the integration of
CT in mathematics in elementary school. It builds on an earlier NSF-funded
exploratory project by, (a) refining and elaborating a set of CT learning
trajectories for grades 3 to 5 related to CT concepts of problem decomposition,
repetition/looping, conditionals, and debugging in the mathematical context of
fractions and (b) carrying out research into children's learning of mathematics
and CT when math + CT is taught in an integrated program. To accomplish these
goals, the project will develop instructional materials that can be used to
teach integrated math + CT in grades 3-5. Mathematics instruction will be based
on the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics, as realized in Everyday
Mathematics 4, the elementary program from the University of Chicago School
Mathematics Project. The project's efforts will focus on the Common Core's
Number and Operations with Fractions (NF) domain. All instructional materials
will be designed to maximize accessibility and engagement of academically
diverse learners by using the Universal Design for Learning framework as an
instructional guide for curriculum development. The project will use a mixed-
methods approach to study the mathematics and CT learning that occurs and to
understand the specific challenges students encounter when interacting with the
materials. Student measures will be developed using an evidence-centered design
process. These assessments include CT assessments newly created or modified from
currently available assessments for older students, automated static analysis of
students' computational artifacts, and measures of the Common Core's NF domain
based on assessments embedded in the Everyday Mathematics instructional
materials. Additionally, video screen recordings of purposefully selected
students will be analyzed using the Collaborative Computing Observation
instrument to evaluate the effectiveness of the activities as well as successes
and challenges the students experience with the CT and mathematics activities.
Teacher data will include classroom observations, interviews, and teacher
reflections.