* 1933398
* Skin-Inspired Mechanics of Liquid Metal - Elastomer Composites as Super Soft, Stretchable, and Tough Conductors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Qing Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 02/28/2023
* USD 520,746.00

The emergence of the field of wearable electronics, along with its applications
in biomedical devices and soft robotics, has highlighted a grand challenge in
stretchable conductors: electronic devices are usually made of hard materials,
whereas biological tissues are super soft, stretchable, and tough. This award
supports fundamental research to elucidate how liquid-metal fillers
simultaneously act as a softener, a toughener, and a conductance enhancer for
the elastomer matrix to realize extremely soft and stretchable, super tough, and
highly conductive conductors. Insights from this project will potentially result
in better design, novel devices, and improved reliability of wearable and
stretchable electronics, and therefore advance the national health and
prosperity. Further, the project will train a diverse group of students in a
multidisciplinary setting and enhance minority involvement and participation in
science and engineering in general and in mechanics and materials of stretchable
electronics in particular at Penn State. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For existing
engineering materials, flexibility and conductivity appear to be two conflicting
material properties; improving one necessarily compromises the other. In
particular, electrical conductivity often degrades with mechanical stretch. To
overcome these limitations, this project aims to fabricate liquid metal-
elastomer composites and elucidate the role of liquid metal fillers on the
softening, toughening, and conducting mechanisms in elastomer matrices. The
multiscale model developed herein is composed of atomistic simulations of the
nano-thick oxide layer spontaneously grown on the liquid metal surface, novel
treatment of the incompressibility of the liquid metal fillers, and hyper-
elasticity of the elastomer matrix. The modeling predictions of the material
properties are systematically validated by experimental characterizations at
different length scales. The integrated experimental-modeling approach offers
deep insights into the low modulus, high stretchability, excellent
recoverability, super toughness, and stretching-enhanced conductivity of the
composites. Such an in-depth understanding will provide guidance to optimize the
liquid metal-elastomer composites in terms of the size, morphology, and volume
fraction of the liquid-metal fillers, and will help foster transformative
progress in the design of other stretchable conductors with improved
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.