* 1933720
* Collaborative Research: Optimization of the Multibeam Sonar Systems of the U.S. Academic Fleet through Coordinated System Testing, Tool Development, and Community Outreach
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Paul Johnson, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 838,835.00

The Multibeam Advisory Committee (MAC) was established in 2011 to coordinate
fleet-wide sonar calibration, perform consistent and routine assessment of
system performance, and to provide tools and protocols for consistent data
acquisition practices. This proposal requests funds to continue these
activities, focusing on the development and maintenance of technical resources,
information, tools regarding the operation and monitoring of multibeam sonars
across the U.S. Academic Research Fleet (ARF). The MAC will continue to
facilitate communication and knowledge-sharing among the community of
stakeholders to provide guidance on a broad array of multibeam issues to improve
how these data are collected and assessed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative proposal is for a 5-year continuing grant. Yearly increments will
be negotiated with the Program based on the annual
report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.