* 1933873
* Data-Enabled Engineering Projects for Undergraduate Data Science and Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Shiwen Mao, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by equipping undergraduate engineering students with the data
science skills needed by current and future job markets. It intends to
accomplish this goal by developing data-enabled engineering research modules
that can be used as standalone enhancements to courses or assembled into
complete course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs). The modular
structure will make the modules and CUREs easy to integrate into existing
courses. These research experiences will provide students with hands-on
experience using large datasets from sensors embedded in industrial systems that
use Internet-of-Things technologies. This approach is expected to increase
student motivation, since the source of the data (e.g., Wi-Fi-enabled wheat
moisture detection systems) is relevant to and easily understood by students.
The research experiences will emphasize computational aspects of data science
including machine learning, classification, regression, and clustering, thus
helping to prepare data-capable engineers. It is expected that the modules and
CUREs will also contribute fundamental knowledge to industrial Internet-of-
Things data science research. The project will study the impact of the data-
enabled research modules and CURES on student motivation, engagement, and
achievement. Results of this research could inform the broader STEM education
community about successful approaches for integrating data science education
into STEM disciplines beyond engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
investigating the impact of the data-enabled research modules and CUREs on
student motivation, engagement, and achievement, the project will also test the
hypothesis that data-enabled engineering research experiences will enhance
students' reflection and metacognition. All of these student characteristics
will be measured via standard instruments. For example, the Metacognition
Awareness Inventory will be used to quantify changes in students' metacognition
awareness between the beginning and end of a set of courses. Evaluation of the
project will be conducted by the Auburn Center for Evaluation and the evaluation
and project research findings will be disseminated through an Auburn University-
hosted website, conference presentations, and publications. The project goals
align well with NSF's goal of equipping undergraduate students with data science
and engineering skills that are in high demand in the current and future job
markets. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This is an Engaged
Student Learning Project, an IUSE: EHR track that supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.