* 1933114
* High-Dimensional Stochastic Design Optimization by Spline Dimensional Decomposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Sharif Rahman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2022
* USD 318,898.00

This award will contribute to national prosperity by establishing new methods
for the development of complex engineered systems and products. Design of real-
life engineered systems and products involves uncertainties in applied forces,
material properties, and manufacturing processes. If not appropriately accounted
for, these uncertainties can directly impact the anticipated performance of a
product, resulting in a significant loss of revenue or even catastrophic
failure. This award supports fundamental research on design optimization for
discovering the best possible design solution while explicitly considering the
uncertain system behavior. These methods will lead to improvements in
computational engineering design tools that will support the design of
commercial products that are more durable, robust and reliable. The algorithms
and tools developed in this project will be applicable to a broad
multidisciplinary engineering design community. The award will support a
graduate student, and the educational outreach activities will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will establish a sound
mathematical foundation, create robust numerical algorithms, and build practical
computational tools for design optimization of high-dimensional complex systems
in the presence of uncertainty. This effort will involve: (1) new multivariate
orthonormal basis splines (B-splines) and non-uniform rational B-splines
(NURBS), leading to a new spline dimensional decomposition (SDD) method; (2) new
formulae and scalable algorithms of the SDD method for calculating the
statistical moments, including estimation of design sensitivities of moments
from score functions; and (3) new computationally expedient robust design
optimization (RDO) algorithms comprising a single or at most a few stochastic
simulations. The research is novel, debuting the stochastic version of B-splines
and NURBS for the very first time. New formulae and scalable algorithms
generated for estimating the statistical moments will account for discontinuous
or nonsmooth stochastic responses. The integration with score functions will
concurrently determine both the stochastic response characteristics and design
sensitivities from the same computational effort, thereby solving RDO problems
from a few stochastic simulations. As a consequence, the speed of design process
will be substantially enhanced, producing rare or potentially unprecedented
solutions to large-scale stochastic design optimization
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.