* 1933739
* Alabama ADVANCE Partnership for Achieving Gender Equity in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Paulette Dilworth, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,250,000.00

The Alabama ADVANCE Partnership for Achieving Gender Equity in STEM will build
on prior NSF ADVANCE work at the University of Alabama at Birmingham and other
research and literature concerning gender, racial and ethnic equity. The
partnership includes the University of Alabama at Birmingham, the University of
Alabama in Huntsville, Alabama A&amp;M University, Miles College and Oakwood
University. The project will implement institutional changes at the partner
institutions in practices and policies to enhance gender equity and inclusion
for STEM faculty in STEM departments. Activities include unconscious bias
seminars and workshops with STEM faculty and administrators, training for search
and promotion committees, and annual state-wide conferences on gender equity
bringing provosts and STEM deans together to discuss strategies that work to
enhance equity and inclusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership will
implement evidence-based activities that have been adapted to the context of the
partnering institutions designed to lead to new policies or policy changes that
promote gender equity for STEM faculty in the academic workplace. The ADVANCE
Partnership builds on existing relationships between the Alabama institutions
and will coordinate with two Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
programs in Alabama and an NSF INCLUDES project lead by Auburn University. The
Auburn INCLUDES project is focused on increasing the quantity and excellence of
persons with disabilities in STEM via a regional alliance of twenty-one
institutions in the southeast. These strategic partnerships will enhance the
sharing of information and result in the establishment of a community of ADVANCE
universities in the state and region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership"
awards provide support to collaborations among STEM professional societies and
academic and non-academic non-profit organizations designed to broaden the
implementation of evidence-based equity strategies and have a national or
regional reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.