* 1933428
* Collaborative Research: The evolution of phenotypic plasticity in sleep across variable environments
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Johanna Kowalko, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 11/30/2021
* USD 426,639.00

While sleep is almost universal across the animal kingdom, sleep patterns and
amount vary drastically between species. Further, individuals alter how much
they sleep in response to their environments. While modulating sleep is likely
important for an animal's survival, little is known about how this plasticity in
sleeping behavior evolves. One ecological factor that affects how much an animal
sleeps is food availability. Some species reduce sleep in response to a food-
poor environment, presumably to increase the time available for foraging.
However, others increase sleep under these conditions, which is likely a
strategy to conserve energy when food is not available. This is referred to as
sleep plasticity. This work examines the evolution of sleep plasticity using the
blind Mexican cavefish as a focal species. By quantifying sleep in cavefish in
their natural habitats across seasons, the researchers will connect naturally
occurring, variable environmental conditions to the amount animals sleep.
Further, sleep plasticity will be examined in crosses derived from cavefish and
their surface fish counterparts, allowing for examination of the genetic basis
of sleep plasticity. Together, these studies will provide unprecedented insight
into how and why sleep plasticity has evolved, how sleep plasticity is impacted
by environmental variables, and the underlying genetic influences on sleep
plasticity. The captivating cavefish system will be leveraged to engage students
through the development of a research-intensive course for undergraduates and a
summer research mentoring program for high school students. Finally, a
collaboration with FAU's Osher Lifelong Learning Institute will promote
understanding of scientific research for retired citizens and provide research
opportunities for local retirees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms regulate sleep
in response to environmental factors, displaying sleep plasticity. One striking
example of sleep plasticity is the change in sleep observed under different
nutrient availability conditions. This project aims to understand the genetic
basis of the evolution of sleep plasticity in the Mexican cavefish, Astyanax
mexicanus. Cavefish sleep less than conspecific surface fish under ad libitum
fed laboratory conditions. When starved, surface and cavefish have opposite
responses: surface fish reduce sleep whereas cavefish increase sleep. This
research program will test the hypothesis that cavefish have evolved sleep loss
and altered sleep plasticity in response to a cave environment that strongly
varies in food availability across seasons. The relationship between sleep
plasticity and evolution in a variable environment are examined using three
approaches: 1) surface-cave hybrids and cave-cave hybrids generated from
multiple cave populations will be evaluated to elucidate the genetic
architecture underlying sleep plasticity and to identify candidate genes for the
evolution of this trait, 2) sleep, feeding, and food availability will be
measured in the field across seasons in three different cavefish-containing
caves to define these behaviors in natural habitats, and to determine the
environmental conditions under which these behaviors have evolved, and 3)
genomic and behavioral analyses will be performed on fish from different pools
within the same cave that vary in food availability to uncover the genetic
underpinnings of behavioral evolution within a single
cave.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.