* 1933800
* Directional Graphene Aerogel Electrodes to Overcome Limitations in Organic Electrochemical Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Kenneth Kihm, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 10/31/2023
* USD 384,286.00

Grid-scale energy storage has the potential to alleviate the variability and
unpredictability of renewable energy sources, such as wind or solar, while also
improving electrical grid stability and national infrastructure security. This
research project investigates organic electrochemical redox flow battery systems
and one of their major limiting factors: electrode performance losses that
contribute to a decrease in efficiency to the overall system. In most
electrochemical systems, ions must move to store or release electricity in the
electrode. If ionic transport is slow, then the system's ability to deliver
power at high efficiency suffers. The research team will address the synthesis
of the electrode material, mathematical simulations of the electrode formation
mechanisms, and characterization of the electrochemical performance of the
electrode in a flow battery application. The electrode material has a porous
structure that is designed so that the transport of liquid electrolyte is
facilitated and improves the power and efficiency of the whole battery system.
The mathematical simulation component of this research is expected to contribute
to a broader understanding of how fluids move in porous structure. Such
knowledge will be useful in oil and gas production, groundwater hydrodynamics,
and other electrochemical reactors. The research will be integrated into a broad
range of educational and outreach activities that include research dissemination
through graduate and undergraduate courses, a pre-college summer program, and
video clips of experimental demonstrations and simulation results for YouTube
dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to
accelerate ionic transport in organic electrochemical systems and to reduce ion
transport loss via directionally-porous graphene aerogel (DGA) electrodes.
Studies will lead to an understanding of the fundamental physics that define the
relationship between viscous flow, porosity, pore morphology, and mass and ionic
transport. The research will complement current research in organic redox
electrochemical systems including identification of promising electrochemical
redox couples and suitable separators. The project involves cyclic integration
between molecular dynamics simulations of synthesis conditions, synthesis of DGA
electrodes via freeze-templating, material property assessment, and electrode
demonstration in an operating organic redox flow battery (biphenyl anode,
sulfide/polysulfide cathode, and sodium triflate as charge carrier). Molecular
dynamics simulations will focus on the effects of freezing conditions on
electrode structure and ionic (biphenyl radical, sulfide, and sodium ion)
transport in the presence of electrolyte convection. DGA electrodes will be
synthesized under a variety of conditions for comparison with simulation results
and implementation in a biphenyl/polysulfide redox flow battery. Physical
properties including stiffness, porosity, and surface area, and electrode-
relevant properties including electrochemical surface area, electronic and
thermal conductivities, and effective permeability will be assessed. A novel
characterization technique will directly measure changes in effective liquid-
phase ionic conductivity using the same foundational principle underlying the
standard four-point probe test used to measure solid-phase ionic conductivity
(e.g. ion exchange membranes). The new diagnostic will measure liquid phase
ionic conductivity, with and without a porous electrode, and with or without
convective flux. Liquid phase ionic conductivity will be benchmarked against
aqueous sodium chloride with a conventional carbon felt
electrode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.