* 1933005
* Collaborative Research: DASI Track 1: Development of a Distributed Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) Meteor Radar Network for Space Weather Research
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Ryan Volz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 12/31/2023
* USD 735,847.00

This project supported by the Geospace Facility's Distributed Arrays of Small
Instruments (DASI) will utilizes observations of meteors to measure the winds in
the upper atmosphere. Tons of mass enters the atmosphere daily in the form of
meteroids. Observations of meteor with radar can be used to infer properties of
very high altitude winds in the atmosphere. Characterization of these winds is
very important to understanding the dynamics of our atmosphere and how it
responds to or creates space weather events, which can impacts radio
communications, for instance. This project is to develop and deploy a novel new
technology for detecting meteors using a system of multiple antennas and
multiple receivers. Typically, a transmit - receive system consists of a single
transmitter and a single or multiple receivers. The novel innovation here is the
ability to deploy low cost antenna. The data from the multiple in - multiple out
(MIMO) system will measure 3D data in the very complex region of the atmosphere.
This team is led by an early career scientist and includes mentoring for
graduate and undergraduate students who will participate in outreach for
deployment sites and participation in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Winds in
the upper atmosphere, at the edge of space, are hard to measure routinely
because in situ observations are limited to rocket flights (too high for
aircraft and too low for stable satellites) and current remote sensing
techniques only provide sparse, local estimates. Models for predicting the
dynamics of the upper atmosphere often do not agree with each other or with
actual observations because there are not enough measurements to inform and
constrain model development. Just as investment in observational infrastructure
has dramatically improved the prediction capabilities of lower atmospheric
weather models, so too could the development and deployment of a continental-
scale meteor radar network dramatically improve modeling and physics-based
understanding of the upper atmosphere. The work will take the first step in
developing such a large scale network by addressing the outstanding technical
challenges which include system miniaturization, autonomous operation, low power
draw, and cost-effective scaling for production. Testing and deployment will
take place near the Rocky Mountains with a network consisting of two transmit
array sites, one receive array site, and ten single-receiver sites providing
observational coverage in a region spanning ~90,000 square kilometers. The work
will encompass: hardware engineering, to optimize system design and produce a
remote-deployable integrated receiver unit; software engineering, to create open
source tools for radar operations, meteor detection and processing, and wind
field estimation; and scientific analysis, to study the upper atmosphere in the
Rocky Mountain region and measure the lower thermospheric wind field from a new
mesoscale perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.