* 1933286
* I-Corps: Precision Oncology Software
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Tom Schryver, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project includes
improvement of overall survival rates for colon cancer patients and reduction of
healthcare costs. As more than 1.7 million Americans are being diagnosed with
cancer each year, there is an urgent need for better prognostic tests for
selection of the right therapy for the right patient. However, in colon cancer,
current prognostic tests often fail to select the right treatment for a
significant number of patients. This I-Corps project will develop a prognostic
test, specifically for stage III colon cancer patients, that will more
accurately choose the right treatment for newly diagnosed patients. The test
will be a precision oncology software that analyzes genomic information from
each patient's biopsy with a proprietary algorithm to predict response to each
treatment option. The primary customer segment will be medical oncologists
specializing in gastrointestinal tumors, who will use the test to choose the
treatment that will be most beneficial to each patient and ultimately improve
overall survival rates. Secondary customer segment will be insurance companies
that will use the test to make value-based reimbursement decisions and to avoid
costs associated with treatments that are not effective.

This I-Corps project aims to further develop a prognostic colon cancer test. The
test will analyze RNA sequencing data of stage III colon cancer patients to
determine the expression levels of a proprietary set of genes that predict
response to standard-of-care chemotherapies used for colon cancer. These genes
were discovered in an innovative ex vivo cell culture system that conserve the
biological properties of cancer cells and allow identification of novel
biomarkers that show clinical significance. These novel biomarkers determine
therapy response more accurately than known biomarkers. Retrospective analysis
of 100 stage III colon cancer patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas Project
database showed high expression of these genes in 80% of stage III colon cancer
patients who also benefit significantly from chemotherapy. Conversely, the
remaining 20% of patients, who do not benefit from chemotherapy, did not express
these genes. Using the new prognostic test to stratify colon cancer patients to
responder versus non-responder groups and administering the right treatment for
each patient, increased 5-year survival rates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.