* 1933086
* Oregon Programming Languages Summer School 2019:  Foundations of Probabilistic Programming and Security
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Zena Ariola, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/29/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This award provides student travel and subsistence for the 2019 Oregon
Programming Languages Summer School (OPLSS). This summer school provides an
important and valuable educational opportunity for students to study
foundational topics related to programming languages and verification. The
topics of this year's school are related to the foundations of probabilistic
programming and security. The exploration of these topics is of extreme
importance: probabilistic programs are now widely used in different areas of
computing science including machine learning and statistical data analysis,
while tools that guarantee the security of software are fundamental for building
applications that are reliable and robust. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
significance and importance of the summer school include building international
community and cooperation in foundational research areas, and enhancing
education of US students, including underrepresented minorities, by exposure to
and interaction with leading-edge research and researchers. By supporting US-
based students, the school will thus train the next generation of programming
languages and security researchers and practitioners in both industry and
academia. Around 20 students will be supported as part of this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.