* 1933351
* FSML:  Enhancing Novel Research and Education Capacity in Central Africa
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Virginia Zaunbrecher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 195,703.00

This project transforms two uniquely located comparative field sites to support
a diverse array of research, education, and capacity building efforts in
Africa's Congo Basin ((https://www.cbi.ucla.edu/field-stations/). The project
provides basic scientific instrumentation and modest facilities upgrades that
will permit longer stays, and sustainability measures at two biological field
stations in Cameroon: 1) the Somalomo station in secondary forest at the border
of the Dja Biosphere Reserve, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and 2) the Bouamir
station, located in mature rainforest at the center of the reserve. The project
supports research in a region where species loss, deforestation, emerging
diseases, and natural resource extraction are having global impacts. It
increases critical local scientific capacity in the region by pairing American
scientists with African researchers. The two field sites also hire and train
naturalists from indigenous Baka villages, facilitating the translation of
traditional knowledge and providing meaningful employment to this marginalized
group. Ultimately, the project will increase the capacity for American-led
scientific research on topics such as emerging infectious diseases food and
water security and ecosystem function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having one station
located at the human forest interface and a second within a mature tropical
rainforest offers researchers an unparalleled opportunity to conduct comparative
work in a very understudied region. The sites support research and education on
a variety of topics, including human and animal disease, food and water
security, anthropology, geology, and environmental sciences. This project
increases scientific capacity at the sites through: (1) Improved scientific
equipment by creating a networked system of basic sensors (e.g., weather
stations, temperature loggers, and other biomonitoring equipment) that will
report on ecological and environmental variables. (2) Facilities upgrades
including adding plumbing and other basic conveniences. (3) Increased
functionality and sustainability at the sites by providing solar-based
electricity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.