* 1933394
* EFRI CEE: Engineered Retinal Epigenomics
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Allen Taflove, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,999,999.00

Retinal blindness, such as retinitis pigmentosa (RP), age-related macular
degeneration (AMD), and glaucoma (POAG), is characterized by unrelenting
neuronal death (photoreceptor loss in RP and AMD and ganglion cell loss in
POAG). These prevalent blinding conditions account for a significant part of the
estimated US$139 billion annual economic burden of vision disorders in the U.S.
This group has, for the first time, shown that controlled microscale
electromagnetic (EM) stimulation can lead to neuroprotective changes in the
retina. The transformational vision of this project is to use non-invasive
controlled electrical stimulation to induce genetic changes in the mammalian
retina to slow down the progression of retinal blindness and perhaps even
restore some level of the lost vision. The success of such an approach would
spawn a whole new area in basic science, engineering, and medicine and in doing
so develop new, innovative, cross-disciplinary educational programs critical to
foster the next-generation of researchers of bioelectronic devices to affect
protective genetic changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of
mechanisms have been identified as to why neuronal death occurs in different
retinal blinding disorders (e.g., genetic mutations in RP, lipid metabolism
abnormalities and inflammation in AMD, and elevated intraocular pressure in POAG
to name a few). This group has shown that controlled microscale electromagnetic
(EM) stimulation can lead to epigenetic retinal changes with implications for
neuroprotective changes. The hypothesis of this proposal is that neuroepigenetic
and chromatin remodeling of the retina induced through controlled electrical
stimulation is a key molecular determinant of neuroprotection and could prove to
be pivotal for the treatment of certain retinal blindness conditions. The vision
of this proposal is that the findings will demonstrate how stimulation using
electromagnetic (EM) fields can be effectively adopted to slow or halt the
progression of prevalent retinal diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.