* 1933453
* EAGER: Technologies for the Reproducibility of Biological Computational Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Herbert Sauro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Simulation models of biological and physiological systems have been increasing
in number and complexity over the last 20 years, and they are an important means
to truly advance understanding of these complex systems. The impact of these
models will be increased if they can be shared easily and accurately between
research groups and so that they can both model and be validated with broader
sets of data. The Center for Reproducible Systems for Biomedical Modeling at the
University of Washington seeks to develop tools to: 1) build reproducible
models; 2) to annotate models using a unified techniques; and 3) reproducibly
simulate, analyze, and visualize models online. The outcomes of this EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award will provide the research
community with tools to make published models more understandable, visualizable,
and reusable. The research team will contribute to various workshops and
conferences to highlight the work and train users in the new tools and
standards. In addition, the project includes a plan to host afternoon science
activities at SoundBio, a maker-space organization that focuses on biology, that
would include hands-on and computational exercises for high school and middle
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award will support efforts of
the Center for Reproducible Systems for Biomedical Modeling to: 1) develop a
smart annotation editor to assist users in an unobtrusive way with the
annotation of models through the addition of metadata; and 2) develop a human-
readable standard for describing simulation experiments, such that the precise
conditions of the experiment could be recreated through multiple platforms and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.