* 1933961
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Physical Computing and Data Science in Movement Based Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Yoav Bergner, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 694,744.00

This project will examine how to integrate machine learning, data science, and
physical computing in the context of movement based learning. The project
focuses on learning environment design for female high school students who
participate in physical education activities such as dance in New York and
Colorado. Many of these learners are African American and Latina, populations
that are underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM).
Researchers will leverage learners' expertise and cultural practices in order to
engage them in authentic and personally meaningful computing. The students will
learn to create computing systems with programmable electronics worn on the body
(physical computing), use those systems to create statistical models of movement
and gesture (data science and machine learning), and then apply the models in a
digital experiential learning environment. Researchers will work closely with
physical education teachers and learners to produce design principles,
curricula, new educational technologies, and comparative analyses across
contexts. This project is funded by the STEM+Computing (STEM+C) program that
supports research and development to understand the integration of computing and
computational thinking in STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research questions
addressed in this project include: 1) How can physical education be leveraged to
build expertise in computing? 2) What are the challenges of integrating
computing into physical education practices? and 3) How can we meaningfully
assess learning outcomes and dispositional shifts with respect to computing in
the context of physical education applications? The research has three phases.
Phase I will consist of conducting interviews and observations at three
development sites including the non-profit organization STEM From Dance in NYC
and two teams in Boulder, Colorado. Phase II will consist of participatory
design sessions with physical educators and computing educators to develop a
deeper understanding of how physical movement and computing (across the sub-
disciplines of machine learning, data science, and physical computing) can
complement one another using co-designed physical and computing learning
activities. The participatory design and co-design activities will explore how
sensing technologies and embodiment affordances can reshape computing education
and provide alternative pathways for conceptualizing knowledge and cultivating
expertise. Phase III will consist of piloting the integrated physical education
and computing curricula across the three sites in NYC and Boulder. The curricula
will consist of four 5-week computing modules that will be iterated on within
the three development sites. Three of the modules will focus on each of the
computing sub-disciplines individually, and the fourth will involve advanced
topics integrating the disciplines together. This research will produce
curriculum and technology to support learning modules in machine learning, data
science, and, physical computing, integrating multiple levels of abstraction
across the boundaries of hardware and software (i.e., cyber-physical systems).
Through this collaborative inquiry researchers will develop transformative
knowledge about how to embed computing into established movement based learning
practices, resulting in computing curricula and tools that build on the
learners' and educators' authentic practices and
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.