* 1933525
* MIP: GlycoMIP - Automating the Synthesis of Rationally Designed Glycomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Robert Woods, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2025
* USD 19,055,237.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Carbohydrates are the most abundant class of
organic compounds on Earth and are found in all main macromolecular building
blocks of life, including nucleic acids, proteins and lipids. Glycomaterials are
carbohydrate-based polymeric materials with diverse biological functions
including biochemical signaling, structural support, and water retention.
Because of their complex molecular structures, glycomaterials are more difficult
to design, create, and characterize than other biopolymers. There are no widely
available methods for their large-scale synthesis and rapid characterization.
These scientific and technological challenges hinder our understanding of these
ubiquitous materials, vitally important to advancing sustainable materials,
renewable energy technologies, and human health. Anchored at Virginia Tech and
the University of Georgia, GlycoMIP, an NSF Materials Innovation Platform,
accelerates discovery in glycomaterials science and technology through a unique
national user facility and leading-edge in-house research and advances the
implementation of the Materials Genome Initiative paradigm shift in materials
development. The GlycoMIP user facility supports researchers from academia,
industry, and government research institutions through access to state-of-the-
art equipment, world-class services, and technical data for the synthesis,
characterization, and modeling of bioinspired glycomaterials at the molecular,
supramolecular, and macroscopic (bulk property) levels. Strengthened by world-
leading expertise at Brandeis University, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and
the University of North Carolina, the in-house research of GlycoMIP employs
efficient convergence of physical sciences, engineering, computation, and life
sciences to achieve scientific and technological breakthroughs in scalable
synthesis, high-throughput characterization, and mesoscale modeling of
glycomaterials. GlycoMIP is a nationwide collaboratory, where members of the
glycomaterials community share tools, samples, data, software, and know-how for
the collective advancement of glycomaterials science and technology. GlycoMIP
offers short courses, hands-on training courses, and tutorials on glycomaterials
science and technology topics to users and potential users and trains the next
generation of glycomaterials researchers in accelerated materials
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Open to
external researchers from across the nation, the GlycoMIP user facility at
Virginia Tech and the University of Georgia provides access to unique
experimental and computational tools for glycomaterials synthesis,
characterization, and modeling and facilitates Materials Genome Initiative
approaches to materials research and development. These include automated glycan
synthesizers for de novo glycan synthesis, a mass spectrometry (MS) imaging
system for in-situ glycan analysis, high-resolution, multi-stage MS systems for
in-depth glycan structural analysis, surface plasmon resonance imaging and
biolayer interferometry systems for high-throughput quantitation of binding
events, two vibrational optical activity spectrometers for analysis of solution-
state conformations, and a rheometer for the characterization of glycan-based
solutions and gels. The facility also offers users multiple open-access
databases and online services to facilitate automation of MS and nuclear
magnetic resonance spectral assignments, provide access to molecular modeling,
and enable optimization of automated glycan synthesis. The in-house research of
GlycoMIP addresses the grand challenge of rational molecular design of
glycomaterials with predefined solution- and gel-state properties, focusing
specifically on accelerated development of glycomaterials with predicted
binding, conformational, or self-assembly behaviors through computer-guided
design of primary structure and molecular
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Materials Innovation Platform award is
jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.