* 1933593
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 ACM International Middleware Conference (Middleware)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Aniruddha Gokhale, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 09/30/2020
* USD 14,998.00

This project will provide travel support for US-based graduate students to
attend the Middleware 2019 conference and its associated workshops, tutorials
and its Doctoral Symposium. This program will expose students to new ideas in
emerging areas of distributed systems and middleware and allow them to interact
with other students and researchers thereby broadening their intellectual
horizons. Middleware brings together participants from both academia and
industry, which will help students learn about both career opportunities and
realistic challenges faced by industry today. The Middleware conference is
particularly beneficial for students to attend not only because of its high-
quality technical content, but its commitment to mentoring through a long
running doctoral symposium and its strong integration of academic and industrial
research. Attending Middleware 2019 will incur an expense beyond the means of
typical graduate students due to the cost of airfare, hotels, and conference
registration. While many students can receive travel funds from their advisors,
this is not always the case, or it may not cover the entire cost. Travel grants
are especially important for broadening the participation at conferences by
allowing students other than just the first author of accepted papers to attend.
This gives more students the opportunity to see research presented first hand
and interact with potential mentors and employers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will partially support 19 mostly graduate students and in some cases
undergraduate students from US-based institutions. Every effort will be made to
encourage participation by women and under-represented groups. The disbursement
of travel funds will be managed by Vanderbilt University. Every student travel
grant awardee will be required to submit a report post conference detailing
their experience along with their travel expenses before the funds are disbursed
to the awardee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.