* 1933649
* I-Corps: Integrated Strain Sensor for Dynamic Hip Screws
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Jeffrey Anker, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project stems from the
potential of the technology to address a key clinical gap hip fracture
treatment. Intertrochanteric hip fractures are common among elderly patients,
affecting their mobility and quality of life. They are routinely treated with a
dynamic hip screw (DHS) consisting of a titanium plate and cannulated lag screw
that hold the fractured ball of the hip onto the rest of the femur so that the
fracture can heal. Like most implants for fracture fixation, the DHS is not
designed for long-term load bearing. If a patient's fracture does not heal after
surgery, then the DHS or bone will fatigue and fail, requiring revision surgery.
This leaves clinicians in a difficult position, as they must carefully monitor
their patients for signs of implant failure after surgery. However, by the time
signs of failure are apparent, it is often too late to salvage the implant, and
a revision surgery is necessary. This device can provide a way to quantitively
track fracture healing, enabling physicians and patients to alter rehabilitation
protocols and add adjunctive therapies to avoid morbidity and mortality
associated with catastrophic implant failure.

This I-Corps project focuses on a novel device to help physicians manage hip
fracture rehabilitation. The envisioned device is unique in that it can be
seamlessly integrated into existing dynamic hip screw (DHS) systems and is read
using plain radiography, which is already acquired during follow-up visits but
is not quantitative or sensitive enough for tracking fracture stiffness without
this sensor. Specifically, the device measures screw bending during weight
bearing: immediately after fixation, the screw holds the femur together, carries
the full load, and bends significantly under load. However, as the fracture
heals and the surrounding bone carries more load, and the screw bends
proportionately less. Although the degree of bending is too small to accurately
measure from traditional radiographs, this device uses a straight radio-dense
tungsten rod through the hollow part of the screw to clearly highlight
displacement. Preliminary results have shown proof-of-principle in computer
simulations, cadaveric specimens, and a sheep study. Measuring fracture
stiffness is important because if the fracture heals too slowly, the implant or
bone will fatigue and fail, requiring costly and risky revision surgery.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.