* 1933974
* Forum on Cyber Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Tho Nguyen, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,776,951.00

The National Academies Roundtable, the Forum on Cyber Resilience, established in
2015, facilitates and enhances the exchange of ideas among scientists,
practitioners, and policy makers concerned with the resilience of computing and
communications systems that are embedded in the critical national
infrastructures and social systems. Resilience encompasses not only security in
the face of attacks, resistance to degradation, and the ability to recover from
adverse events, but also broadly interpreted, the capacity for innovation and
adaptation with the ability to absorb technological disruption and surprise in a
way that reflects societal values, such as privacy, and needs of the
infrastructure's many stakeholders. The value of the Forum on Cyber Resilience
derives from the ability of the members to choose topics of mutual interest and
then enable discussions on these issues among members and experts in a neutral
setting, building trust and promoting innovative problem-solving.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This National Academy of Sciences (NAS) Forum on Cyber
Resilience provides a unique venue for stakeholders from academia, industry, and
government to broadly consider resilience technologically along with the
societal tensions that may arise among them. The Forum explores critical issues
of shared interest, framing critical questions and needs on resilience and
incubating activities of value to the participants -- encompassing discussions
on research directions, emerging technologies, design and engineering
approaches, human-system interactions, policy and social implications, education
and workforce considerations, and institutional roles. The Forum supports cross-
sector and public-private dialogue about goals and challenges, achieving goals
shared by the Forum members and their stakeholders for society, enabling early
identification of promising approaches to improve resilience, and exploring case
studies to extract lessons applicable in other domains and resilience. The Forum
events are open to the public, and their reports are publicly available on the
NAS website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.