* 1933251
* GOALI: Determination of the Structure and Properties of Microfibrillated Cellulose during Dynamic Phase Transitions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Marco Caggioni Caggioni, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 306,401.00

Microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) is a waste product generated during paper
manufacturing. It is processed commercially for some industrial uses, but it
also has a potential application as a rheological modifier in consumer, fabric
and home care products. Rheological modifiers are materials added to certain
products to customize their flow behavior. MFC is non-ionic, which makes it
compatible with a wide range of product recipes, but it must be dispersed
throughout a product to modify the product's properties. The challenge is that
MFC is supplied as a concentrated slurry of highly entangled fibers in water
that are difficult to disperse in most products. This GOALI project, which is a
collaboration between Lehigh University and Procter and Gamble, will investigate
how the structure of MFC depends on parameters such as the temperature,
composition of the host solution and forces exerted on MFC due to flow. Using
several techniques that probe the microstructural arrangements of the MFC
fibers, the researchers explore transitions in the microstructure that can
enhance dispersal of MFC in useful products. Repurposing MFC waste from the
paper industry as additives for consumer products will reduce the need for MFC
disposal and reduce manufacturing costs of valuable consumer products. The
research team will engage in a variety of outreach activities, including
programs at the Da Vinci Science Center to educate the public in colloids and
rheology, mentoring middle school and high school students interested in STEM
fields, and training undergraduate and graduate students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this GOALI project is to
characterize the spatial and temporal rheological evolution of an MFC scaffold
to enable its use as a rheological modifier for consumer, fabric and home care
products. MFC has a fiber size that is comparable to the fiber size of
rheological modifiers in current use, but unlike other modifiers, MFC has
negligible charge on the colloid. The potential advantages of MFC will be
explored by characterizing the microstructural evolution of MFC using
microrheology and microscopy, by characterizing the evolution of bulk rheology
of MFC systems, and by determining equilibrium properties and scaffold structure
after phase transitions using a unique microfluidic platform and multiple
particle tracking microrheology. MFC solutions will be characterized during
phase transitions due to three driving forces: temperature, changes in the
surrounding solution and flow-induced mechanical forces. This knowledge will
enable the use of these materials as rheological modifiers for the formulated
product industry. The results of the research will identify materials that lead
to homogeneous MFC suspensions and determine the microstructure and macroscopic
structure and properties that lead to stable
suspensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.