* 1933165
* RAPID: Ecosystem impact of a coral bleaching event: The role of coral exudates in shifting oligotrophic biogeochemistry and reef microbiomes.
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Andrew Thurber, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 05/31/2022
* USD 198,928.00

Shallow tropical reefs are biodiversity hotspots. Their ecosystem services make
them key areas of economic, ecological, and cultural importance. Yet coral reefs
are under significant threat due to both local and global stressors which can
lead to coral bleaching, disease, and eventually coral death. When corals
bleach, they release materials such as dead tissue, mucus, bacteria, and viruses
that may affect the entire ecosystem. This project uses a wide-spread bleaching
event at a Long Term Ecological Research site in French Polynesia to explore how
these released materials impact the reef ecosystem The water chemistry and
microbes associated with the corals and surrounding water are examined. This
research aims to better understand how corals interact with their environment
and how this interaction changes when corals are stressed. Throughout this
project two female graduate students are being trained and interactive programs
are used to communicate results to elementary, high school, and undergraduate
students in Oregon. A 20-minute documentary for web release focusing on the reef
scale impact of coral bleaching is in preparation together with film
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral exudates include particulate and dissolved
material (sloughed tissue, mucus, bacteria, viruses) that together add limiting
nutrients and carbon compounds to the reef, fueling auto- and heterotrophic
bacterial production. In recent experiments, coral-bleaching derived exudates
were observed to themselves cause rapid bleaching, and often mortality, of
previously healthy corals. Importantly, these negative impacts of coral exudate
exposure were far greater than thermal stress. These experiments provided
insight into a novel mechanism in which bleaching corals can adversely affect
the health of adjacent corals. This project leverages these data and an
extensive and ongoing bleaching event on the island of Mo?orea to quantify the
cascading effects of coral exudates on reef ecosystems. It is hypothesized that
during widespread bleaching: (1) DOC is significantly elevated across the
reefscape; (2) coral holobiont components become enriched in the pelagic
microbiome; (3) the water column microbial community shifts in function to
increased heterotrophy and pathogenicity; and (4) coral holobionts diverge from
their previous stable state leading to coral reef dysbiosis and/or disease and
mortality. Sampling throughout the course of an ongoing bleaching event in
Mo?orea is used to quantify the effects of this bleaching event on DOM dynamics
and reef health. Mo'orea is situated in the MCR Long Term Ecological Research
(MCR LTER) site. The rare reef-scale bleaching event at this well-studied
location provides the unusual opportunity to quantify the impact of coral
exudates on reef health and to better understand the temporal and spatial
impacts of an island-wide bleaching event in an oligotrophic ecosystem.
Measurement of the amount of organic matter released per unit area of coral on
an island where the reef ecosystem is well parameterized over time and space
allows development of a model of the impact of bleaching events on the island
carbon budget.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.