* 1933079
* NSF Student Travel Grant for IEEE/ACM 2019 International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Myra Cohen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

The IEEE/ACM 2019 International Conference on Automated Software Engineering
(ASE) is a leading conference where results of Software Engineering research are
reported and discussed among academic and industrial communities. The conference
takes in San Diego, California in November 11 through 15, 2019. This proposal
requests funds to support student travel and expenses to attend the conference
and events such as the Doctoral Consortium and mentoring events. The grant will
enable the technical exchange of information and research
conversations/collaborations made possible by the conference, as well as
advances in the field made possible by these interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference provides education, training and mentoring
received by the participants. The international nature of this conference helps
develop a globally-aware workforce of research and educators within the US and
helps build the community of researchers in the field of Software Engineering.
The Doctoral Symposium is for graduate students at all stages of their degree
completion. The goal is for students to exchange ideas, receive constructive
feedback from experts in a supportive environment, learn how to perform quality
research on automated software engineering, and to meet other students and
researchers in their research fields. This grant will be used to support student
travel from US institutions to attend both the Doctoral Symposium and the main
ASE conference. Awardees will be prioritized based on acceptance into the
Doctoral Symposium, with preference given to students in underrepresented groups
and US citizens. A portion of the funds will be used to recruit undergraduate
students from schools near the&lt;br/&gt;conference venue that have a large
population of students from diverse and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.