* 1933469
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Isotopic Reflections of Mobility and Labor Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Jelmer Eerkens, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2021
* USD 31,400.00

Candice Ralston, a Ph.D. candidate at the University of California-Davis, will
conduct archaeometric research to study the relationship between social
organization and the division of labor for hunter-gatherer populations. Place of
residence after marriage, or postmarital residence, impacts the structure of
societies and their kinship networks. Ralston's dissertation research will
investigate the relationship between the relative importance of male versus
female contributions to subsistence and diet, and postmarital residence.
Advancements in stable isotope analysis of human skeletal tissues, permit
archaeologists to generate nuanced data-sets with which to investigate ancient
diet and mobility. Stable isotope analysis provides more direct evidence of
paleomigration and diet for individuals, can distinguish individual-level
residential and dietary patterns, and permit comparison between male- and
female-mobility and dietary patterns. This study uses five isotopic
discriminants (strontium, oxygen, sulfur, carbon, and nitrogen). Incorporating
multiple lines of isotopic evidence enhances the interpretive power of these
analyses for understanding human mobility and the food webs they exploit. This
project will also further Ralston's academic and intellectual development.

Evidence will come from two California Central Valley archaeological sites, CA-
SAC-107 and CA-SJO-68, dating to the Early Period (ca. 5000-2500 BP). The
California archaeological record shows temporal trends for 1) shifting
subsistence-economies and 2) increasing differentiation of gendered labor. As
such, the region is ideal to test how subsistence and labor co-vary with
postmarital residence. Archaeological research conducted in California's Central
Valley has traditionally focused on resource intensification, demographic
forcing, and resource depression as drivers of cultural change. By contrast, the
dynamics of cultural development and social organization have not been
adequately addressed. Cross-cultural analyses suggest that economic systems, the
division of labor between women and men, warfare, and territoriality are
significant predictors of postmarital residence practices. These findings set up
the central question of Ralston's research. Does the division of labor, and more
specifically, a biased subsistence contribution to the overall diet, influence
postmarital residence for Early Period populations in the Central Valley of
California? Ralston will address the research question by 1) reconstructing
marital mobility using isotope chemistry (strontium, oxygen, and sulfur) in
skeletal tissues to ascertain postmarital residence, 2) interpreting subsistence
practices using previously published faunal, botanical, and artifactual data
from CA-SAC-107 and CA-SJO-68, and 3) reconstructing the diet of burial
populations from the two sites using stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen in
bone collagen, and carbon in bioapatite. Ralston's dissertation research will
clarify synchronic patterns of postmarital residence for the Early Period but
also, when combined with site-specific data from different periods, provide a
diachronic perspective that will elucidate the evolution of postmarital
residence practices of indigenous groups of California and, more broadly,
hunter-gatherers. Additionally, this study will demonstrate the significance of
using multi-isotopic approaches to understanding ancient human behavior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.