* 1933729
* Quest for Mechanical Rogue Waves in One-dimensional Discrete Lattices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jinkyu (JK) Yang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 517,355.00

The research objective of this award is to provide the needed knowledge for the
formation of rogue waves in mechanical structures. Rogue waves are abnormally
large-amplitude waves that appear abruptly and disappear without the trace.
Rogue waves in the ocean, often referred to as the ?wall of the water,? have
been witnessed by seafarers. However, the existence of such waves that swallow
big ships in the ocean has been mythical for a long time. It is only a couple of
decades ago that their existence has been verified scientifically. Since then,
rogue waves have been a subject of intense research in different media.
Nonetheless, the realization of mechanical rogue waves in solids and structures
remains elusive to date. The quest for such mechanical rogue waves in engineered
lattices constitutes the core of this project. The successful formation of
mechanical rogue waves will enable scientists and engineers to focus mechanical
energy in an efficient and controllable manner. Thus, the findings from this
project can open a new avenue to guiding high-amplitude mechanical wave packets,
harvesting ambient mechanical energy, and developing novel sensing/actuation
systems. From an engineering standpoint, this new mechanism of mechanical energy
control can be applied to aerospace, mechanical, and civil industries, thereby
benefiting society. From an educational standpoint, this project will help train
young minds, including several underrepresented students, in the field of
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The manipulation of mechanical
energy flow (i.e., mechanical waves) is challenging. Particularly, the
controllable localization of mechanical energy demands new technical approaches
beyond the utilization of conventional linear elastic wave principles. This
project will introduce the concept of rogue wave generation, the focusing
mechanism of waves mostly observed in fluidic or optical media, to the
mechanical realm. As an analytical guideline, the celebrated nonlinear
Schr?dinger equation will be applied to one-dimensional mechanical lattices
(i.e., nonlinear spring mass systems like Fermi-Pasta-Ulam-Tsingou lattices).
Based on this analysis, computational models of dynamic lattices will be
established in a form that facilitate the formation of mechanical rogue waves.
Lastly, a prototypical system will be fabricated using 1D discrete lattices. The
formation of mechanical rogue waves will be verified by conducting full-field
measurements of the prototype?s wave dynamics using action camera-based stereo
vision techniques. All components of these analytical, computational, and
experimental studies will be integrated into the education and training of
participating undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.