* 1933395
* Exploring How Geoscience Inquiry Labs Influence Graduate Student Teaching Beliefs and Undergraduate Student Learning and Interest
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Katherine Ryker, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2023
* USD 93,057.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving the undergraduate geoscience curriculum and
producing future faculty who are more effective educators. Inquiry-based
teaching is an effective way to model the scientific process. However, published
geoscience lab manuals often contain few inquiry-based exercises. Such lab
manuals suggest that learning occurs by following an instructor's directions.
Faculty who believe that following directions is a good pathway to learning are
less likely to adopt techniques, such as inquiry, that research has demonstrated
to better support student learning. Since teaching assistants are still
developing their teaching beliefs, we hypothesize that teaching assistants who
have more experience teaching inquiry-based labs will develop more student-
centered beliefs, enhancing their effectiveness as future faculty. This project
will create a suite of inquiry labs for introductory geoscience courses and
study their effect on teaching assistant beliefs at five institutions over two
years. This research will determine the relative effects of inquiry experiences,
teaching assistant's teaching beliefs, and undergraduate student interest on
student learning outcomes of approximately 1500 undergraduate students. This
project's significance lies in its work to provide more effective instructional
materials for geoscience students and its potential to reveal a new pathway for
transforming STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply the
Interconnected Model of Teacher Professional Growth (Clarke &amp; Hollingsworth,
2002) to test the hypothesis that involving teaching assistants in teaching
inquiry labs will increase their student-centered teaching beliefs, as measured
by the Teacher Beliefs Interview (Luft &amp; Roehrig, 2007). Hierarchical linear
modeling will explore the proportion of influence that teaching assistant
beliefs, the inquiry level of the lab, and student interest have on conceptual,
geoscientific learning. Labs developed by the project will be made available
using the Teach the Earth website. As a result, the project has the potential to
increase adoption of inquiry-based geoscience labs across the nation. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.