* 1933548
* NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference, Nonstandard Finite Difference Methods: Advances in Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Dominic Clemence, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2023
* USD 35,000.00

This National Science Foundation award supports the 2020 NSF-CBMS conference
"Nonstandard Finite Difference Methods: Advances in Theory and Applications" to
be held July 20-24, 2020 at North Carolina A&amp;T State University. The 5-day
conference will feature Professor Ronald E. Mickens of Clark Atlanta University,
who will deliver ten lectures on the topic, beginning with basic numerical
motivations for the method, including theoretical exposition and various
applications to differential equations models of diverse phenomena in the
sciences, medicine, and engineering, and concluding with open problems. While
the general scientific goal of the conference is the understanding and
extensions of nonstandard finite difference methods (NSFD) methods that will
emerge from the lectures and the discussion sessions, the human development goal
is to introduce and encourage new researchers to this exciting field of
research, with a focus on faculty and students from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities and Minority Serving Institutes, whose activities are normally
confined to teaching. The conference is intended to stimulate interest and
activity in the study of NSFD methods and their applications, to be enabled by
hands-on activities as well as panel discussions led by invited senior
researchers on NSFD models in applications, graduate and undergraduate research
projects, and a framework for future collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main conference lectures are designed to advance understanding and explore new
frontiers in NSFD theory and applications of the methodology, which addresses
the emergence of numerical instabilities and contrived chaotic behavior that is
prevalent in standard finite difference models. Beginning with need for
numerical methods for DEs, the lectures will introduce participants to the basic
foundations and formulations of the NSFD methodology, discuss the state-of-the-
art and latest advances in theory and applications, and summarize open problems
as well as possible future directions in the field. Advances in theory will
include explorations of potentially transformative concepts for generalized NSFD
construction methods for systems of ordinary, partial, delay, and fractional
differential equations. Advances in applications will be highlighted with
various studies of engineering, science, and mathematical phenomena of classic
or emerging interest modeled by the various classes of differential equations.
The lectures presented by Professor Mickens, to be consolidated in a monograph,
will unify these disparate research areas at their intersection and will serve
as a resource to advance understanding, discovery, and inter-disciplinary
collaboration in the mathematical sciences and other science and engineering
disciplines. Further conference information will be available at
http://www.ncat.edu/~math/cbms2020/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.