* 1933066
* Support for Doctoral Students to Attend the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED 2019)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Bruce McLaren, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 20,000.00

The United States has historically been the global leader in the field of
artificial intelligence in education (AIED), or ways to use artificial
intelligence technology to enhance teaching and learning in contexts ranging
from children learning math in K12 setting, to soldiers learning highly
technical jobs in the US military. The preeminent conference in this field is
the International AIED conference; at this conference the latest research is
presented and practitioners learn the state of the art techniques that allow
creation of these important educational technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal would provide partial travel support for 18 Ph.D. students, selected
through a competitive process, to attend the AIED conference, present their
work, and receive additional mentoring outside of their dissertation committees
as part of a doctoral consortium. The intellectual merit of the work rests on
the studies the graduate students submit to be considered for participation in
the early career track of the conference; this work is then enhanced by guidance
from world-class mentors who meet with the students in a structured format to
improve their research. The broader impact includes the career impact on the
twenty selected students, especially since promising graduate students whose
advisors may not have funding to send them to the conference can still be
included, and their work can be showcased and improved. Possible long-term
broader impacts include building the field of artificial intelligence in
education and data analytics researchers and thus eventually, improving the
quality of education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.