* 1933061
* EAGER: Mechanics-Guided Multicellular Self-Organization
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Jianping Fu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,738.00

During the development of multicellular tissues, the formation of shape and
pattern occur in fairly standard ways. Homogeneous cell populations are
triggered to autonomously self-organize into structured, multicellular tissues.
However, the signals that guide this organization remain a mystery, and these
processes do not consistently occur properly or completely in an a laboratory
culture environment. The goal of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project is to develop a microfluidic system in which the
culture environment can be precisely controlled so that tissue development from
stem cells can be directed towards reproducible structures. Correct tissue
development requires both biochemical and mechanical signals, which will be
precisely controllable through this system. These signals then trigger gene
expression within initially homogeneous sets of cells so that they begin a
developmental path. The microfluidic system will also be compatible with live
imaging, to support future advanced studies into mechanisms driving cellular
organization and tissue development. Improved understanding of 3D tissue
development into correctly organized structures will significantly enhance
research related to developmental biology, including congenital malformations,
as well as tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. Educational and
outreach plans include integrating high school students, with priority given to
women and underrepresented minorities, into the lab for a 4-8 week research
experience as well as engaging undergraduates in research. These projects will
also provide an opportunity for senior graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows to gain mentorship experience. A new course is also being developed
related to stem cell biotechnology and regenerative medicine, which will
directly draw on the advances in science that support this research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This cross-disciplinary project involves stem cell biology,
developmental biology, signal transduction, mechanobiology, and microfluidics.
The objectives of this study are to develop a microfluidic device and use it to
achieve controllable synthesis of both the epiblast cyst (a columnar tissue) and
the amniotic cyst (a squamous tissue) from human pluripotent stem cells. The
multi-chambered, microfluidic system will vary both cell loading and chemical
induction factors. Cell seeding will be assessed with confocal imaging. Live
imaging and immunostaining will be used to monitor mofphogenetic dynamics of the
cyst formation, including lumenogenesis (cavity formation) as well as changes in
cell shape. Cell fate will be confirmed by staining for epiblast and amniotic
lineage markers, and the dynamics of epithelialization will be examined at
varying time points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.