* 1933184
* Understanding and Quantifying Structural Loading from Tsunami-Induced Debris Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Pedro Arduino, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2023
* USD 690,800.00

Tsunamis and storm surges pose a significant threat to coastal communities
around the world. In tsunami risk zones, the threats from large-scale coastal
inundation are exacerbated by the accumulation of large debris fields that
impact and build up around critical infrastructure systems. These debris fields
are composed of various objects that move with the incoming flow and that range
in size from construction materials from damaged buildings to vehicles and large
watercraft. To lessen the risks and damage to coastal infrastructure and
ultimately improve the welfare of communities in these risk zones, improved
design and strategic retrofit strategies are necessary and require a better
understanding of the forces associated with such debris impacts, specifically
forces associated with large, disorganized debris fields. Previous studies have
addressed the effect of wave and flow loads on infrastructure, but few have
examined the influence of multiple pieces of debris, or debris fields carried by
such flows. Flow driven debris fields are fundamentally chaotic in nature;
nearly identical initial conditions can lead to widely varying outcomes. Thus,
predicting the loads arising from these events requires a statistical approach
to help address the uncertainties with how debris interacts with and affects the
built environment. Using a combination of experimental results and numerical
modeling, this project will quantify the impact forces and damming effects in a
manner valid for this kind of highly nonlinear, chaotic system. The results of
this research will provide key information to enable improved safety and
sustainability of structural systems in coastal regions and to improve post-
event response and recovery efforts. Data from this project will be archived in
the Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). This project contributes to NSF's role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will combine two distinct experimental programs, one at the NHERI large
wave flume facility at Oregon State University and the other at the University
of Washington, with a strategic numerical modeling approach to predict debris-
induced forces on structures in tsunami hazard zones. The large number of
potential debris impact scenarios, combined with the disparate nature of debris
fields across coastal communities impacted by large wave events, is well beyond
the practical scope of any single experimental program. Thus, the development of
a robust, predictive numerical approach is critical to improving the
understanding of complex debris-fluid-structure interaction phenomena. This
research has three primary objectives: (1) generate statistically representative
experimental test results for flow-driven, multi-debris impact scenarios to
inform numerical modeling efforts; (2) develop, refine, and combine a series of
complex numerical models capable of capturing the key physical phenomena
associated with the experimental results; and (3) extend the numerical models
using a statistics-based approach to debris-induced force predictions under
broader scenarios. By using a statistical approach, this research will develop a
physically meaningful, representative numerical estimate of the risks of debris
impact and damming forces, supported by experimental results that will provide
engineers and community officials with an improved confidence for designing safe
and resilient coastal infrastructure in tsunami and storm surge susceptible
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.