* 1933764
* Antarctic Submarine Melt Variability from Remote Sensing of Icebergs
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Ellyn Enderlin, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 221,344.00

Enderlin/1643455&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project that will
use a novel remote sensing method, which was initially developed to investigate
melting of icebergs around Greenland, to examine spatial and temporal variations
in ocean forcing around the Antarctic ice sheet periphery. Nearly three-quarters
of the Antarctic ice sheet is fringed by regions of floating glacier ice called
ice shelves. These ice shelves play an important role in modulating the flow of
ice from the ice sheet interior towards the coast, similar to how dams regulate
the downstream flow of water from reservoirs. Therefore, a reduction in ice
shelf size due to changing air and ocean temperatures can have serious
implications for the flux of glacier ice reaching the Antarctic coast, and thus,
sea level change. Observations of recent ocean warming in the Amundsen Sea,
thinning of the ice shelves, and increased ice flux from the West Antarctic ice
sheet interior suggests that ice shelf destabilization triggered by ocean
warming may already be underway in some regions. Although detailed observations
are available in the Amundsen Sea region, our understanding of spatial and
temporal variations in ocean conditions and their influence on ice shelf
stability is limited by the scarceness of observations spanning the ice sheet
periphery. The project will yield insights into variability in the submarine
melting of ice shelves and will help advance the career of a female early-career
scientist in a male-dominated field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use
repeat, very high-resolution (~0.5 m pixel width and length) satellite images
acquired by the WorldView satellites, to estimate rates of iceberg melting in
key coastal regions around Antarctica. The satellite images will be used to
construct maps of iceberg surface elevation, which will be differenced in time
to derive time series of iceberg volume change and area-averaged melt rates.
Where ocean data are available, the melt rates will be compared to these data to
assess whether variations in ocean temperature can explain observed iceberg melt
variability. Large spatial gradients in melt rates will be compared to estimates
of iceberg drift rates, which will be inferred from the repeat satellite images
as well as numerically modeled drift rates produced by (unfunded) collaborators,
to quantify the effects of water shear on iceberg melt rates. Spatial and
temporal patterns in iceberg melting will also be compared to independently
derived ice shelf thickness datasets. Overall, the analysis should yield
insights into the effects of changes in ocean forcing on the submarine melting
of Antarctic ice shelves and icebergs. The project does not require field work
in Antarctica.