* 1933642
* I-Corps: Systemization and Digitization of Career Exploration Coaching
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Jamie Eggers, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to alleviate
and improve the high rate of disengagement of the US workforce (i.e. alleviating
the current struggle professionals face to have the right resource and guidance
they need in order to find job fit). Additional societal issues that may be
resolved include the "purpose gap" at work and high turnover/job attrition
rates. The impacts of disengagement at work include impacts to individuals'
wellbeing, organizations' bottom line and level of employee productivity, and
subsequent costs to the economy. The impact of this project will improve the
value and ability of higher education to meet societal expectations and improve
students' prospects. This project will enable individuals to find job fit early
on, avoid job hopping and be engaged and productive at work so they and their
companies, economies, and societies thrive. By advancing individuals' career
process, the project can enable them to play a more impactful role in society.

This I-Corps project is exploring career coaching automation by pairing
technology where it works best with human interaction where it is needed. The
project leverages advanced technology to automate and scale career guidance to
every professional, including cloud-based tools, chatbots, sentiment analysis
and audio capabilities. The project explores how technology can learn about
individuals and help them learn about themselves and their career options. This
career assessment tool is based on a new methodology and format, where free-form
text (user generated content) produces stronger outputs than competitors. The
platform enables continuous learning and reflection by systematizing coaching
through a structured, iterative, ongoing process, leading to clarity and
confidence in one's path. The platform also guides users by releasing guidance
and resources as the user is ready for it coupled with on-demand and real time
support. Through data science, data visualization, and machine learning, the
project will empower professionals to be thoughtful at every career step.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.