* 1933069
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Trustworthy Hierarchical Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Yanchao Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 10/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Edge computing has quickly risen as an effective paradigm to capture, process,
gain insights from, and act upon the massive amount of Internet of Things (IoT)
data close to where it is generated. Future edge computing systems are expected
to be hierarchical and heterogeneous. It will become increasingly common for a
single IoT application to utilize edge computing resources owned by multiple
entities. This project envisions the emergence of hierarchical edge computing
(HEC) service providers that purchase computing services from heterogeneous
multi-owner edge computing systems and provide unified edge computing services
to individual IoT applications. The development of HEC systems will have a
profound impact on transportation, healthcare, energy, education, social life,
public safety, and many other sectors. Security and privacy are among the most
challenging obstacles that hinder the wide development and deployment of the
promising HEC paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to tackle key
security and privacy challenges in HEC systems, under which heterogeneous multi-
owner edge computing systems can jointly provide trustworthy computing services
to end-users via a single service provider. There are four research thrusts: (1)
developing novel techniques to authenticate data streams with freshness
guarantees; (2) investigating locally differentially private data analysis
techniques via correlated randomized responses; (3) designing a novel framework
for distributed privacy-preserving collaborative learning; and (4) building a
prototype HEC system to thoroughly validate and evaluate the proposed
techniques. If successful, the research can serve as a key enabler for the
explosive development and deployment of edge computing services and IoT
applications. The research will also enrich the scientific knowledge of network
and distributed system security, data privacy, and edge computing. A substantial
quantity of project deliverables will be made publicly available online through
tutorials, talks, publications, and software toolkits. In addition, this project
will integrate the research activities with curriculum development, provide
research opportunities to female and underrepresented students, enhance
undergraduate research experience through senior design projects, and foster the
interest of K-12 students in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
via outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.