* 1933406
* Workshop Proposal:  Advanced Crop Improvement: meeting challenges for food security, Senegal, October 27 - Nov 9, 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Jan Leach, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2020
* USD 49,996.00

The AfricaRice Advanced Crop Improvement (ACI) short course will build a network
of collaborative young US scientists that understand how plant science will help
address global problems. The content will focus on modern crop improvement
strategies, how they can be incorporated into crop improvement, and the
sociological and economic issues for their acceptance by farmers and consumers.
By showcasing real-world issues faced in crop production and delving deeply into
state-of-the-art crop improvement methods and the controversial issues
associated with their use, the ACI short course will bring the science and
sociological issues alive to the participants. The participants will learn how
the science of crop improvement intimately links to food security, the national
and international politics of food and agriculture, and science communication,
attracting them to explore career and research options in this area. Other
outcomes of the workshop will be up-to-date educational materials, brief
podcasts and a publishable position paper.

The goal of the AfricaRice Advanced Crop Improvement (ACI) short course is to
build a network of collaborative young scientists that understand the importance
of innovative plant science in addressing global problems. The ACI will focus on
modern improvement strategies relevant to most crop species, including genomic
selection and genome editing. Classroom, lab, and field-based learning will be
augmented by topical discussions on how advanced technologies and novel
resources can be incorporated into crop improvement, and the sociological and
economic issues for their acceptance by farmers and consumers. A team class
project, in collaboration with a professional science writer/lecturer, will
produce a concept note and podcasts of interviews of consumers, growers and
scientists on issues related to the adoption of crops improved by various
approaches. Graduates of the course will have a broader appreciation for
international agriculture, collaborative approaches to science, and the
possibilities for putting modern plant sciences into practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.