* 1933369
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic and Dynamic Chemotherapy Planning and Dosing
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Clifton Fuller, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 10/31/2022
* USD 95,313.00

This award will contribute to the advancement of national prosperity and
economic welfare by developing novel methods for scheduling and dosing
chemotherapy over multiple time periods under uncertainty. Chemotherapy is one
of the three most common cancer therapies, yet few methods have considered its
optimal use. This award will develop several innovative techniques as it studies
dynamic methods of characterizing response and dosage. The research integrates
both continuous and discrete decisions. One such aspect considers time: cancer
and chemotherapy drugs change continuously over time, but dosing decisions occur
at discrete time periods (i.e. doctor appointments). Another such aspect
considers dosing decisions; chemotherapy drugs are often given via pills, which
limits dosing options. These novel models present formidable modeling and
computational challenges. The goals of this award are in line with the NSF
mission goal of promoting the enhancement of national health. This award will
involve students from under-represented groups through various programs at Rice
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a novel framework to
build next-generation models for chemotherapy scheduling and dosing decisions
over time and under uncertainty. A major challenge is in determining how to
blend continuous and discrete aspects of the problem in terms of time and
decisions. The project's framework blends ordinary differential equations and
stochastic mixed-integer programming. Unlike previous approaches, this framework
allows the inclusion of various dosing and toxicity restrictions as linear
constraints within the stochastic mixed-integer program. Many of the
differential equations governing tumor growth can only be solved approximately,
so a major goal of this research is to understand how approximations and error
bounds can be integrated across the models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.