* 1933169
* EAGER: Spatio-temporal Imaging of Mount St. Helens Magmatic System using Efficient Waveform Inversion of Earthquake Records
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jyoti Behura, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,762.00

Mount St. Helens, in the Cascadia Subduction Zone, is an active volcano and is
most well known for the devastating 1980 eruption which is widely regarded as
the most disastrous volcanic eruption in the United States history in terms of
loss of human life and damage to infrastructure. In fact, the United States
Geological Survey (USGS) regards Mount St. Helens as a very high threat volcano.
The work planned here will illuminate the Mount St. Helens magmatic plumbing
system and help scientists better forecast impending volcanism and its possible
duration. Such knowledge will be extremely useful for volcanic hazard mitigation
and help save human lives. This project is a collaboration between a university
(Colorado School of Mines) and a government institution (USGS) to extend the
application of a cutting-edge technology, originally developed by a private
enterprise (Seismic Science LLC) to image hydraulic fractures in oil &amp; gas
reservoirs, for monitoring volcanic systems for the betterment of the society.
The investigators believe this collaboration will foster further cooperation,
technology transfer, and exchange of ideas between the hydrocarbon industry and
government entities. The processes and techniques developed under this project
could potentially be extended to the other subduction zones in order to help
image megathrust and volcanic systems all over the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The architecture of the Mount St. Helens magmatic
system and the spatio-temporal changes resulting from magma production,
transport, and storage are poorly understood. To address these questions,
extensive seismic data, in the form of active-seismic surveys and passive
recordings, have been acquired over the past three decades and also as part of
the EarthScope program. The investigators will use local earthquake recordings
from both the active-seismic data (comprising of two nodal geophone arrays and
PASSCAL Texan geophones) and broadband seismometers and the active-seismic
waveform data to generate a high-resolution time-lapse 3-dimensional image of
the Mount St. Helens magmatic system using waveform inversion. These images will
extend from the shallow upper-crust all the way to the subducting slab
underneath Mount St. Helens, thereby helping to shed light on the complete
architecture of the magmatic system, the connections between different magma
bodies, and the physical state of the rocks. Knowledge of the magmatic system at
Mount St. Helens (in terms of its architecture and spatio-temporal changes) will
provide valuable insight into a number of key scientific challenges including
questions about crustal evolution, magma generation in the mantle, magma
transport from the upper mantle to the shallow crust, the structure of magma
reservoirs, and forecasting volcanism. The high-resolution spatio- temporal
3-dimensional images will be especially useful in understanding stress changes
associated with magma emplacement/inflation and in deciphering the transport of
melts in the crust and upper mantle. Also, the scale, extent, and connectivity
of magma in the crust and mantle beneath Mount St. Helens is not fully
established. High-resolution images of the deep crust and upper mantle, all the
way to the slab, will help unravel the large-scale magmatic system in detail and
will reveal intricate details of the subducting slab, the possibility of
serpentinization of the mantle wedge, and the weak reflectivity of the Moho in
the mantle fore- arc. The waveform processing and inversion technology employed
in this project was originally developed at Seismic Science LLC for mapping
fractures generated during hydraulic stimulation of low-permeability oil and gas
formations. Under this project, Colorado School of Mines and United States
Geological Survey (USGS) will collaborate to employ this technology to image the
Mount St. Helens magmatic system at high resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.