* 1933334
* 2019 US-EU Workshop on 2D Materials. To Be Held In State College PA,   May 9-10, 2019.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Mauricio Terrones, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 25,017.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide an open technical
forum that brings together leading researchers from the US and Europe to discuss
cutting-edge research in two-dimensional materials and devices. Student
participation will be encouraged and they will have the opportunity to interact
with leading researchers in the field. The workshop is anticipated to catalyze
important collaborations. Participants will discuss ways to share unique
research infrastructure at their instiuttions to streamline efforts and
consolidate resources. Finally, the proposal will foster collaborations with the
EU Graphene Flagship and US Scientists, for planning innovative international
activities that can facilitate joint collaborative projects in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
workshop is to bring together leading scientists working on graphene, 2D
materials and devices, from Europe and the United States to help promote future
collaborations and address common challenges in this dynamic field. In doing so,
it is envisioned that such interactions will help promoting new synergistic
activities and hence research progress. The Workshop will also promote the
participation of students who will have the opportunity to interact with experts
in the field and learn about the latest advances in 2D materials and devices.
This workshop will foster advances in the leading research on 2D atomic layers
and devices by gathering a diverse group of experts and researchers. The
presentations and scientific exchanges will focus on a wide range of 2D layered
materials such as phosphorene, transition metal di-chalcogenides, hexagonal
boron nitride, tertiary compounds of carbon nitrides, and complex oxides. It
will prompt collaborations with the EU Graphene Flagship program administrators
and NSF that will lead to international activities that can facilitate joint
collaborative programs in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.