* 1933350
* Collaborative Research: Implementation Strategies and Performance of Unsaturated Bio-Cemented Dune Sand
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Brina Montoya, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,992.00

This research will explore a novel approach for dune protection using bio-
cementation to stabilize and enhance natural protective structures. Dunes often
present the first line of defense for the built environment during extreme wave
surge and storm events. In order to remain effective, dunes must resist erosion
in the face of these incidents. Understanding the physics of dune erosion is
critical for devising ways to mitigate it. The research team will explore
multiple treatment implementation techniques and assess their performance under
extreme conditions at field-scale in a large wave flume (LWF) at Oregon State
University. Dunes will be constructed in the LWF, bio-cemented in-place, and
subjected to a series of wave inundations so that their performance may be
observed and quantified. The large-scale work will be supported by coupled
laboratory and numerical investigations. The numerical investigation will
provide insight into the loading conditions for which each treatment
implementation alternative is preferred and the treatment design (e.g., required
treatment dimensions) to have minimal impact on the natural environment while
still providing the required engineering performance. The resulting outcome of
this work will provide guidance for enhancing coastal dunes with bio-cementation
to prevent damage to infrastructure during extreme
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-cementation may be a viable method to mitigate
dune erosion, which in turn would protect coastal infrastructure during extreme
events. We will explore two approaches to implement bio-cementation. The first
implementation technique will induce bio-cementation at depth within the dune;
this will result in an uncemented surficial layer which may erode but will also
minimally impact the coastal habitat. The second approach will be geared towards
rapid deployment, for example, in preparation for a forecasted storm event
anticipated to hit vulnerable dunes. This rapid approach will be sprayed onto
the dunes, instead of injected, since this quick application is more likely to
be implemented in a rapid deployment. Furthermore, two methods to induce bio-
cementation will be explored: microbial induced carbonate precipitation (MICP)
and enzyme induced carbonate precipitation (EICP). The EICP implementation will
be conducted by the NSF Engineering Research Center for Bio-mediated and Bio-
inspired Geotechnics (CBBG). The research approach will include near prototype-
scale experiments in the NHERI Hinsdale Wave Research Laboratory (HWRL); this is
made possible by collaborating with an existing NSF project, Physics of Dune
Erosion During Extreme Surge and Wave Events, which includes placing nearly 1000
tons of sand in the HWRL Large Wave Flume (LWF), the largest of its type in
North America and in the top 10 in the world. In addition to the experiments in
the LWF, a complementary laboratory testing and integrated numerical modeling
program are planned to assess the effects of implementation strategies with
overall dune performance. This research will advance bio-cementation technology
by providing well-controlled and instrumented case studies to quantitatively
compare the effect of implementation techniques on the performance of dunes. The
resulting cementation patterns from the two treatment approaches are expected to
be different; however, the performance of the two treatment approaches is
unknown. This approach will not only develop prototype-scale case studies of two
different treatment implementations, but also provide case studies of bio-
cemented sand dunes subjected to extreme storm loading conditions. The numerical
simulation approach will provide a framework to design and evaluate the
stability of the bio-cementation under extreme wave
loading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.