* 1933344
* EFRI CEE: DNA origami tools to engineer chromatin structure and function in live cells
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Michael Poirier, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,220,000.00

Numerous organisms from yeast to humans organize their genome by wrapping it
repeatedly around histone proteins into nanoscale spools known as chromatin.
Cells use the organization of chromatin to dictate whether a gene is actively
expressed or turned off. Combining the ability to target a specific gene,
visualize its location and structure, activate the gene, and detect gene
expression in live cells would be a major technological advance in how genes are
studied and controlled in living organisms, and lead to applications in many
fields, including medicine, agriculture, energy and the environment. DNA
nanotechnology, which uses well-understood folding properties of DNA to engineer
nanoscale, biocompatible structures, is an emerging technology with the
potential to combine these functions. A 5-PI team will apply bioengineering,
cell biology, genetics, single molecule spectroscopy, super resolution
microscopy and multi-scale molecular modeling to develop such DNA-based
nanodevices that can also operate in live cells and be "switchable" to allow
these functions to be triggered at will. The research will be integrated into
university curricula, and will enable cross-disciplinary, collaborative and
international training of graduate students. The PIs will also broaden
participation of underrepresented students in STEM by creating open access
standards-based videos and modules for use by K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in genetic and epigenetic methods
have enabled chromatin engineering technologies that 1) target genes to 2)
visualize chromatin structure, 3) activate target genes, and 4) detect gene-
specific transcription. However, current tools (including super-resolution
imaging, chromatin conformation capture and genome engineering with CRISPR/Cas9)
are usually only able to accomplish one of these functions at a time, giving
single-channel, static views of the players and processes at a specific
transcription site. This project will leverage DNA nanotechnology to leapfrog
current technologies for probing and engineering genome and epigenome functions.
A team of five PIs will develop multi-functional DNA origami (DO) nanodevices
that combine targeting, functional modifications and RNA detection onto a single
platform, operate in live cell nuclei, and are "switchable", allowing for real-
time detection and for functions to be triggered by endogenous or external
signals. The outcomes will serve as a foundation for future automated devices
that target and regulate genome and epigenome functions, including gene
expression, and serve as diverse new toolsets for science, engineering, and
medical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Genetic Mechanisms cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
in the Biological Sciences Directorate, the Emerging Frontiers in Research and
Innovation program in the Division of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary
Activities in the Engineering Directorate, and the Chemistry of Life Processes
program in the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematics and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.