* 1933216
* SHINE Workshop Coordination: 2016-2020
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Teresa Nieves-Chinchilla, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2022
* USD 565,554.00

The Solar Heliospheric and Interplanetary Environment (SHINE) Program is a
broad-based, community-initiated research program dedicated to promoting an
enhanced understanding of the processes by which energy in the form of electro-
magnetic fields and particles are produced by the Sun, accelerated in
interplanetary space, and transported to the Earth and elsewhere in the
heliosphere. The goal of SHINE activities is to enrich and strengthen both the
physical understanding and predictive capabilities for these phenomena. Since
it?s inception in 1996, SHINE has grown into a vibrant community of researchers
spanning a wide range of disciplines, but still primarily focused on
understanding solar processes and their influence on the inner heliospheric
environment. A key factor in the success of the SHINE program is the annual
summer workshop, which is highly valued for its uniqueness in style and
effectiveness of communication. The workshops bring together a large number of
active researchers in the solar, interplanetary, and heliospheric communities,
including, not least, a strong and growing student and post-doc population.
Typical numbers for students and postdocs attending the workshops are 65-75,
which constitutes about 35% of the entire workshop population. The SHINE
workshop provides students a unique opportunity to present their research, learn
from experts in the field and network in a relaxed and collegial atmosphere. The
main purpose of this award is to continue the support for students and postdocs
to attend the annual workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SHINE research focuses in
particular upon: (i) the connection between events and phenomena on the Sun and
their relation to solar wind structures in the heliosphere; (ii) the origin and
evolution of the solar wind; (iii) the nature of turbulence in the
interplanetary medium; and (iv) the production and transport of solar energetic
particles from the Sun through the heliosphere. The annual SHINE workshops
provide un-matched opportunities for active discussions and new collaborative
projects around these topics.