* 1933624
* 2019 Waterman Award
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jennifer Dionne, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) has named Dr Jennifer Dionne one of the
two 2019 recipients of its Alan T. Waterman Award. This award is NSF's highest
honor that annually recognizes an outstanding researcher age 40 years or younger
and funds his or her research in any field of science or engineering. This
year's awardees will receive a $1 million grant over a five-year period for
further advanced study in his or her field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr Dionne is a
material science and engineering associate professor at Stanford University. Her
research focuses on the development of new nano and optical materials for
applications ranging from high-efficiency energy conversion and storage to
bioimaging and manipulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has led to
demonstration of negative refraction at visible wavelengths, development of a
subwavelength silicon electro-optic modulator, design of plasmonic optical
tweezers for enantioselective sorting, demonstration of a metamaterial fluid,
and synthesis of high-efficiency and active upconverting materials. Most
recently, Jen has developed in situ techniques to visualize chemical
transformations and light-matter interactions with nanometer-scale spatial
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr Dionne has received awards and recognition
from a diverse group of technical societies, including the Adolph Lomb Medal
(2016), a Sloan Fellowship (2015), Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar Award (2015), and the
Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (2014), as well as
the inaugural Kavli Nanoscience Early Career Lectureship from MRS (2013). She
was also named one of Technology Review's TR35 - 35 international innovators
under 35 tackling important problems in transformative ways (2011). In addition,
she has received the Outstanding Young Alum award from Washington University in
St. Louis (2012), the CAREER Award from the National Science Foundation (2012),
an Air Force Office of Scientific Research Young Investigator Grant (2010), the
Clauser Prize for best Caltech thesis (2009), and the Materials Research Society
Gold Award for outstanding graduate student (2008). Jen has received several
best paper awards at international conferences and holds patents on all-optical
chiral resolution, upconverting materials, optical tweezers, nano-optical
tomography, plasmonic modulators, and plasmonic display technologies. Her work
also been featured in Nature, Science, and other major scientific journals, as
well as on PBS and in Michio Kaku's book 'Physics of the
Impossible'.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Dionne perceives outreach as a critical component of
her role as an educator, and is active both in the scientific and general
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.