* 1933176
* An international travel proposal to NSF requesting support of the PI to attend the 13th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Xiaofeng Liu, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2020
* USD 4,531.00

Travel funds will enable the PI, upon invitation by the symposium chair, to
participate in the 13th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry
(ISPIV 2019, July 22-24, Munich, Germany) and deliver an oral presentation of
significant scientific importance. The oral presentation and the conference
paper titled ?Error propagation from the PIV-based pressure gradient to the
integrated pressure by the omni-directional integration method? reports for the
first time a comprehensive theoretical analysis and the corresponding numerical
and experimental validation results for error propagation characteristics of the
?omni-directional integration method?, which is shown to have better performance
in data accuracy in comparison with the conventional Poisson equation
reconstruction approach. The travel support will help the effort in proving and
establishing the advantage of the ?parallel ray omni-directional integration
method? over the conventional Poisson equation approach for pressure
reconstruction from noise embedded experimental data. Moreover, since there are
numerous occasions in science and engineering practice that require solution of
a scalar potential from a conservative vector field using Poisson equation,
e.g., the reconstruction of temperature or wavefront from their corresponding
gradients, the ?parallel ray omni-directional integration method? is readily
applicable to those generic occasions. Thus, the new pressure reconstruction
method will not only bring lasting impact to the fluids community, but also to a
much larger audience in science and engineering applications as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to prove and establish
the advantage of the ?parallel ray omni-directional integration method? over the
conventional Poisson equation approach in pressure reconstruction from noise
embedded experimental data. Characterization of the accuracy of the PIV pressure
reconstruction methods is of critical importance in understanding the
capabilities and limitations of these methods. Unfortunately, until the proposed
oral presentation by the PI to be delivered at ISPIV 2019, there is no
theoretical analysis available for the omni-directional integration method that
characterizes the error propagation from the measured pressure gradient to the
reconstructed pressure field. The proposed presentation and paper by the PI at
ISPIV 2019 intends to fill the gap, and help settle the question about why the
omni-directional method has better performance over the conventional Poisson
equation based on theoretical analysis, numerical simulation and experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.