* 1933333
* I-Corps: Risk Detection Algorithms for Adolescent Online Safety
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Pamela Wisniewski, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that it will
greatly benefit society by serving to proactively protect youth from serious
online risks. A multidisciplinary team of researchers, clinicians, and industry
partners will build, evaluate, and explore the commercial potential for state-
of-the-art machine learning algorithms that detect adolescent online risk
behaviors online, including mental health issues, sexual solicitations, and
online harassment, for the purpose of mitigating these risks and preventing
harm. The project will explore the release the algorithms as 1) an open source
project that creates a community dedicated to promoting adolescent online
safety, and 2) a software as a service application programming interface that
makes this solution publicly available to social media and internet-based
companies. The intent is to shift responsibility away from relying on third-
party parental control software for protecting youth to directly enabling online
platforms that cater to youth to play a larger role in protecting teens. By
serving the direct needs of these customers, this project will also provide
secondary benefits to teens and their families by proactively protecting teens
from online risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will further
develop a suite of algorithms tailored to adolescents that not only detect
objectionable content within social media data but can also identify problematic
behavioral patterns or changes that are indicative of impending risks over time.
The intellectual merit of this work lies in the novel and intertwined synthesis
of multi-modal data, machine learning techniques and human-centered approaches,
in concert with clinical and industrial partnerships, for the design and
development of tools that address the problem of adolescent online risk
detection. This approach is transformative because it relies on developing a
deeper contextual understanding of teen social media users by leveraging human
insight and meta-level data about the social media content, rather than
analyzing the social media data by itself. This work will enable real-time
online safety interventions that protect and empower teen internet
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.