* 1933303
* EFRI CEE: A mesoscopic bottom-up approach for understanding and modulating the physical epigenome
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Mauro Maggioni, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,999,702.00

This project tackles the critical question of how epigenetics enable cells with
the same genomic DNA to develop into different cell types and respond to
environmental cues in different ways. The main objective is to investigate
mechanisms whereby epigenetic information controls gene expression by studying
the relationship between chemical changes in nucleosomes that package DNA into
chromatin, the physical compactness of nucleosomes, and the expression or
silencing of genes that ultimately control cellular behavior and fate. The
project integrates biochemical and biophysical experimentation, mathematical
modeling, and computational analysis, and the outcomes are expected to
facilitate "epigenetic engineering" to manipulate cellular states for better
understanding and treatment of of human diseases, such as obesity and cancer.
The project will also broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
engineering by offering research opportunities to high school students in
Baltimore, through the Ingenuity project, as well as development of curricular
materials and activities supporting K-12 education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this project is development of a "bottom-up" theoretical,
computational, and experimental approach for understanding the physical
properties of the epigenome and the physical mechanisms underlying its
structure, organization, and function, and for studying their effects on
cellular plasticity and phenotypic identity. The focus will be on creating a
cohesive model that relates to the physical organization of nucleosomes,
interconnects information about epigenetic modifications at the DNA and
nucleosomal levels, and predicts higher order chromatin organization, gene
expression, and determination of cell state. The research strategy will couple
information theory and statistical mechanics with experimental biophysics,
chromatin biochemistry and epigenetic biology. Specifically, the mesoscopic
chromatin model will be defined by the physical properties of local chromatin
deformability and global condensability. Through this "physical" lens, the
research will link conventional chromatin biochemistry to large-scale
chromosomal organization and lead to experiments for model testing, including
imaging analysis at the molecular and cellular level to identify events that
drive switching of cell states. The outcomes are expected to relate
stochasticity in the information-theoretic epigenetic landscape to pluripotency
and changes in cell fate for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Biological Sciences Directorate, and the Emerging
Frontiers in Research and Innovation program in the Office of Emerging Frontiers
and Multidisciplinary Activities in the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.