* 1933678
* Collaborative Research:  : Collaborative Partnership to Teach Mathematical Reasoning Through Computer Programming (CPR2)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jennifer Knudsen, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2023
* USD 650,270.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program addresses an urgent need for real-world,
interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of students from the early
grades through high school (preK-12). The Collaborative Partnership to Teach
Mathematical Reasoning through Computer Programming (CPR2) project will
investigate whether computer programming is an effective tool for teaching and
learning generalization in 7th and 8th grade math classrooms. Understanding and
interpreting general expressions can be difficult for students, but it is a key
to advancing in STEM disciplines. The failure to "catch" this skill in middle
school is a major roadblock to pursuit of STEM in college and career. The CPR2
Instructional Model (IM) will help students come to understand, interpret, and
even generate general or algebraic expressions. The team has developed an
explicit method for teaching generalization that is intended for learners with
no background in programming or formal mathematical argumentation. Students will
write mini computer programs and then recognize and recover general behaviors
from their code. Next, students will learn to describe these behaviors using
abstract mathematical language. An additional benefit of the CPR2 IM is that
learners will gain experience, skill, and confidence in using programming as a
tool for scientific exploration. This experience advances STEM fields by opening
a door for all students to recognize, understand and apply abstractions, and to
experience writing their own computer programs. The CPR2 IM has the potential to
pave the way for all student participants, including those currently
underrepresented in computer science, to succeed in future STEM studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will refine the instructional model in a
design-based implementation research approach. In a two-week summer institute,
teachers will be immersed in the four-step model and learn how it builds the
mental frameworks necessary for generalization. The teachers will then implement
the model in their classes with support from the team. Finally, researchers will
determine the effects on students in an experimental pilot study. The
researchers hypothesize that teachers who participate in the professional
development offered by the project will improve their own ability to generalize
over a mathematical concept and will become more comfortable using computer
programming as a tool in the classroom. Students and teachers will use computer
programming to explore ideas, which will improve their ability and confidence to
think computationally and to generalize over a mathematical concept.The teachers
will be immersed in a collaborative environment with professionals from high
schools and institutes of higher education. The network created will facilitate
and sustain change in mathematics education at all levels. Ultimately, this will
lead to broader participation of teachers and students in programming and
computational thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.