* 1933748
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing (ACM/IEEE SEC)
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Yifan Zhang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 10/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

The 2019 ACM/IEEE SEC Conference (Symposium on Edge Computing) will be held in
Washington DC from Nov. 7-9, 2019. This leading technical conference is the
primary venue for presenting new research results in the area of "edge
computing", a new paradigm in which the resources of a small data center are
placed at the edge of the Internet, in close proximity to mobile devices,
sensors, and end users, and the emerging Internet of Things. The conference will
consist of technical paper presentations, panels, PhD forums, posters, and
demonstrations. It will also feature keynote speeches from leading researchers
and practitioners in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation in SEC 2019
and similar conferences are valuable and important activities of the graduate
school experience. It provides students with the opportunity to interact with
more senior researchers, and exposes students to leading work and practical
industry practices in this important area of research. This may have an
important impact on career development. The goal of the funds is to support
approximately 20 student participants at recognized US institutions of higher
education. Funds will be dispersed with preference given to students who would
not otherwise be able to attend the conference and students who are not already
scheduled to present a paper, paying particular attention to diversity and
relevance of the student's research interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.