* 1933436
* Reconfigurable Metasurfaces for Controlling Elastic Wavefront
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Serife Tol, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2023
* USD 356,411.00

Elastic metamaterials and phononic crystals are artificially structured
composite materials that can manipulate and control elastic waves. While they
are proven to be useful in many ultrasonic applications, their wave
functionality is limited to the low frequency regime. Since a significant amount
of energy is carried by low frequency waves propagating in mechanical or civil
systems, it is crucial to develop compact structures enabling broadband control
of low frequency elastic waves without the need for further structural
modifications. This grant will support research that will answer how to
effectively tailor low frequency elastic waves within a small footprint and
advance the state-of-art via reconfigurable metasurface concepts. The
reconfigurable metasurfaces will enable broadband wave focusing and high-power
energy harvesters converting low frequency vibrations into usable electricity,
overcoming the energy related limitations of the wireless sensor networks. This
award supports fundamental research and advances applications in mechanical,
civil, and aerospace systems to achieve next-generation wave devices that are
compact and easy to integrate within existing structures. Therefore, results
from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and broader society. The
integrated education program will also help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and features a K-12 outreach module for the
Girls in Science and Engineering Camp at the U-M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goal of this is to manipulate and control low frequency elastic waves
(~hundreds of Hz) via compact reconfigurable metasurfaces which can adapt to
environmental conditions to achieve greater dynamic wave functionalities such as
steering and focusing in a broadband frequency range. This research will
introduce active elastic metasurfaces and nonlinear elastic metasurfaces which
will be tuned by external electrical and mechanical loads, respectively. The key
idea is to leverage the linear/nonlinear dynamics of the elastic/electro-elastic
unit cells and tailor elastic wavefronts over a broad range of frequencies using
the existing structure. A theoretical framework will be established to implement
the required phase gradient for achieving desired dynamic wavefront shapes.
While manipulating the elastic wave propagation by tailoring the refraction
properties of the metasurface, wave reflections will be minimized to ensure
maximum wave transmission through the active/nonlinear metasurface layer. The
research will create next-generation metasurfaces to modulate low frequency
wavefronts in high impact applications in mechanical, civil, and aerospace
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.