* 1933986
* Board on Earth Sciences and Resources and Its Activities
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Deborah Glickson, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,480,000.00

Natural or human-made activities that occur immediately above, on, or within the
Earth impact humans and the physical environment over different time and spatial
scales. Earth sciences offer information and approaches to understand, manage,
and respond to those impacts. The long-term mission of the Board on Earth
Sciences and Resources (BESR) to coordinate the Earth science issues of the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM). The Board
identifies opportunities to advance basic research and understanding of Earth
processes for policy decisions, to report on applications of Earth sciences to
important societal issues, and to address the overall health of research and
education programs related to Earth sciences. By developing interdisciplinary
activities aimed toward understanding how fundamental processes within the
terrestrial system interact, the Board enables sharing and exchange of
information among government agencies and entities; private, professional, non-
governmental, and academic organizations; and the general public to continue
raising the profile of science and increase public scientific literacy. Specific
impacts following from the consensus study reports and other activities may
include language that is input to congressional legislation, changes that are
made to agency programs, organization, or priorities; information that is shared
by professional or trade organizations through social media platforms, and news
coverage of scientific issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Board on Earth Sciences
and Resources (BESR) is the focal point for Earth science activities at the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM). The Board
develops and oversees consensus studies and other activities that provide
independent, objective scientific and technical information to the Earth science
community, policy and decision makers in government, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector, and the public. The Board manages a range of
projects to advise the nation, advance dialogue, and connect thought and
research leaders on a range of challenges with fundamental Earth science
components. Through a variety of engagement platforms, products, and
communication tools, the Board provides a unique and trusted interface among the
Earth science research community, many stakeholders, and those in policy- and
decision-making roles. This award enables the Board to conduct activities that
develop and share Earth science information to inform and advise policy- and
decision-making at multiple levels, across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.