* 1933037
* Fundamentals of co-crystallization of polyoxacyclobutane and water
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Tara Meyer, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 364,982.00

Crystals composed of two distinct molecules organized within a lattice (co-
crystals) are variously known as clathrates, host-guest compounds, intermetallic
compounds amongst metals, or hydrates if water is included. A well-known example
of an organic co-crystal is the gas hydrate formed from the co-crystallization
of methane and water. The co-crystallization of polymers, very long chain
organic molecules, with small molecules is unusual, and those with water are
especially rare. The focus of this research project is to study a rare class of
co-crystals based on the polymer, polyoxacyclobutane (POCB), and water. The
researchers will investigate the types of phases that POCB hydrate can form as
well as the rates of formation. Understanding the unique behavior of POCB
hydrate is important, because it could be applied to a thermal desalination
process that involves no membranes. The project will involve training graduate
and undergraduate students in state-of-the-art research, as well as some
curriculum development related to the topic of the project. The researchers will
also perform outreach activities to pre-college students around the topic of
molecular shapes and intermolecular interactions, especially in the context of
gas hydrates and their relevance to energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;POCB can co-
crystallize with water to form a hydrate, which melts upon heating above 37
degrees Celsius. Melting yields either a homogeneous liquid phase, or a water-
rich and a polymer-rich two-phase mixture. The properties of the POCB hydrate
are unique: (1) the melting point of the co-crystal exceeds that of the two pure
species; (2) co-crystallization can occur either from a liquid-liquid
equilibrium (LLE) state or from a homogeneous liquid solution; (3) the hydrate
is highly insensitive to salt; and (4) the hydrate melting point fortuitously
happens to be almost exactly at human body temperature. This combination of
properties makes POCB unique not just amongst polymers, but amongst all
materials. Very little is known about the POCB hydrate. Even the most basic
information, such as the melting point of the hydrate in the high molecular
weight limit or its heat of fusion, is missing. This research project will
explore the thermodynamics and crystallization kinetics of POCB hydrate and
examine the coupling between LLE and crystallization in which the polymer co-
crystallizes with the solvent. The unique phase behavior of POCB could be used
for a purely-thermal desalination process that requires no vacuum or pressure,
no refrigeration, and no membrane. Such a process may enable waste-heat-based
desalination and the desalination of high salinity waters. This research project
will provide the first proof-of-principle and a preliminary technoeconomic
evaluation of such a process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.