* 1933552
* Collaborative Research: Protein nanofiber growth factor delivery platforms for modulating phenotype of iPSC-derived human hepatocytes and liver non-parenchymal cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Matthew Kipper, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Drug and chemical toxicity to the liver is a major cause of acute liver
failures. The Food and Drug Administration mandates the testing of drugs in
animals prior to human clinical trials; however, animal experiments are slow,
costly, and cannot always predict drug/chemical-induced liver toxicities in
humans. Therefore, there is an urgent need for in vitro (outside the body)
models of the human liver that can be used to screen for drug toxicity prior to
testing in live humans. Unfortunately, there is a severe shortage of donor
organs for harvesting human liver cells for testing. Alternatively, human
induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived human liver cells could provide a
nearly infinite and patient-specific source of cells, but current methods are
not able to mature these cells to the same functional levels as in the native
liver. This project seeks to address this critical challenge by developing
nanostructured 3D scaffolds made from native human liver extracts that can
deliver the appropriate biochemical and biophysical signals to iPSC-derived
liver cells when they are co-cultured with key supportive cell types of the
liver. This platform will be characterized for liver functions, such as the
ability to metabolize drugs as in the body. Ultimately, this human liver culture
platform could reduce the cost of developing safer drugs/chemicals for humans,
and be used to better understand the effects of human liver diseases.
Educational efforts will focus on engaging high school teachers and students in
research experiences using the findings and devices of this project. Such
efforts will introduce cutting-edge research concepts earlier in high school,
thereby preparing students better for a rigorous engineering/bioengineering
curriculum at the college level. New modules for a graduate program in
biomanufacturing and undergraduate capstone design projects will also be
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is on addressing the
need for improved cell culture-based models of liver function that enable
screening of drugs/chemicals for human liver toxicity. Models using primary
human hepatocytes (PHHs) have been developed that can accomplish this task, but
scarcity of healthy donor tissues limits the use of PHHs for routine screening
of thousands of compounds. Though induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs) can
serve as a sustainable and abundant cell source, current protocols to create
iPSC-derived human hepatocyte-like cells (iHeps) are unable to fully mature the
cells towards the adult PHH phenotype. Thus a better understanding of
microenvironmental regulators of iHep functions is needed. This project
addresses this need by developing new nanostructured 3D scaffolds made from
decellularized liver extracellular matrix (ECM) and new culture technologies for
co-cultures of iPSCs differentiated into a hepatocyte phenotype and supporting
non-parenchymal cell types (NPCs). Electrospinning nanofibers will be used to
create nanoscale 3D scaffold materials from both synthetic and natural polymers.
Nanofibers will be further coated with growth factor (GF)-binding molecules such
as heparin towards mimicking the cell-ECM and cell-GF signaling that occurs in
vivo. Scaffolds made from naturally-derived ECM allow cells to interact with
many molecules present in vivo. The use of GF-binding ECM nanofibers for
controlled differentiation of iHeps down the hepatic lineage in the presence or
absence of liver NPCs will be explored under two objectives. The FIRST Objective
is to develop processes for generating nanofibers from decellularized liver ECM
while using collagen and Matrigel as controls and test effects on long-term iHep
functions +/- liver NPC stimulation. Objective outcomes include new ECM-based
nanofiber scaffolds with control over fiber diameter, using four different ECM
materials (human liver ECM, porcine live ECM, Matrigel and rat tail collagen
type I) and an in-depth evaluation of the functions of four cell types (iHeps,
primary human liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, hepatic stellate cells and
kupffer cells) and their co-cultures on each of these ECM nanofiber scaffolds.
The SECOND Objective is to determine the effects of key GFs and drugs on
iHep/NPC mono-cultures and co-cultures seeded iteratively onto ECM nanofibers of
increasing complexities developed in the first objective. Objective outcomes
include demonstrated controlled cytokine delivery from each of the elecrospun
ECM nanofibers for four different growth factors (VEGF, HGF, HB-EGF, and OSM),
evaluation of the effects of cytokine delivery from nanofibers on each of four
important liver cell types, and determination of the GF delivery and co-culture
model that results in the optimal maintenance of iHep functional maturity and
retention of NPC phenotypic markers over 2-4 weeks. Finally, the utility of this
approach will be demonstrated for screening compounds to evaluate drug induced
liver injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.