* 1933655
* NSF-BSF: SaTC: CORE: Small: Blockchain Fairness
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Ari Juels, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,999.00

Blockchains provide compelling security properties that enable powerful systems
to be constructed without reliance on trusted third parties. Their rise has
created successful, multi-billion dollar systems and has had a transformative
impact on venture funding and the financial industry. Blockchains as currently
designed, though, fail to enforce fairness for their users, meaning equal
opportunities for fast transaction processing. The project investigators will
seek to address the pervasive fairness deficiencies in blockchain systems. The
project's novelties include a systematic investigation of fairness lapses in
blockchain systems and the exploration of new techniques to enforce fairness
across different layers in these systems. The project's impacts are rigorous
measurement of fairness gaps in existing blockchain systems and the creation of
new design principles and techniques to address these
gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators systematically explore failures of
fairness in blockchain systems both through measurement of active systems and by
means of formal definitions and theoretical analysis. They design and implement
solutions that approximate or fully realize the ideal properties they formalize.
The investigators also explore options for obtaining fairness properties on top
of existing blockchains, despite their underlying lack of fairness guarantees.
They seek to achieve this goal through novel design of smart contracts,
applications that execute on top of blockchain platforms. The investigators
leverage rigorous cryptographic and game-theoretic modeling in their work, and
also aim to deploy software solutions that are mature and practical enough for
adoption by practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.