* 1933300
* I-Corps: Cybersecurity Solution for Collecting, Storing, and Using Substation Relay Settings Data
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Peter Sauer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
new capability to the U.S. electric utility industry that (1) enhances system
reliability and (2) enables linking cyber and physical system analyses in new
ways. The power grid's reliable, resilient, and secure operation is a vital
national interest - underpinning economic vitality, high living standards, and
health/welfare. The power grid, one of the most complex systems ever built, is
vulnerable to extreme weather, natural disasters, criminal acts, and hostile
attacks. It has some 3,100 providers generating, transmitting, and/or
distributing power, who operate more 70,000 high-voltage sub-stations. Each
substation has tens of relays that open and close breakers - controlling power
flows. System planning staffs require accurate, up-to-date relay settings to
populate computer simulations that shape reliable system design and operation.
Typically, system protection staffs maintain relay settings databases specific
to their needs. System planning staffs often find these databases are ill-suited
for their needs - extracting/adapting the needed data subsets for planning
simulations is a manual, man-hour intense effort. The system operator is also
obligated to protect relay settings data during collection, storage, and use to
prevent exploitation by criminals or other hostile actors.

This I-Corps project seeks to provide power system operators a new capability to
streamline/harmonize their efforts to collect, store, use, and secure relay data
for system studies/analysis. This new capability will also enable power
providers to link their physical system simulation results and cyber network
maps - opening the door to security effort prioritization with new, previously
unachievable, synergy. The research objectives are two-fold. First, the project
seeks to provide an integrated, end-to-end capability enabling automated relay
settings data collection, central storage, and automated, tailored data
provision to system analysts. The physical product will be a standalone,
purpose-built computer system that incorporates multiple essential functions:
database, FTP server, webserver, parser, and application-specific software.
Second, it is envisioned to expand the capabilities to leverage recently
introduced Software Guard Extension (SGX)-enabled CPUs, which provide encrypted
memory space for securely processing sensitive data. The purpose-built computer
linking SGX-enabled CPUs will provide a new level of security on networked
computer systems simulating power system behaviors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.