* 1933400
* EFRI CEE: Engineering and imaging 3D genome folding dynamics to control transcriptional misregulation in Alzheimer's disease
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Arjun Raj, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project seeks to discover new molecular understanding of the genetic
defects in Alzheimer's disease (AD), a neurodegenerative disorder that
progressively disrupts cognitive function in millions of Americans. The research
team will use multi-disciplinary approaches and state-of-the-art methods to test
the idea that single-base changes in genes associated with AD alter the three-
dimensional (3D) packaging or folding of the genome, thereby disrupting gene
activity and causing neuronal dysfunction. In parallel, they will build and test
tools to re-fold pathologically tangled DNA into a configuration that will
reverse some aspects of the malfunctioning genes in AD. The project will also
have educational impact through development of innovative courses and training
opportunities to attract and retain the highest level of next-generation talent,
with a particular emphasis on under-represented minorities, for careers in the
new field of genome engineering. In the long term, the research and training
efforts have the potential to make positive contributions towards engineering
better medicines for diseases such as AD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical
unknown is how rare and common single nucleotide variants in noncoding regions
of the genome govern the misregulation of gene expression that occurs in human
disease. The goal of this project is to elucidate how the 3D genome and long-
range gene regulation is disrupted in developing neurons by the genetic variants
that cause AD. The project will focus on investigating the 3D epigenome as a new
unexplored dimension in understanding and reversing the pathological
transcriptional phenotypes that occur in sporadic and familial forms of AD.
Cutting-edge molecular and imaging technologies will be used to query the
structure and dynamics of genome folding at unprecedented resolution and scale
during neural lineage commitment in healthy cells and in cells with AD
mutations. The resulting outcomes will be used to build predictive models to
explain how genomic miswiring is linked to pathological transcriptional
disruption. Then the models will be tested by developing new engineering
strategies for directing changes in genome topology on demand to reverse
transcriptional defects. This work is broadly significant because it provides
new quantitative models and genome engineering tools to reveal how modifications
to the DNA sequence work through long-range, higher-order folding mechanisms to
govern the gene expression profiles critical for proper neuron function.
Addressing this knowledge gap will provide an essential foundation for the
team's long-term goal to engineer the 3D genome to control neural cell fate in
debilitating neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.