* 1933527
* GOALI: High Magnetic Anisotropy Materials for Ultrahigh Density Heat-assisted Magnetic Recording Media.
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Kai Liu, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 196,577.00

Over the last six decades, the areal density of magnetic recording has increased
by eight orders of magnitude. These rapid advancements have fundamentally
changed information technology and the way of life. The information is stored in
tiny magnets, like compasses with nanometer sizes. As each bit of information is
stored over an ever-smaller volume, it is essential to use materials that are
still stable at extremely small dimensions against thermal effects. This
material property is known as the magnetic anisotropy, which anchors magnetic
moments in place, enabling their practical use. This project aims at realizing
materials with high magnetic anisotropy using convenient and benign synthesis
conditions, combined with control over the material properties, towards
applications in next generation ultrahigh density magnetic recording media and
rare-earth-free and precious-metal-free permanent magnets. This GOALI
partnership between U.C. Davis and Seagate offers an exciting opportunity to
rapidly transfer research results into technology. This would potentially speed
up the adaptation of the emerging heat-assisted magnetic recording technology.
Advances in more powerful permanent magnets would impact numerous industry
sectors, including hybrid and electric vehicles, magnetically levitated trains,
wind turbines, power storage, magnetic refrigeration, etc. The partnership also
provides opportunities to train junior researchers in industry research and
development laboratories, in addition to excellent exposure to research
experience in university and national laboratory and user facilities. The team
plans to initiate and actively participate in a variety of efforts to broaden
participation from underrepresented groups through internships, graduate course
offering, exchange visits with Seagate, and other specific programs at the
Magnetism Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High magnetic anisotropy materials
have critical applications in next generation ultrahigh density heat-assisted
magnetic recording media as well as high energy density permanent magnets.
Alloys of ordered FePt in the L10 phase is an ideal candidate for recording
media applications. However, a critical challenge has been the high annealing
temperature necessary to transform the as-deposited low anisotropy phase into
the desirable high anisotropy one. This project will achieve high magnetic
anisotropy L10 FePt-based thin films using atomic-scale multilayer sputtering
and rapid thermal annealing. Magnetic properties of these materials will be
tailored to achieve the desirable high anisotropy, large saturation
magnetization, and low Curie temperature using ternary FePt-based alloys through
proper tuning of the effective valence electron number. These approaches will be
extended to realize L10 FeNi films that are alternative type of permanent
magnets using earth abundant elements. A true understanding of the disorder-
order phase transformation in these thin films will be gained, and quantitative
evaluation of the phase fractions will be obtained. The partnership between U.C.
Davis and Seagate will help to achieve L10 FePt and FeNi based alloys that can
be readily synthesized, with controlled anisotropy at the atomic scale and
minimized switching field distribution. Such materials have potentially
transformative technological impacts, in speeding up the adaption for the
emerging ultrahigh density heat-assisted magnetic recording technology and in
the realization of high energy density permanent magnets that are rare-earth-
free and precious-metal-free.