* 1933933
* Developing a Teacher Micro-credential for Integrating Computational Thinking Across Disciplines
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Aman Yadav, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,733,861.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). One
significant challenge is designing professional learning experiences around
CS/CT integration that fit within the landscape of teacher credentialing and
that can be accessed and recognized at scale within and across schools and
districts. This project develops a scalable model for supporting teachers'
capacity to design, implement, and iterate integrated computational thinking
lessons while simultaneously providing mechanisms that support teachers' access
to an integrated CT professional learning experience. The proposed professional
learning experiences will involve a blended learning model of (1) online
platforms to build foundational CT knowledge, (2) face-to-face engagement in
curricular co-design, (3) expert supports for integrated CT lesson development,
and (4) evidence-based micro-credentials on integrating various specific CT
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports teachers' capacity to
integrate CT into the disciplines of Social Studies, English Language Arts, and
Art. The project's focus on CT integration into these subject areas fits well
with the STEM+C program's aims given that computational thinking skills are
required for many subject areas and CT applications cross many traditional
disciplinary boundaries. The research focuses on two key areas: questions of
teacher learning within the micro-credential program; and issues of systems
implementation of the micro-credential program. Its two related research
questions are, (1) What professional development mechanisms support teachers to
engage in productive sense-making and conceptual understanding around
computational thinking in ways the result in successful CT integration within
Social Studies, English Language Arts, and Art Education disciplines? and (2)
How can alternative teacher certifications in the form of micro-credentials
support access to professional learning experiences focused on CT integration
into existing disciplines, and, once received, support recognition of teacher
expertise around CT within their schools and districts? Data sources include
video of curricular design activities, vignettes, interviews and artifacts
including integrated CT lessons and pedagogical reflections. Drawing on design-
based research methods, the project aims to contribute to the literature around
teacher professional learning and how teacher learning opportunities are
situated within broader school-level and classroom-level systems that influence
their implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.