* 1933523
* Forced Precipitation Response in a Single Column Model with Parameterized Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Adam Sobel, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/29/2024
* USD 728,814.00

Rain falling in sheets and torrents is a common image of the tropics, and the
broad regions of warmest tropical sea surface temperature (SST) are, in an
averaged sense, the rainiest places on earth. Heavy rain is both a threat and an
essential resource for the populous countries of the tropics, and the deep
convective clouds that produce it serve as the "boiler" of the heat engine that
drives the global atmospheric circulation. The study of tropical precipitation,
including its dependence on SST, sensitivity to greenhouse warming, depth of
convective clouds, and other factors is thus a primary research area in climate
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A characteristic feature of the tropics is the
lack of strong temperature contrasts, particularly at levels above the turbulent
motions generated near the earth's surface. The uniformity of atmospheric
temperature has motivated theories of tropical precipitation based on the weak
temperature gradient (WTG) approximation, in which the net effect of large-scale
atmospheric dynamics is to impose a vertical temperature profile in the
atmospheric columns where convection and precipitation are occurring. Under this
assumption convection and precipitation can be understood as a consequence of
physics and thermodynamics occurring locally within a single atmospheric column,
without taking the large-scale three-dimensional circulation into account. Thus,
single column models (SCMs) using the WTG approximation have become important
tools for understanding tropical convection and
precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work performed here develops and uses SCMs
built on variants of the WTG approximation to address the response of tropical
precipitation to external forcing. One goal is to examine theories of the
response of precipitation to greenhouse warming framed in terms of gross moist
stability (GMS), a stability measure based on the exchange of thermodynamic
energy between the column and its surroundings. Reductions in GMS due to the
moistening of the atmosphere with increasing temperature tend to increase
precipitation but GMS can also increase if warming causes convective clouds to
become taller. A further complication is that GMS increases if warmer conditions
cause the height of the strongest updrafts within clouds to increase, even if
the clouds themselves do not get taller. This effect can be captured in SCMs
using the WTG approximation but there are large discrepancies in results from
SCMs with different representations of column physics. Another form of external
forcing examined here is heating in the stratosphere above the column, and the
PIs attempt to reconcile differing precipitation responses to stratospheric
heating found in earlier studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader
impacts due to the substantial societal impacts of changes in tropical
precipitation, as work performed here has direct relevance to the development of
models used to predict the weather and climate of the tropics. The PIs also
serve the broader climate science community by making their SCM versions
available as part of the Community Earth System Model (CESM). SCMs are commonly
used as part of a hierarchy of models, in which full-complexity climate models
are used to simulate phenomena of interest and simpler models are used to
isolate particular physical mechanisms and test hypotheses regarding their roles
in the full-complexity simulations. The SCMs developed in this project use
column physics representations taken from CESM and are fully compatible with
CESM software, thus they can be easily incorporated into the model hierarchy
developed for CESM. In addition, the work provides support and training to a
graduate student, thereby providing for the future workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.