* 1933512
* Marine Geoscience Data System 2020: Optimizing Established Data Infrastructure for the Future
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Vicki Ferrini, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,413,803.00

The preservation of and access to scientific research data is a critical aspect
of the modern scientific research enterprise that facilitates reproducibility
and enables follow-on research to leverage pre-existing data products and
results. We live in a data-rich era, but in many scientific disciplines,
including the marine geosciences, there are vast gaps in observational data. In
addition to scientific reproducibility, the spatial and temporal sparseness of
marine geoscience data coupled with the costs of generating data products (from
acquisition to processing and synthesis) are strong drivers for preserving and
documenting data for future re-use. Although some marine geoscience data
produced by scientific researchers are unique and small volume and are therefore
considered to be "long-tail", when aggregated into curated collections, they can
be transformed into "big data" where the whole is greater than the sum of its
parts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Marine Geoscience Data System (MGDS) was
established in 2003 as a trusted marine geoscience data repository that provides
free public access to a curated collection of marine geophysical data products
and complementary data related to understanding the formation and evolution of
the seafloor and sub-seafloor. The system ensures that NSF-funded marine
geoscience research data are Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable
(FAIR), and the richness of the MGDS metadata catalog adds value to its data
holdings by providing extensive disciplinary information and context that more
readily enables data discovery and re-use. MGDS makes available a digital
library of more than 80 terabytes of data files, and is designed to serve the
needs of its science user community with a focus on (1) facilitating data
discovery and access, (2) curating coherent disciplinary data collections that
facilitate the creation of global syntheses, (3) ensuring the long-term
preservation and stewardship of research data products, and (4) facilitating
compliance with data management and sharing obligations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the continued operation of the
MGDS to provide ongoing public access to its curated data collections and to
evolve the system to support efficient, scalable and sustainable operations.
Technical enhancements will include modernizing and optimizing back-end
components and the technical stack that drive the data system, as well as
optimizing tools and workflows for integrating new data contributions, and
streamlining front-end interfaces that enable discovery and access. The planned
technical enhancements will yield operational efficiencies with respect to data
curation efforts, data storage costs, and system maintenance to ensure that
highly valuable observational marine geoscience data collections are maintained
and accessible for ongoing access and use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.