* 1933630
* Climate Impacts of Land Use and Land Cover Using Subgrid Information from Earth System Models
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Xuhui Lee, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2023
* USD 730,401.00

A map of US surface air temperature, meaning the air temperature recorded 2
meters above the surface, typically has a broad-brush appearance with warmer
temperatures to the south. But the temperature of the surface itself can vary
dramatically in a few short steps, say on the barefoot walk from a grassy picnic
area across hot sand to the cool water at the beach. This mismatch in spatial
scale between the patchy land surface and the broad-brush atmosphere poses a
challenge for understanding how the two interact: each patch of land interacts
with the patch of air directly above it, yet the atmosphere somehow smooths out
the patchiness and responds to the aggregate effects of the moisture, heat, and
other inputs it receives from the surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a practical
matter some of this aggregation must be explicitly coded into weather and
climate models as it is not possible to represent every distinct patch of the
local land surface on the global grid of a weather or climate model. The
standard strategy for such aggregation is to represent surface patchiness
through the use of multiple "tiles" within each surface grid square (the grid
squares can be 50 kilometers wide or wider). Tiles represent distinct land
surface types, for instance paved urban environments, farms, forests, and lakes,
each with appropriate values of reflectivity, roughness, drainage, and other
parameters that regulate land-atmosphere coupling. The percentage of the grid
square covered with each tile is specified, and the exchanges of heat, moisture,
momentum, and constituents are summed over the tile fractions to form grid
totals which are shared with the atmosphere. Climate simulations generate a
tremendous amount of tile data, which could provide a valuable resource for
understanding land-atmosphere interactions and their climatic consequences. Yet
tile data is rarely archived with climate model output, which generally contains
only the grid square totals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to exploit
the untapped resource of tile-level data for understanding land-atmosphere
coupling and its implications for large-scale climate. The PIs have organized an
effort to collect this data as part of the Land Use Model Intercomparison
Project (LUMIP) so that results from multiple models can be compared. Data is
collected for two specific simulations, one which considers the effects of
deforestation assuming a fixed carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration, and another
in which CO2 increases substantially following a scenario of future emissions
(SSP3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key issue in the research is differences in
climate that can be related to the representation of soil reservoirs of
moisture, heat, and nutrients. In the commonly used "shared column" approach all
tiles within a grid box share the same soil reservoir, while the "independent
column" approach uses a separate soil reservoir for each tile within a grid box.
The PIs argue that the independent column approximation leads to more extreme
grid box surface temperature as, for example, a tree-covered tile only has
access to soil moisture within its own tile and is thus more prone to drought.
Nevertheless this may be a better representation of the hydrology as plants with
similar functional traits are often found together, and the extent of water
sharing across a grid box may be limited as grid boxes are typically much larger
than the distances over which water can percolate and heat can
diffuse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The database of tile outputs from multiple models
constitutes an important broader impact of the project. It serves as a resource
for the community of researchers working on land-atmosphere coupling and its
role in climate, and for model developers seeking to improve models used to
provide weather predictions and climate projections for decision makers. The
tile data can also be used to assess the likely climatic consequences of climate
change over regions with particular ground cover, for instance the data can
reveal characteristic differences in water availability between grasslands and
forests in a warming climate. The project also supports a graduate student and a
postdoc, thereby providing for the future workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.