* 1933196
* Validating Pressure Gauges for Seafloor Seismology and Geodesy
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Spahr Webb, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 11/30/2023
* USD 376,602.00

Seafloor pressure gauges have long been an essential tool for oceanographic
observations and are now a critical sensor deployed with seafloor seismometer
systems. Three different sensors, the hydrophone, differential pressure sensor
(DPG) and the high-resolution absolute pressure gauges (APG), are all used
because no one sensor covers all frequencies necessary to record all seismically
or oceanographically relevant pressure signals. A long-standing problem has been
that there has been no means to accurately calibrate these sensors at
frequencies relevant to seismology and at appropriate temperatures and
pressures. A system for inter-calibration of the sensors will be built and
installed within a high-pressure facility to make calibrations of the different
sensors. The new calibrations can be applied to many previous data sets archived
by the scientific community and to future seafloor data enhancing the usefulness
of the data. A second component of the research will be to analyze data from
recent seafloor deployments of a new system for recalibrating pressure gauges at
the seafloor to remove long term variations in the calibration (drift). The
development of drift free or nearly drift free methods for measuring seafloor
pressure will open heretofore impossible observations of faulting processes
relevant to seismic hazard and of oceanographic currents helping to validate
long term changes in oceanography. An early career, postdoctoral scientist will
lead much of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A system
for calibrating marine pressure gauges at frequencies relevant to seafloor
seismology (0.001 to 50 Hz) will be constructed and installed in a laboratory
high pressure facility to enable accurate inter-comparison of the responses of
DPGs, APGs and hydrophones. The calibration of APGs is currently well known at
low frequency but unknown at short period. Hydrophone calibrations are only
accurate at high frequency. DPG calibrations are uncertain at all frequencies
due to temperature and pressure dependencies of the sensor response and possible
variations related to mechanical compliance. The research seeks to eliminate any
remaining uncertainties in our understanding of the response of these gauges by
calibrating the sensors completely over all relevant frequencies for the first
time and searching for possible problems in sensor function. An analysis of
signals from large earthquakes on seismic and pressure sensors recorded during
recent deployments in New Zealand and Alaska will be used to confirm sensor
calibrations. Application of pressure measurements to the study of oceanographic
currents and to seafloor geodesy is limited by drift - the slow variation in
calibration of the pressure gauges with time. A system “A-0-A” for calibrating
absolute pressure gauges at the seafloor was installed on 5 instruments recently
recovered from year-long deployments offshore of Alaska and New Zealand. The
inputs to dual pressure gauges are periodically switched to measure the pressure
within the instrument housing which is verified using data from a barometer. The
drift at high (seafloor) pressure is expected to follow the drift measured at
low pressure and thus the drift can be subtracted from the high-pressure data.
The data from the dual pressure gauges (which drift at different rates) will be
compared to assess the accuracy of this new method for the removal of
drift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.