* 1933280
* Advancing Carbonyl Sulfide (OCS) as an Independent Atmospheric Ttracer for Global Photosynthesis through Quantification of Microbial-mediated Sources and Sinks in Soils
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Jana U'Ren, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 796,549.00

This collaborative project seeks to increase understanding of how plants impact
the atmospheric carbon cycle by using carbonyl sulfide (OCS) as a tracer. OCS
has shown potential to help estimate the amount of carbon taken up by plants,
yet, its use has been limited by the fact that OCS also is consumed by microbes
in the soil. The objective of the proposed work is to quantify and predict this
OCS sink and to extend acquired knowledge to regional scales so that the role of
plants and soils on the overall carbon budget is better constrained.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at closing the gap of current understanding of soil
microbial uptake mechanisms of OCS. Soil microbial genomics data will be linked
to direct measurements of OCS fluxes, thereby building a framework to improve
quantification and prediction of OCS uptake from individual microbial isolates
to communities and further to regional ecosystems. The multi-disciplinary
approach involves (i) growing laboratory fungal cultivations while measuring OCS
uptake, (ii) field sampling in Alaska, (iii) obtaining and processing fungal
genome data from the enzyme carbonic anhydrase (CA, the OCS specific uptake
enzyme), and (iv) building iterative trait models that parametrize OCS uptake
based on CA genomics. The outcome of this work may be used by other groups with
potential impact in larger scale models of plant and soil impacts on the carbon
cycle. One graduate student and one postdoctoral researcher will carry out the
laboratory and field work, and the team will develop education and outreach
materials to be integrated into Biosphere 2, where currently a tour exhibit on
high latitude ecosystems is absent. The proposal is co-funded by the Atmospheric
Chemistry and Ecosystems Science Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.