* 1933279
* Collaborative Research: Online Data Stream Fusion and Deep Learning for Virtual Meter in Smart Power Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Yinghui Wu, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

With ever growing deployment of information and communication technologies in
engineering systems online steaming of data becomes available. Online learning
algorithms can utilize such high value data to enhance operation of national
critical infrastructures such as power grids. Power distribution systems, unlike
transmission power grids, lack extensive direct online measurement through
sensing infrastructures. This makes an accurate monitoring of power distribution
systems, which is crucial for reliable operation of the system, a challenging
task, specifically in power distribution systems with massive integration of
intermittent renewable energy sources that increase the variability of the
aggregated load-generation values. The proposed research enables reliable
monitoring of power distribution systems with massive integration of renewable
energy which has economic and social impacts on the public. The proposed online
optimization techniques, which will be investigated in this project, can be
applied to a variety of learning tasks over data streams beyond power
engineering. Research and teaching will be integrated through development of
interdisciplinary educational modules on machine learning and smart power grids.
The smart grid technologies will be promoted among high school seniors by
defining and providing mentorship for projects that intersect power systems and
computer science. Talented students from under-represented groups in STEM will
be actively engaged in the project through the Washington State University and
University of Iowa mentorship engineering programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Installing new sensors/meters at every node of the power
distribution network, which may include thousands of nodes, is an expensive and
a multi-year planning task. Also, the required sensors/meters redundancy for
achieving reliable sensing platforms in facing possible failure or loss of
sensors/meters cannot be fulfilled with such a scarce sensing infrastructure.
Our proposed solution to this challenging real-world problem is analytical
methodologies in the form of 'Virtual Meter'. The proposed "Virtual Meter" is
not an actual physical device; rather it is a co-modeling paradigm that fuses
data-driven and physics-based models in a closed loop setting with online
bidirectional interactions. We propose a class of coherent, holistic, and
feasible stream processing and online learning algorithms with provable quality
guarantees and incur learning cost that enables such an online interaction,
forging the co-modeling framework. First, we will create a class of ad-hoc data
fusion algorithms that can exploit and extract reliable values from
heterogeneous data streams. Second, the project will devise a class of online
learning algorithms including online deep learning to estimate virtual
measurements. The third major contribution of the project is that the proposed
'Virtual Meter' closes the loop of interactions between data-driven and physics-
based models in an online setting creating a co-modeling framework to enhance
the real-time monitoring of power distribution
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.