* 1933072
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Fully water-soluble bioelectronics with skin-conforming galactomannan
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Huanyu Cheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2023
* USD 142,124.00

This EAGER project aims to realize the biodegradable epidermal devices by
fabricating fully water-soluble zinc sensors on a water-soluble and ultra-smooth
galactomannan substrate that is obtained from seeds with an environmentally-
friendly aqueous extraction method. While there has been increasing attention to
exploring biocompatible and biodegradable materials for implantable monitors and
disposable epidermal sensors, the substrates are often associated with poor
biodegradability, high surface roughness, lack of conformability, and expensive
chemical synthesis approaches. In this project, various zinc sensors on the
nature-derived galactomannan substrate will be fabricated, characterized, and
benchmarked. The resulting disposable electronics can be programmed to dissolve
in water, and further produce environmentally benign end-products, which can be
used for alkaline soil amendments. Considering the numerous human health
benefits such as reducing blood glucose and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
levels of the water-soluble galactomannan, the results from this study will also
enable the future development of biomedical implants. Additionally, the research
will be tightly coupled with a comprehensive educational program that will
expose undergraduate and underrepresented students to interdisciplinary
technologies through early engagement and research training on the design and
fabrication of fully water-soluble sensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant
efforts have been devoted to reducing the bending stiffness of epidermal devices
to improve the contact quality at the device-skin interface and to yield high-
quality sensing data. As the bending stiffness of the device is primarily
affected by the modulus and thickness of each device layer, successful
demonstrations include the use of low-modulus substrate or exploration of thin
device structures. However, the materials are limited in the former, and low-
cost fabrication is challenging in the latter. Additionally, non-water-soluble
properties of both classes create electronic waste streams, posing environmental
concerns. An innovative, fully water-soluble bioelectronic device is proposed in
which zinc sensors are fabricated on the galactomannan substrate through a low-
cost fabrication process. The objective of this project is to carry out a
feasibility study that water-soluble bioelectronics on a skin-conforming
galactomannan film can form a conformal contact with the hierarchically textured
skin surface and reduce the contact impedance. Two research tasks are proposed
to accomplish the feasibility study: (1) fabricating capacitive zinc electrodes
and temperature sensors on the skin-conforming galactomannan films, and (2)
characterizing water-soluble zinc sensors to benchmark their performance,
particularly against motion artifacts. By following arbitrary skin deformations
without mechanical failure, the new class of fully disposable, high-performance,
and low-cost electronic devices can significantly improve the contact quality at
the device-skin interface and reduce the susceptibility to motion
artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.