* 1933491
* Sociocultural Approach to Integrating Computational Thinking and Data Analysis into an Online Citizen Science Program Linking Rural Educators in Maine, Mississippi, and Alabama
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Rhonda Tate, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,392,980.00

This project will engage students in nine rural coastal schools in Maine,
Mississippi, and Alabama, linking students around the Gulf of Maine with
students near the Gulf of Mexico. This innovative approach of linking an online
to classroom learning community will engage students in citizen science
activities and will result in the design of curriculum modules that integrate
computational thinking skills with standards-based instruction. An advisory
group of teacher leaders, scientists, and a specialist in using computational
analysis tools will co-design three learning modules for students and
professional learning opportunities for teachers that will support classroom
groups in developing investigations. The modules will use a data analysis tool
designed specifically for students to integrate computational thinking skills
with the citizen science investigations, enabling students to work with both
existing, large-scale datasets related to their investigations, and local
datasets that they and their peers have constructed. The project will also
develop and implement a 3-day summer institute for teachers that will focus on
inquiry-driven, place-based learning that integrates computational practices and
thinking. Following each summer institute, participating teachers will work in
teams to align a citizen science with components of computational thinking, with
a focus on data collection and management, and data analysis. During the
academic year, participating teachers, scientists, and participating community
members will meet monthly to develop computational thinking skills, formulate
questions to guide investigations, and consider topics related to student
leadership, highlighting the work of scientists, and using science to inform
actions. The modules to be developed and the supporting materials will be
incorporated into learning management system that will be used to manage
resources as well as facilitate interactions among students, teachers,
scientists, and interested community members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will use a design-based research approach to iteratively develop and test
learning modules that engage students in computational thinking through active
participation in citizen science investigations in school classrooms. This work
will be guided by two research questions: 1) What are the key design elements
and levels of implementation to consider when integrating computational data
analysis skills in the context of place-based problem solving in co-designed
citizen science in the classroom? And 2) What supports do rural educators need
to increase their confidence and ability to teach computational data analysis in
grades 3-8? To answer these questions, the project will: 1) Implement a co-
design process to identify where and how computational thinking can be aligned
with the Next Generation Science Standards and the Common Core State Standards
for mathematics while addressing the unique needs and interests of rural schools
and communities through citizen science involvement, 2) Develop a set of modules
and associated professional development resources that support rural educators
in using computational data analysis to interpret and share findings with peers
and relevant communities, and 3) Identify ways to support rural educators in the
implementation of computational thinking skills through the lens of citizen
science, thereby making learning relevant and meaningful to students in their
local communities. A range of classroom level data and student data, both
quantitative and qualitative, will be collected to examine project impacts using
ongoing, grounded theory-based analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being supported jointly by the STEM+Computing program and the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program. As computing
has become integral to the practice of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address emerging
challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration of
computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (PreK-12). This
project will advance efforts of the ITEST program to better understand and
promote practices that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue
careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by
developing a technology-rich, out-of-school time STEM program for underserved
middle and high school youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.