* 1933207
* Workshop on Power Electronics-enabled Operation of Power  Systems, To Be In Chicago, IL, October 31 - November 1, 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Qing-Chang Zhong, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,978.00

Power systems worldwide are going through a paradigm shift. Millions of
distributed energy resources (DER) are being connected to power systems, which
imposes unprecedented challenges to grid stability, reliability, security, and
resiliency. Recent research has shown that it is promising to seamlessly
integrate expertise in control systems, power electronics, and power systems to
achieve power electronics-enabled operation of power systems to address these
issues. This workshop will invite 50 participants from funding agencies,
regulatory commissions, utilities, think-tanks, vendors, and universities etc.
to offer multidisciplinary perspectives on the paradigm shift of power systems
and identify the associated challenges and needs, and potential tools and
methodologies. Recommendations will be made after the workshop. This will help
speed up the paradigm shift of power systems, improve the stability,
reliability, security, resiliency of future power systems, promote
sustainability, create jobs, and stimulate economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental challenge behind this paradigm
shift is that future power systems will be power electronics-based, instead of
electric machines-based, with a huge number of active, intermittent, non-
synchronous, and heterogeneous players. The objective of this workshop is to
bring experts from control systems, power electronics, and power systems
together to identify fundamental challenges and needs in multidisciplinary
research and education in control of power electronics-enabled power systems for
enhanced grid stability, autonomy, scalability, operability, reliability,
security, and resiliency; strengthen collaborative efforts to tackle the
challenges identified; and raise the awareness of funding agencies and policy
makers to support and nurture research and educational activities to advance
fundamental knowledge, enabling technologies, and workforce in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.