* 1933535
* Student Travel Support for 2019 Symposium on Computer Science and Law
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Joan Feigenbaum, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 20,000.00

The inaugural Association for Computing Machinery Symposium on Computer Science
and Law (ACM CSLAW-19) will be held in October 2019, in New York City. By
launching efforts in this nascent field of study, the symposium will have impact
on a broad range of societal issues, ranging from online security and privacy to
Internet platform regulation to digital intellectual property protection. This
award provides full or partial support for approximately 20 students to attend
the symposium. A subcommittee of the symposium program committee will select a
diverse group of students for travel support, based on applications in which
students explain their interest in Computer Science and Law and the ways in
which they expect the symposium to further their educational and professional
development, and advisors address the quality of the students' work and the
reason that travel support is needed for attendance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scope of the ACM CSLAW-19 symposium includes: Security, privacy, encryption, and
surveillance; Cyber espionage, cyber war, and cyber diplomacy; Cyber crime,
cyber law enforcement, and digital forensics; Freedom of expression online (or
the lack thereof); Online market structure, platform monopolies, and antitrust
law; Online government services; Digital intellectual property; Legal
informatics; Automation of legal reasoning and legal services; Fairness,
accountability, transparency, and ethics (FATE) in machine learning and data
mining; Methodological compatibility and incompatibility between the discipline
of computer science and the discipline of law; Educational imperatives and
existing educational programs in Computer Science and Law. The main expected
outcome of the symposium is a comprehensive report on the findings of break-out-
group discussions. The report will explicate a rich agenda for research,
practice, education, and fostering the interdisciplinary area of Computer
Science and Law and make concrete suggestions about how the research community,
ACM, funding agencies, universities, the technology industry, and other
interested institutions can help advance this agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.