* 1933975
* Conference to Explore Mechanisms to Gather Annual Feedback from Computing Professionals for Continuous Improvement of Computer Science Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Rahul Simha, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 04/30/2024
* USD 80,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing computer science
departments with systematic, reliable, actionable feedback from computing
professionals. Such feedback will be useful for developing and refining
computing curricula nationwide. It also has value for making institutional
decisions about funding of computing programs, as well as for research on
computer science education. The project will assemble an initial group of key
stakeholders in computer science education. These stakeholders include experts
from colleges and universities, major employers, and professional organizations
such as Accrediting Board for Engineering and Technology, Association for
Computing Machinery, Association for Information Systems, and the Institute for
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Computer Society. The workshop will focus
on survey design, piloting, eventual deployment, and long-term sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The long-term vision of this multi-year project is to
develop a nationwide survey of industry professionals to gather feedback that
will enable the computing disciplines to continually adapt to changing technical
and societal needs. The project aims to launch the first step in achieving this
vision by organizing and conducting a workshop with experts from key stakeholder
groups. The conference participants will plan and develop the processes needed
to create a comprehensive national survey of computing professionals. The
workshop participants will consider issues such as: survey topics, survey
design, outreach, responsiveness, operational details, long-term sustainability,
rigorous analysis, and acceptance in academia. A core group of the participants
will distill the workshop outcomes into a subsequent effort to launch the
national survey. This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources. The IUSE: EHR program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. This project is in the Engaged Student Learning
track, through which the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.