* 1933193
* Leadership Support for the Board on Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,302,776.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing national
leadership in science education pre-K through adulthood within informal and
formal settings (K-16). The overarching goal is to advance efforts to better
understand and promote practices that increase student motivations and
capacities to pursue careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, or
mathematics. Through consensus studies, workshops, and other public meetings,
coupled with innovative approaches to communication and stakeholder engagement,
the Board on Science Education leverages NSF's investments in research to draw
out relevant guidance and communicate it to a broad audience. This work is
designed to bridge the gap between research and practice, and to identify the
most pressing challenges for policy, practice, and research. These efforts aim
to improve the agenda for STEM education research, the value of such research,
and its translation into guidelines for educational practice and policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of the Board on Science Education at the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine seek to: improve the
knowledge base for science education by charting the frontiers for research on
science education; identify critical issues in science education policy and
practice and provide evidence-based strategies for addressing them; narrow the
gap between science education research and practice by translating research into
evidence-based guidelines for practice and disseminating them; and develop the
intersection of science and science education by building an interdisciplinary
community of scholars whose expertise can be brought to bear on current issues
in research, policy and practice. The Board on Science Education plays a
leadership role in providing evidence-based guidance for policy and practice
that synthesizes across multiple lines of research. In addition, the board
identifies areas where evidence is missing or weak, thereby laying out the road
map for future research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported through
the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human
Resources (IUSE: EHR) and the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.