* 1933075
* DASI Track 2: Space Weather UnderGround (SWUG)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Charles Smith, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 12/31/2023
* USD 505,853.00

This project supported by the Geospace Facilities Distributed Arrays of Small
Instruments (DASI) will support the construction and deployment of a
magnetometer array in northern New England as well as the construction of a data
center. The Space Weather Underground (SWUG) network will bring a scientific
investigation into the high school physics and engineering classrooms in
northern New England. Students will continue ongoing projects to build fluxgate
magnetometers and support hardware (photovoltaics, radio telemetry, and GPS) and
then deploy the magnetometers at locations around the region. This array is
capable of measuring local dynamics in Earth's Ionosphere in response to space
weather events. Faculty at the University of New Hampshire will support the
development effort and the data analysis efforts that will result in a manner
that brings physics-driven computer programming tasks into the schools. The data
generated from this network will be made publicly available to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This magnetometer array will support existing
magnetometers around the globe, monitor space weather, and provide insights into
the small-scale ionospheric dynamics at mid-latitudes that result from solar
wind transients. The spatial scale is designed to provide a measure of local
dynamics as disturbances move through the region. It will provide unique
measurements of mid-latitude dynamics that can be combined with global ground-
based measurements, magnetospheric measurements from orbiting satellites, and
solar wind data from Lagrange Point 1 (L1). This project also places a space
physics research tool into the back yards of schools in northern New England and
thereby serves to bring space science into the classroom. The same school-
provided computers that serve the node data to the SWUG Data Center will have
real-time graphics showing the state and activity of the local node. These
magnetometers will constitute a network that will provide students and teachers
with project-based activities that support inquiry and promote access to real
scientific data. Participating schools will be provided with lessons to teach
students the basics of magnetic forces, induction, geomagnetic fields, the solar
wind and space weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.