* 1933330
* CBMS Conference: Gaussian Random Fields, Fractals, Stochastic Partial Differential Equations, and Extremes
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Dongsheng Wu, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 11/30/2022
* USD 35,000.00

This award will support an NSF/CBMS Regional Research Conference to be held at
the University of Alabama in Huntsville, August 3-7, 2020. The topics are
Gaussian Random Fields, Fractals, Stochastic Partial Differential Equations, and
Extremes. The distinguished lecturer will be Foundation Professor Yimin Xiao
from Michigan State University. The lectures will put the latest developments on
random fields from the areas of probability theory, fractals, stochastic partial
differential equations, and extreme value theory in a nutshell and present to
young researchers and graduate students in probability and related areas. The
overall project builds upon the general theory of Gaussian random fields and
presents cutting-edge research on intrinsically connected topics to the
participants of the conference. The conference will bring novel insights into
the understanding of random fields and further promote their applicability in
mathematics, statistics, and other scientific areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF/CBMS program focuses on important and timely research, with 10 lectures
delivered by a leading researcher. This conference will bring together experts
from probability and statistics on the topics involving random fields to
interact with young researchers and graduate students in probability and related
areas, and will explore connections between random fields and SPDEs, geometry
and extremes, and to identify open problems in the theory of random fields that
are motivated by statistics, mathematical physics, fluid dynamics, among other
disciplines. The conference will fund approximately 25 participants, especially
targeting graduate students, postdocs, early-career researchers, and individuals
from underrepresented groups. This conference will be an extraordinary
opportunity for students and junior researchers to learn the latest developments
in random fields theory and related topics, and to interact with leading
researchers in probability and statistics. For more information, please refer to
the conference webpage:
https://www.uah.edu/math/cbms2020&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.