* 1933033
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Meta Coding and Applications in Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Dana Dachman-Soled, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The fields of coding theory and cryptography are intertwined, with each field
influencing the other: Certain error correcting codes from coding theory are
equivalent to a type of secret sharing scheme used in cryptography to achieve
secure multiparty computation. Other types of coding/secret sharing schemes
(such as non-malleable codes and leakage-resilient secret sharing) were first
proposed to solve security problems arising in cryptographic settings. There are
currently many variants of coding/secret sharing schemes, and most of the
constructions are complex or ad-hoc. This project's novelties are: proposing a
unifying framework that captures a spectrum of coding/secret sharing schemes
that have been studied in the literature, developing new approaches for
constructing coding/secret sharing schemes that are simple, modular and can be
instantiated in a number of ways, and introducing new applications of
coding/secret sharing schemes to solve a variety of problems arising in secure
multiparty computation and tamper-resilient cryptography. This project's impacts
are to help unify/classify prior work, identify new combinations of interest and
impact directions of future work in these areas. To ensure broader impact of
this work beyond the research being conducted, this project incorporates various
educational and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
establishes a framework for the unification of various types of sharing/coding
schemes in the literature. The investigators will consider combinations of
aspects of the framework and their applications to the following areas in
cryptography: (1) fairness in multiparty computation with general adversarial
structures; (2) modular constructions of non-malleable/leakage-resilient secret
sharing schemes via player-simulation techniques; and (3) non-malleable codes
with manipulation detection for broad classes of tampering. The conceptual
contributions of the research program consist of suggesting novel applications
of coding/secret sharing schemes, developing generic paradigms for simple and
modular constructions of these schemes, and introducing new cryptographic
hardness assumptions grounded in complexity theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.