* 1933508
* Binghamton University's Graduate Conference in Algebra and Topology (BUGCAT) 2019, 2020, 2021
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Alexander Borisov, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 02/29/2024
* USD 36,250.00

The BUGCAT conference (Binghamton University Graduate Conference in Algebra and
Topology) is a yearly conference at Binghamton University, that has been running
since 2008. It is aimed primarily at the graduate students and recent PhDs in
Algebra, Topology, and related areas of mathematics. The current grant will
support the conference for the next three years, starting with BUGCAT 2019 which
will be held from November 2-3, 2019. The conference website is
https://www2.math.binghamton.edu/p/bugcat/start.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference
participation is an irreplaceable component in the development of young
mathematicians. It is especially helpful if a conference is run at the level
appropriate for graduates students so that they can both understand the various
ideas and trends and present their own research. This is especially important
for the members of underrepresented groups: they are often more prone to being
unduly intimidated by high-level research conferences. The BUGCAT conference is
run for the graduate students, by the graduate students, with a diverse group of
organizers. It strives to provide an inclusive environment for young researchers
in Algebra, Topology, and related fields. These are some of the traditional
areas of strength at Binghamton University, with a large number of local
graduate student participants and organizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.