* 1933158
* Coupling Skull-Brain Vibroacoustics and Ultrasound Toward Enhanced Imaging, Diagnosis, and Therapy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Levent Degertekin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

The complex structure of the human skull makes it very difficult to use
ultrasound for the diagnosis and treatment of brain disease or injury. This
project supports fundamental research on vibroacoustics and wave propagation in
the skull-brain system to enable the development of new medical imaging and
therapy techniques for the diagnosis and treatment of brain tumors, detection of
traumas and skull-related defects, mapping of brain function, and
neurostimulation. The dynamics of the coupled skull-brain system will be
explored over a wide frequency range to improve the transmission of ultrasound
and control the sound and vibration fields created in the brain. Such control
can impact focused ultrasound surgery and transform neurology via
neuromodulation. This research may also have implications for using ultrasound
to deliver drugs through the blood-brain barrier, which may be critical for the
management and treatment of Alzheimer's Disease, and might lead to fast and
simple diagnosis of skull damage due to trauma, impacting emergency medicine and
enabling self-contained, low-cost and portable medical equipment for that
purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research project is to
investigate the dynamics of the skull and brain as a coupled vibroacoustic
system to lay a foundation for enhanced imaging, diagnosis, and therapy. The
research will investigate: (1) how guided (Lamb) waves can be employed to image
and detect anomalies in the brain, (2) how mode conversion between bulk and Lamb
waves can be exploited for efficient ultrasound transmission to inaccessible
brain regions without causing unacceptable temperature rise in the skull, (3)
whether low frequency skull vibrations coupled with high frequency parametric
array excitation can provide feedback/guidance for focused ultrasound and
potentially eliminate the need for magnetic resonance image guidance, and(4)
whether nonlinear dynamic effects can be harnessed for various medical purposes,
including enhanced therapeutic ultrasound and evaluation of the structural
integrity of the skull. The team will conduct a comprehensive study of the
coupled skull-brain system over a broad frequency range to evaluate the
vibrational/modal behavior and vibroacoustics of the coupled skull-brain system
and the application of both guided Lamb waves and bulk waves in the ultrasound
regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.