* 1933040
* DASI Track 2: MagStar- Improving the Spatial Coverage of United States Magnetometers for Space Weather Research and Operations
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Delores Knipp, Computational Physics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,325,357.00

This Distributed Arrays of Small Instruments (DASI) project supported by the
Geospace Infrastructure and Facilities program will provide long-term
observations of the Earth's magnetosphere aimed at studying geomagnetically
induced currents (GICs). During geomagnetic storms, GICs can impact power grids,
particularly those with aging transformers. The recent 2019 as well as the
previous 2015 National Space Weather Strategy and Action Plans call for further
study of induced geoelectric fields. The high-quality instruments to be deployed
will add to the sparse coverage of the continental U.S. and provide reliable
streams for the science as well as operations community. Magnetometers will be
deployed at six sites across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved spatial
coverage of magnetometers with the enhanced temporal resolution and noise
characteristics has the potential to advance a broad cross- and inter-
disciplinary range of scientific research across the geosciences, including
geophysics, magnetospheric physics, ionospheric physics, and GIC science. Some
of the most important questions in these fields, for example localized
enhancements of GIC drivers, cannot progress until magnetic field data at the
appropriate spatial and temporal scales becomes available. The scientific and
operational goals can be met concurrently, through high-quality measurements,
delivered in real-time (less than a second latency), with advanced
industrialized components and data transfer
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.