* 1933178
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the 2019 International Graphonomics Conference: Graphonomics and Your Brain on Art, Creativity and Innovation
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Jose Contreras-Vidal, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This is funding to provide support for a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) at the
2019 International Conference of Graphonomics and Your Brain on Art, Creativity
and Innovation. The conference's goal is to identify the challenges and
opportunities for engaging in convergent research at the nexus of the arts,
design, science, engineering, medicine and the humanities to promote creativity
and innovation leading to novel approaches to solving complex societal
challenges (e.g., advancing personalized learning, enhancing virtual reality,
reverse engineering the brain, engineering tools for scientific discovery, and
engineering better therapies). The meeting, which will be held at Live Aqua
Cancun on June 9-13, is organized by the PI (University of Houston) in
collaboration with the International Graphonomics Society (IGS). The agenda is
designed to summarize the state of the art, to promote audience-driven
discussions whose content is provided by the participants themselves, and to
facilitate collaboration, debate and interactive human-in-the-loop
demonstrations using mobile brain-body imaging (MoBI) technology. To these ends,
the conference will adhere to a single-track format with thematic sessions that
are jointly chaired by a scientist/engineer and an artist, with no more than 4
speakers per session. Interactive demonstrations, a brain-computer interface
hackathon, and Art-Sci performances that address grand challenges will add to
the conference's broad impact. A special issue of the journal Brain-Computer
Interfaces will promote wide dissemination of findings from the conference
presentations and hackathon designs. The Doctoral Consortium will consist of
several intertwined activities that will provide an opportunity for the trainees
to network while exploring and developing their research interests within the
context of an interdisciplinary conference, under the guidance of a
distinguished group of international researchers, artists and innovators. To
assure diversity, the organizers will actively recruit student participants from
under-represented groups, including women and minorities, with a maximum of two
students per institution (and if two then one must be a
female).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Consortium for selected graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows will provide an opportunity for the
participants to explore and develop their convergent research interests. It will
include a special session on Brain-Machine Interfaces, a MoBI workshop, a brain-
computer interface hackathon, and a poster session. The trainees will also
strengthen their oral and written communication skills by serving as scribes,
writing summaries of the group interactions and final group briefings during the
conference. The summaries will describe the challenges addressed and outline the
approach identified to solve them, including what convergent research needs to
be done to understand the fundamental science behind the challenge, the proposed
plan for promoting trans-disciplinary collaboration and innovation, the
reasoning that went into it, and the benefits to society. The Doctoral
Consortium will be fully integrated with the conference events; applicants who
are selected will receive travel support (round-trip airfare and all-inclusive
accommodations) as well as reduced registration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.