* 1933409
* Investigating the Relationship Between an Intelligent Trunk Exoskeleton and Its Wearer as a Basis for Improved Assistance and Rehabilitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Vesna Novak, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 11/30/2021
* USD 524,940.00

Low back pain (LBP) is a leading cause of disability and a significant
contributor to reduced work productivity and wage loss. Intelligent, adaptive
trunk exoskeletons are a novel class of wearable robotic systems that reduce or
redistribute the load on the spine and trunk muscles, thereby offering a
nonsurgical and nonpharmaceutical LBP intervention that may be more effective
that standard spinal orthoses because intelligent exoskeletons will have the
capability to adapt their mechanical support to the changing activities and
needs of the wearer. The research objective of this project is to characterize
the bidirectional adaptations that will promote useful and comfortable
interactions between an intelligent trunk exoskeleton and its wearer. The
project offers three "work packages", which will develop fundamental knowledge
about the effects a trunk exoskeleton has on human movement and physiology in a
variety of activities performed in and out of the research lab. The project will
also increase knowledge about how intelligent exoskeletons can adapt themselves
to the wearer in an activity-specific manner, and how the wearer's exoskeleton
usage patterns evolve over time. The project will promote the nation's health
and prosperity by advancing the effective design and deployment of trunk
exoskeletons, which will have broad impact on human health and productivity. For
example, intelligent trunk exoskeletons could help workers in occupations like
agriculture and materials handling to lift heavier loads with lower risk of
injury. Broader impacts of the project include the integration of project
technology and results into undergraduate and graduate courses, as well as
outreach to K-12 and community college students, individuals with low back pain,
and to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's Intellectual Merit
is advanced through three sets of human subject experiments organized into "work
packages". The first determines the effects of the exoskeleton's compression and
stiffness on various aspects of the wearer's trunk biomechanics, metabolic load,
task completion strategy, and perceived comfort during low-intensity, high-
intensity, and unpredictable laboratory-based activities. The results will
provide insight into how exoskeleton compression and stiffness can be adjusted
to enhance task performance and comfort. The second work package integrates
sensors and actuators into the exoskeleton, thereby allowing an intelligent
algorithm to infer the wearer's posture and intended task, and to reconfigure
the exoskeleton's fit in a task-appropriate manner. Additionally, a smartphone
app will let users manually adjust the exoskeleton's configuration using a
simple user interface. The automatic and manual approaches will be compared in
lab-based experiments involving participants with and without LBP. The third
work package performs a 2-week, home-based, unsupervised evaluation of the
adaptive trunk exoskeleton to examine how the user?s relationship with the
exoskeleton evolves over time, such as whether users develop new usage
strategies as they gain experience with the device. Supervised laboratory
evaluations will be performed before, during, and after the 2-week evaluation
period to determine how extended experience with the exoskeleton affects its
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.