* 1933240
* The role of intracellular pH in the specification of cell fate
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Todd Nystul, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 890,000.00

Non-Technical Paragraph &lt;br/&gt;Stem cells in embryos and adults have the
capacity to change to specific cell types, such as pancreatic cells that make
insulin, intestinal cells that absorb nutrients, and master blood cells that can
become an immune cell or a cell that carries oxygen. How stem cells change their
identity is important for understanding human development, developmental
defects, and approaches for regenerative medicine. For development, research is
aimed at understanding how an embryonic stem cell becomes all the diverse cell
types that make organs, like the heart and liver. Development “gone wrong” is
often the cause of defects such as cleft-lip palate and heart malformations, as
well as diseases such as cancer and diabetes. And regenerative medicine holds
promise to repair damaged organs or treat diseases like Alzheimer’s. Hence, how
stem cells change their identity or “fate” is a highly significant question to
resolve. One new answer to this question is that when stem cells change their
identity they change their internal acid-base balance. The current proposal
tests predictions on how these changes in acid-base balance ensure a correct
cell fate. Predictions will be tested by using new tools to accurately measure
acid-base balance in live isolated stem cells and in stem cells in whole
animals, and by using new computational and experimental approaches to
understand how changes in acid-base balance change the shape and function of
proteins as well as the expression of genes previously recognized for
controlling how a cell fate is specified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Paragraph &lt;br/&gt;Studies on how cell fate is specified from naïve stem cells
mostly focus on regulation by signaling circuits, transcriptional programs, and
epigenetic changes. New findings reveal that intracellular pH (pHi) dynamics is
a previously unrecognized critical regulator of stem cell fates in three stem
cell models: mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), adult Drosophila follicle stem
cells (FSCs), and adult mouse intestinal stem cells (ISCs). Building on these
findings will generate a mechanistic understanding of how pHi dynamics specifies
cell fate. Aim 1 addresses how pHi dynamics regulates mESC pluripotency and FSC
differentiation by testing the hypothesis that pHi regulates distinct stem cell
states through pHi-dependent effects on the activity or ligand-binding affinity
of selective endogenous proteins with established roles in regulating cell fate
decisions. Roles for known (-catenin, DIDO3, phosphofructokinase-1) and
predicted (BCL9 and FOXM1) pH sensitive proteins will be resolved at molecular,
cellular and animal scales. Aim 2 determines the conservation of pHi dynamics in
cell fate decisions through studies using ISC organoids. Preliminary data
support testing the hypothesis that pHi-dependent differentiation of ISCs occurs
at two steps; crypt budding and lineage specification. Crypt budding will be
determined by focusing on pHi-regulated actinomyosin contractility and Wnt
signaling, and lineage specification to secretory cells will be resolved by
using lineage-specific fluorescent reporters and reporters for Wnt and Notch
pathway activity. Outcomes will generate mechanistic insights on how pHi
dynamics regulates cell fate decisions that will be significant to understand
human development, developmental defects, and approaches for regenerative
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.