* 1933486
* Broadening Participation - I-Corps Northeast Regional Inclusion Summit
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 171,116.00

This project is to convene and conduct a workshop focusing on broadening
participation of under-represented groups in the NSF I-Corps program. This
workshop builds upon the outcomes from the national Broadening Participation
Inclusion Summit and focuses on approaches to increasing diversity and inclusion
in the I-Corps Program more regionally. Diversity of all types is critical to
ensure America's excellence in science and engineering research and the
translation of that research to innovations with economic and societal benefits.
This regional Inclusion Summit will help introduce, educate and invite
underrepresented communities to become engaged in the I-Corps programs and to
grow their participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together
pioneers in the fields of inclusiveness and entrepreneurship, and leadership
from organizations and institutions serving minorities and underrepresented
groups. This project has several key objectives: to continue building on the
relationships formed at the inaugural Summit in Fall 2018; the need to focus on
broadening this participation at a smaller, regional level; the need to expand
to other underrepresented groups, including a greater focus on women and
veterans; and an increase in participation both for the I-Corps program and
other NSF Programs more broadly. The results of the Summit will increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in I-Corps training at the local,
regional, and national levels, both at the team and instructor levels; pursuant
to that, accelerate the translation of fundamental research to practical
applications that will improve the well-being of society; and increase the
economic competitiveness of the United States. While this project focuses
specifically on the Northeast region of the United States for now, its impact
and lessons learned can be replicated to other parts of the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.