* 1933793
* Collaborative Research: Systems analysis of the interplay between oxygenic photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation in a unicellular cyanobacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Costas Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Modern agriculture is critically dependent on fertilizers as the source of
biologically available nitrogen. Chemical synthesis of fertilizers is energy
intensive, and the process generates greenhouse gases that are a major driver of
climate change. Moreover, application of fertilizers invariably leads to run-off
related issues that are detrimental to the environment. One potential solution
is development of nitrogen-fixing crop plants. This is a grand challenge in
biology, since oxygen is a potent inhibitor of nitrogenase, the enzyme that
catalyzes nitrogen fixation. Oxygenic photosynthetic organisms are the primary
producers of oxygen in the biosphere. Among them, some cyanobacterial strains
can also fix nitrogen using the energy captured during photosynthesis. The
central objective of this project is to develop a deep understanding of the
biological system in cyanobacteria that accommodates the two antagonistic
processes, photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation. Success in these efforts will
unravel design principles to develop nitrogen-fixing crop plants and will have
far reaching implications in basic biology as well as biotechnology. The project
activities also include (i) providing training for local and international
undergraduate students and (ii) outreach activities for scientifically
underprivileged individuals, organized by the International Center for Energy,
Environment and Sustainability at Washington
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unicellular diazotrophic cyanobacteria are the
only cellular platforms in which oxygenic photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation
coexist. These microbes have developed sophisticated strategies to perform these
antagonistic processes in the same cell by temporally separating them.
Cyanobacteria are the only prokaryotes with a well characterized circadian clock
that is thought to coordinate these two processes. However, a detailed
understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which these organisms adjust their
metabolism to accommodate both nitrogen fixation and photosynthesis is lacking.
The plan is to use a recently developed genetic modification system for the
unicellular diazotrophic strain Cyanothece sp. ATCC 51142 to strategically probe
these questions. During this project, a systems biology approach is deployed to
dissect the regulatory hierarchies that coordinate photosynthesis and nitrogen
fixation. Overall, these studies help unlock the puzzle of the integration of
photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation in a single cell. They provide a
quantitative map of the highly orchestrated changes occurring during the day-
night diel cycle informing how regulatory events affect metabolism as well as
how the products of metabolism reset regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.