* 1933324
* Collaborative Research: Tailoring Terahertz Emission in Ultrafast Multi-Functional Devices using Reduced-Dimensional Hybrid Metal Perovskites
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Wei You, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2022
* USD 110,000.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;Terahertz technologies hold great promise for future
computing and communications. Energy-efficient and miniaturized THz sources
using light-weight, low-cost, and robust materials are a long sought goal. Few
materials, however, possess the attributes needed to realize working devices.
Metal halide perovskites with reduced dimensionality are a new class of
semiconductors with great promise for such applications. They can be
inexpensively synthesized and solution processed, have attractive electronic
properties, and tolerate defects. These properties have led to great interest
for applications in solar cells and flexible displays. Perovskites also show
promise as high performance THz sources. Remarkably, these properties can be
controlled via spin electronics (spintronics) that exploit the fundamental
properties of electrons in devices. This makes it possible to interface
perovskites with magnetic materials, enabling spintronic THz emitters. This
project will lead to low-cost and energy-efficient THz devices with
complementary magnetic, optical and electronic functions. The PIs will educate
graduate and undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented
groups, by integrating research with education. Established and developing
outreach programs will be used to involve K-12 students with the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
realization of a spintronic control of the broadband THz emission in RD-
HMH/Ferromagnet heterostructures. The research consists of three research
thrusts: (1) Demonstrate the proof-of-concept spintronic hybrid THz emitter
using reduced dimensional-hybrid metal halide (RD-HMH) polycrystalline thin
films prepared by a low-cost spin-coating approach, taking advantage of the fast
relaxation of spin (akin to a switch) and efficient spin-to-charge
interconversion thanks to the heavy metal elements in RD-HMHs. A thorough,
fundamental physical understanding of the ultrafast generation of THz emission
in RD-HMH/Ferromagnet heterostructures will be unraveled. (2) Tailor the THz
emission via engineering RD-HMH single crystals. Wafer-scale single crystals-
based THz emitters will be designed and optimized with tunable bandwidth as well
as high quality (Q-) factors, in complement to that of polycrystalline-film
emitters. (3) Optimize the THz emission via versatile chemical synthetic routes
using device building blocks. The available pool of high-quality synthesized RD-
HMH candidates with tunable quantum-well effects are ready to be fabricated into
efficient THz emitters, allowing the spintronic and magnetic control of THz
generation that can be potentially used for logic applications utilizing THz-
wave emission and absorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.