* 1933302
* Collaborative Research: Using Ca, Sr, Mg, and Fe isotope proxies to constrain redox and continental weathering during Ocean Anoxic Event 2
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Alan Brandon, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2022
* USD 212,443.00

Rapid increases of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere can lead to changes in the
global ocean, including increased acidification, lower oxygen, and significantly
reduced plant and animal life. This project’s scientists are interested in
changes in ocean chemistry and global climate 94 million years ago when the
atmosphere had up to 5 times more carbon dioxide than Earth’s present
atmosphere, and the concentrations varied dramatically. The researchers are
measuring isotopes of strontium, calcium, magnesium, and iron in rocks from the
Eagle Ford Group in Texas that formed from an ancient seabed. The results are
leading to a better understanding of the factors that led to and sustained that
period of global warming, and they are revealing implications for present-day
climate change. This research is aiding the career development of a Ph.D.
student from an underrepresented group and an early career female scientist. A
museum exhibit on climate and energy is being created to outreach to the public
about this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Late Cretaceous Ocean Anoxic Event 2
(OAE2) was a sustained period of high atmospheric carbon dioxide and consequent
warming of the global climate. How global warming is related to volcanic
activity, and the cascading effects on continental weathering and global ocean
chemistry, remain open questions. A complete stratigraphic section through OAE2
from the Eagle Ford Group in Texas is being examined for Sr, Ca, Mg, and Fe
isotopes. Each of these element systems record distinct chemical information on
the global ocean environment and on changing climate. Numerical mass balance
models based on the isotope data are being employed to constrain the inputs and
outputs to the global ocean and the feedback between volcanic activity and
continental weathering. Results are providing a framework for further
examination of the causes of ocean anoxia and substantial climate change in the
geological past, and are allowing a better understanding of the factors
contributing to future climate change. Broader impacts of this project include
mentoring and training students from underrepresented groups and public outreach
about the links between climate and energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.