* 1933657
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Ethics Education for Social Justice
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* James Holbrook, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 140,841.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping engineering students
understand social implications of their work. Engineering ethics are the
standards that guide the professional conduct of engineers. Formal teaching of
engineering ethics is often missing from undergraduate engineering programs. In
addition, these ethical standards are often regarded as soft skills that do not
count as engineering. The New Jersey Institute of Technology, in collaboration
with the University of Florida, aims to teach students engineering ethics within
a social justice context. They plan to develop and teach a new course that will
help students understand how to use the power of engineering to benefit society.
The new course will be implemented at both institutions and preliminary data
will be collected to examine the efficacy of the course for engineering ethics
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to accomplish the following
goals: 1) design an engineering ethics course focused on justice and societal
impact; 2 ) implement the course in two different institutional settings; and 3)
collect preliminary data to determine the efficacy of the new course for
engineering ethics education. Expected outcomes of the new engineering ethics
course include improved student ability to see alternative perspectives and
enhanced student capacity to make ethical decisions. The project will test the
hypothesis that teaching engineering ethics in terms of justice and societal
impact yields better outcomes than other approaches. The project team includes a
philosopher with 15 years of experience in teaching ethics and an engineer with
22 years of experience in engineering education, making it well-qualified to
undertake this research. A diverse advisory board, which includes experts in
anthropology, community engagement, and science and technology studies, will
provide feedback throughout the project. Given the pivotal role of ethics
education in the management of the benefits of technological innovations, this
research contributes to the advancement of research in service of the welfare of
the American public. Engineers have the potential to benefit society in many
ways, especially if they see engineering as inherently connected to societal
impact. By developing courses focused on justice and societal impact, this
project has the potential to transform engineering education to produce
engineers focused on using the power of engineering to benefit society. This
project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education:
Education and Human Resources Program, which supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.