* 1933310
* Control of Instability Transition in Transverse Jets
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ann Karagozian, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 319,900.00

Jets injected perpendicularly into a cross-stream, or transverse jets, exist
both in nature and in a wide range of engineering applications. For example,
transverse jets are used to control fuel-air mixing and cooling of turbine
blades in gas turbine engines for aircraft as well as in stationary power
plants. Such jets are also used for fluid injection in liquid rocket engine pre-
burners and in environmental control systems. A volcanic plume may also behave
like a transverse jet in a windy environment. Controlling and optimizing
transverse jet behavior can improve fuel efficiency, control vehicle
performance, and potentially reduce environmental impact, all of which are
important economic, energy and national security goals. Recent experimental
studies have demonstrated the value of actively controlling transverse jets, or
controlling the flow immediately exterior to the jets, in order to improve
performance for a range of flow regimes and applications. The proposed
experimental studies in this project are designed to focus, in greater detail,
on the fundamental physics of transverse jet instabilities. This include
studying their dynamical character, how they arise, and hence how they may be
actively controlled in a robust manner. The broader impacts of the proposed
studies will expand beyond practical applications and graduate level research.
It will include undergraduate research training, community outreach, and summer
laboratory experiences for local high school and community college students and
potentially undergraduates at other universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed experimental research activities will examine shear layer instabilities
and asymmetries that naturally form in the transverse jet flow field, and how
different approaches for excitation can control jet behavior tailored to
different classes of applications. In addition to fundamental exploration for
the single, nozzle-generated transverse jet, it is proposed to examine an
alternative configuration, a coaxial jet in crossflow. This will determine the
effects of a new modality for control of shear layer instabilities via creation
of counter-current shear using suction or blowing in the outer annular section
of the coaxial jet. The studies will also build on recent discoveries of
dynamical lock-in, quasi-periodicity, and regular patterns in modes associated
with proper orthogonal decomposition from laser-based imaging of the single
transverse jet. Corresponding studies involving linear stability theory applied
to transverse jet shear layer dynamics are expected to be pursued via an
international collaboration with researchers at the Universidade Federal
Fluminense (UFF) in Brazil. The proposed studies have the potential to yield
unprecedented understanding and identification of control methodologies for
future innovations in propulsion and energy generation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.