* 1933166
* Collaborative Research: Cell signaling regulation of hormonally mediated auditory plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Joseph Sisneros, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2024
* USD 766,000.00

Hormonal state can alter hearing capabilities in many animals, including humans,
but it is not known how hormones affect the structure and function of the inner
ear. This research uses plainfin midshipman fish to understand how hormones
affect hearing. During the breeding season, male midshipman fish sing to attract
mates, making acoustic communication vital for reproductive success. Female
midshipman fish show seasonal, estrogen-dependent changes in hearing that make
it easier for them to locate potential mates. This research asks how estrogen
affects the production, survival, and function of sensory receptors involved in
hearing to increase hearing sensitivity. This research has broader impact by
increasing understanding of the natural world and providing insight into how
hormones can influence the inner ear to modulate hearing â€“ findings that can
apply to many species, including humans. This research also impacts society by
exposing high school teachers and their students to both the scientific method
and cutting-edge scientific techniques. As part of the M.J. Murdock Charitable
Trust Partners in Science program, high school teachers will work in university
laboratories for two summers, gain valuable research skills, and present their
work at national conferences. These teachers also work with the academic team to
develop research-based lesson plans for the classroom. Members of the public can
learn about this research through interactive museum demonstrations hosted by
graduate students. In this way, non-scientists share the excitement of the
science and students gain critical communication skills that they can use in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hormonal modulation of sensory plasticity related
to reproductive cycles is widespread among vertebrates, but the underlying
molecular and genetic mechanisms responsible for these steroid-dependent changes
remain poorly understood. This project takes an integrated molecular,
anatomical, and physiological approach to determine the effects of gonadal
steroids on the adaptive auditory plasticity for encoding socially relevant
acoustic signals. The objective of this study is to determine how estrogen
regulates cellular and molecular changes in the inner ear of the female plainfin
midshipman, leading to seasonal, steroid-dependent changes in hearing that
enhance intraspecific acoustic communication to facilitate reproduction. The
central hypothesis is that estrogen upregulates inner ear gene networks for
progenitor cell proliferation, hair cell differentiation, and cell survival,
leading to increased hair cell addition and enhanced auditory sensitivity in
reproductive female midshipman fish. The experiments use both in vitro and in
vivo approaches to manipulate cellular signaling (Wnt, notch, and heat shock
signaling pathways) in female midshipman from different reproductive states.
Changes in gene expression are assessed with qRT-PCR, cell proliferation and
survival with cell biology assays and fluorescent microscopy, and auditory
function with electrophysiology. These studies allow to gain insight into neural
and endocrine mechanisms that may act to enhance communication in all
vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.