* 1933768
* Myocardial Remodeling: Role of Microstructural Cell-ECM Mechanical Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Marcos Dantus, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2023
* USD 399,997.00

One of the main reasons for heart failure due to hypertension is that the
structure of the heart tissue changes with time, altering its mechanical
capabilities. The heart tissue is mainly made of two "materials": cells (called
myocytes) and fibers (specifically, collagen fibers). Cells and fibers "push and
pull" on one another while the heart beats: this is called mechanical coupling.
Because hypertension alters the composition of the tissue -- cells become bigger
and fibers grow in number -- it is intuitive to think that it will also have an
impact on how cells and fibers interact. The goal of this project is to use
advanced modeling and computations and careful experiments to understand how
hypertension affects the mechanical coupling and how this change in coupling
contributes to cardiac dysfunction. This study will have impact in the fields of
regenerative medicine and tissue engineering, specifically in the case of new
emerging heart failure treatments. Finally, this project will also serve as a
platform to launch an innovative outreach program ("I heart Biomechanics") to
educate and enhance public awareness of biomechanics research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, it is hypothesized that the mechanical
coupling between cells and collagen fiber network not only changes during
pathological remodeling in the heart of hypertensive rats, but also is one of
the significant forces driving remodeling. The overarching goal of this project
is to elucidate how mechanical coupling between cells and extracellular matrix
(1) drives microstructural changes in healthy and diseased hearts, (2) affects
mechanical properties of the left ventricle at various stages of the remodeling,
and (3) contributes to the pathological changes of the heart tissue. The
approach consists of new constitutive formulations, finite element modeling, and
experiments on intact tissues as well as tissues with isolated components under
both active and passive conditions. In the process, a methodology will also be
developed to quantify and incorporate the collagen-cells mechanical coupling
into a new microstructural model for ventricular
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.