* 1933556
* Collaborative research: Quantum Communication with Loss-Protected Photonic Encoding
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Dirk Englund, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2022
* USD 262,500.00

Nontechnical Description: Quantum photonic processors generate, process, and
measure quantum states of light on-chip to provide exponential advantages in
computation, simulation, and communication. But such processors are also very
sensitive to noise and loss. To realize practical quantum photonic processors
that can solve useful problems requires quantum error correction which, like
classical error correction, incorporates redundancy in order to protect the
information from faults in the system. But the realization of these error
correcting codes with photons is extremely challenging and requires very
efficient photon sources, mode transformations, and single photon
nonlinearities. Recent progress in integrated photonics and quantum optics has
provided these core individual components, but integrating them into complex
fault-tolerant systems remains extremely challenging. This program aims to
combine large-scale silicon photonics, quantum emitters, and strongly nonlinear
materials to build next generation quantum photonics processors that can protect
quantum information using error correction. To address this challenging goal,
the principal investigators will combine state-of-the-art quantum dot sources
and nonlinearities with foundry based silicon photonics, a scalable and CMOS-
compatible photonic platform. New fabrication approaches will be developed to
combine these disparate components into a single device structure that can
manipulate and interact photons with each other at an unprecedented scale. These
devices will operate at the technologically important telecommunications band,
and could potentially interfaced with existing infrastructure to develop
continental-scale unconditionally secure communication networks. They could also
implement next generation quantum algorithms advancing drug design, materials
science and big data -- all at a scale where classical machines can no longer
keep pace. This program will also contain a significant outreach effort aimed at
developing the next generation of quantum engineers by mentoring, new curriculum
development, and the development of a youtube channel for quantum engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: A key goal of this program is a
unification of the core individual hardware components into a single system that
can efficiently process quantum states of light on a semiconductor chip. These
core components include single photon sources, high-fidelity mode
transformations, and strong single-photon nonlinearities. By bringing together a
combination of complementary expertise in large-scale silicon photonics design,
quantum emitter spectroscopy, and nano-fabrication of CMOS control, this
proposal will develop systems level solutions to build next generation quantum
photonics processors that can perform photonic quantum error correction, the key
ingredient for scalable quantum information processing. To generate single
photons, the team will utilize high-efficiency single photon sources based on
InAs quantum dots. Large-scale Si photonic circuits will apply complex linear
mode transformations on generated photons. Finally, cavity-coupled quantum dots
in the strong coupling regime will implement single photon nonlinearities to
generate two-qubit interactions. Hybrid fabrication techniques will be leveraged
to combine different material platforms into a single circuit that can implement
photonic error correction for loss, the dominant fault mechanism for photonic
qubits. Such loss error correction codes are essential for any scalable quantum
information processing application including photonic quantum computers and one-
way quantum repeaters that can attain long distance and high speeds
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.