* 1933071
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Biorefinery for Pyrolysis Biofuels and Biotemplated Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Jillian Goldfarb, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 274,585.00

As the world?s population and energy demands increase, our global reliance on
fossil fuel resources to provide this energy puts an incredible strain on the
environment. The modern biorefinery could produce sustainable energy by
converting lignocellulosic biomass to fuels through thermal and chemical routes.
However, one of the primary issues with using pyrolysis (heating in the absence
of oxygen) as a thermochemical conversion technique is the need for significant
fuel upgrading to improve stability and increase the heating value of the oil.
Though bio-oils can be upgraded post-production, current methods suffer from
catalyst poisoning and high materials and operation costs. This research project
aims to address these issues by incorporating inorganic compounds, such as metal
nitrates and acetates into cellulosic feedstocks, to simultaneously engineer
high-value nanomaterials via bio-templating and catalytically upgrade pyrolysis
bio-oils, thus reducing the need for costly downstream upgrading. Using machine
learning based techniques, such as materials informatics for potential catalyst
selection and statistical design of experiments, to inform process variable
decisions, the proposed work will add to a fundamental body of knowledge on in
situ upgrading of thermochemically derived biofuels while offering a new
paradigm in computationally informed, experimentally verified renewable fuel
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will focus on upgrading of
biofuels during pyrolysis by simultaneously making bio-templated nanoparticles.
Materials Informatics approaches will be used to select in situ pyrolysis
catalysts and surrogate reactions will be used to predict (and then validate via
integrated feedback loop) potential reaction pathways and formed nanomaterial
structure. By developing a new Pyrolysis Product Index that looks at where, for
example, oxygen goes during pyrolysis, and how yields of marker compounds change
upon catalyst incorporation, the principal investigators aim to synthesize a new
way to discuss biofuel upgrading pathways, helping to standardize what is a
rather diverse literature in terms of what is deemed to be a good pathway. The
project also aims to elucidate the physical changes occurring during pyrolysis
of metal-impregnated biomass using in operando Raman spectroscopy through an
international collaboration with a group from Queens Mary University (United
Kingdom). The objective is to improve our knowledge of which reaction pathways
are most critical to devolatilization, and how to better design catalysts to
improve both primary pyrolysis and to limit secondary reactions, such as re-
condensation, and to promote cracking, thereby reducing tar formation. The
proposed work also involves nanomaterials characterization to understand the
process variables impacting size, morphology and crystallinity of bio-templated
nanomaterials. Advances in fundamental science stemming from the proposed work
may lead to the design of an optimized integrated biorefinery to convert
renewable sources to energy and materials. In addition to training graduate and
undergraduate students in research, there ae plans to engage and mentor
underrepresented students and develop and international graduate student
exchange between Cornell, Boston and Queen Mary Universities. An active learning
module for renewable energy applications will be developed, implemented and
assessed in the three participating universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.