* 1933107
* Quickest Spectrum Awareness under Correlated Spatio-temporal Variations
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ali Tajer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,190.00

Wireless communication technology is rapidly transcending its primary
applications (e.g., cellular communications) and plays a transformative role as
the critical backbone in various emerging new technologies that affect different
technological, social, and economic domains. All such technologies are viable at
the expense of increasing demands for radio spectrum, which is the key commodity
in the wireless industry. Enabling long-term and sustainable wireless
infrastructures necessitates technologies that enhance spectrum access
efficiency and allow for real-time and fine-granularity spectrum management. The
effectiveness of spectrum management critically depends on forming agile and
accurate situational awareness of spectrum occupancy states across time and
space. This research project focuses on developing a comprehensive analytical
framework for forming situational awareness of the spatio-temporal variations in
wireless spectrum opportunities. This framework establishes bi-directional
interactions with the sensing circuitry. In the forward direction, it receives
measurements collected by the sensors in order to form various detection,
inferential, and resource management decisions. In the reverse direction, based
on the data deemed necessary for delivering accurate situational awareness, it
sends instructions to the sensors on how to proceed with collecting data from
various segments of the spectrum. The decisions formed by this framework can
also be used for visualizing decisions and alarms. The research tasks of this
project include: developing a comprehensive framework that coherently integrates
several critical components for innovative spectrum sensing, forming agile
inferential decisions, achieving fast computations and fast adaptivity in
dynamic settings, and ensuring decision robustness under environment
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop such a comprehensive framework,
this project has several research thrusts, each addressing one aspect of the
framework. In each thrust, the project pursues the following two intertwined
research objectives: (1) Theoretical Foundations: The first objective is to
establish the fundamental limits of forming quickest situational awareness,
while recognizing the physical restraints due to the cost of sensing,
communication delay tolerance, model uncertainties, and dynamic variations of
the beneficiaries of spectrum sensing, which encompass various autonomous
wireless applications that operate under distinct protocols and infrastructures.
(2) Algorithm Design: Driven by the observations gained from the uncovered
fundamental limits, the second objective is to design data analytic tools and
mechanisms for forming the quickest situational awareness, which is amenable to
real-time and scalable implementation, exhibiting sound decision guarantees, and
fully adaptive and responsive to the spatio-temporal variations of the spectrum
occupancy status in wideband spectrum. This project will produce a decision-
theoretic framework for forming quick and reliable situational awareness of the
spectral occupancy states over different segments in wideband spectrum. To
achieve this goal, the project will address long-standing open problems in
quickest detection of change over networked data, open problems in controlled
sensing, as well as challenging problems motivated by the physical constraints
of spectrum sensing such as 1) sensing budget, 2) decision-making under model
uncertainty, and 3) detecting adversaries that seek to compromise sensing data
and distort spectrum sensing decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.