* 1933561
* Collaborative Research: A general approach to partitioning contributions from multiple drivers affecting individuals, populations, and communities
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Peter Adler, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 02/29/2024
* USD 114,882.00

The patterns in nature that ecologists strive to understand are usually the
result of many interacting processes. Why are there about 1100 bird species in
the US, rather than 110 or 11,000? To answer a question like that, it is not
enough to list all the contributing factors; we need to know which ones are more
and less important. Like a cook who knows which ingredients are essential for a
recipe, ecologists ask, for example, what 'ingredients' are crucial for
preserving biodiversity in an ecosystem altered by human activities, and which
are less critical. The goal of this project are first, to give ecologists better
tools for identifying the factors most important in creating observed patterns,
based on a general statistical method called "Functional Analysis of Variance"
(fANOVA). Second, the new tools will be used to extend ecological theories
explaining how competing species can coexist, to identify which vital rates
(e.g., survival rates at different ages) contribute most to fluctuations in
population abundance, and to identify which vital rates, at which ages or life-
stages, contribute most to the large within-population variation in lifetime
outcomes (such total number of offspring) that cannot be explained by observable
traits. The researchers will also develop new computing methods and statistical
theory to broaden the applicability of fANOVA in ecology and conduct workshops
to teach others to use the new tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;fANOVA is a general
variance decomposition method for nonlinear input-output relationships,
decomposing output variance into direct contributions from variation in each
input, contributions from interactions of all orders (pairwise, triplets, etc.),
and unexplained residual variation. Many ecological questions involve processes
operating over large spatial and temporal scales, so experimental manipulations
are infeasible and inference must come from dynamic models fitted to empirical
data. This project will explore how fANOVA can play the role in these situations
that conventional ANOVA does in simple experimental designs, answering questions
about the relative importance of different processes using models fitted to
empirical data. fANOVA is not 'plug and play': the general recipe is often
computationally intractable and hard to interpret in high-dimensional
situations. Each new application needs to overcome these challenges. Specific
objectives include: (1) Develop an exact and complete version of Life Table
Response Experiment analysis, and using a meta-analysis of hundreds of published
models to contrast fANOVA with current approaches; (2) Extend recently developed
fANOVA-based methods of quantifying coexistence mechanisms to include systems
with explicit spatial structure and clumped species distributions; (3) Determine
how the magnitude of within- population random variation in lifetime
reproductive success is related to life history and functional traits through a
meta-analysis of published models; (4) Develop general systematic tools to
determine when or where in the life cycle luck (random differences in outcomes
such as survival and fecundity) matters the most for lifetime outcomes; (5)
Develop statistical theory to determine how models should be constructed for
optimal estimation and inference about luck.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.