* 1933803
* Collaborative Research: Social Dynamics of Knowledge Transfer Through Scientific Mentorship and Publication
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Daniel Acuna, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 09/30/2023
* USD 176,475.00

Mentorship plays a critical role in the careers of scientific researchers. Most
researchers spend several years training under just one or two graduate and/or
postdoctoral mentors, suggesting that these few relationships can have a large
impact on scientific careers. Mentorship can provide both direct intellectual
benefits to the trainee, through the learning of new skills and concepts, and
indirect social benefits, through engagement with the social network of the
mentor. Given the importance of mentorship in scientific career development,
this aspect of training may play an important role in determining access of
underrepresented groups to scientific careers. The purpose of this study is to
characterize the impact of demographic variables--such as gender, ethnicity and
socio-economic background--on the outcome of scientific
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networks of mentors and trainees can be
represented by a directional graph resembling a traditional family tree. This
project develops a large crowdsourced database of academic mentorship
relationships, and links that data to databases that measure scientific
productivity (publications and grants) and demographic variables. Graph
theoretic and semantic tools will be used to determine if and how demographic
variables, associated with both of the mentor and trainee, impact scientific
productivity. A preliminary analysis of gender replicates previous reports of
bias toward representation male researchers, especially at more senior career
stages. Accurately modeling effects of demographic variables requires accounting
for other variables that impact scientific productivity metrics, namely
differences between fields and long-term temporal trends. This project will use
semantic analysis of publication data to develop the concept of the
"intellectual neighborhood" of mentors. and incorporate this into the modeling
of career outcomes. Data will be made open-access for general use by the public,
providing a new resource for studying the dynamics of research
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.