* 1933717
* Research on the Integration of Science, Engineering, Mathematics, and Computational Thinking in Rural Elementary Teacher Professional Development and Effects on Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Paula Leach, Longwood University
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 12/31/2023
* USD 647,206.00

This interdisciplinary research project represents a collaboration between
Longwood University's Institute for Teaching through Technology and Innovative
Practices, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Department of
Biological and Environmental Sciences, and rural schools in Virginia to develop
and test a professional development program for 4th grade teachers in rural
elementary schools. Teachers will gain experience designing lessons that
integrate computational thinking (CT), science, and mathematics. During the
first summer of the program, teachers will focus on subject matter content and
instructional strategies for integrating CT with science and mathematics. During
the following school year, teachers will be supported in implementing integrated
learning modules designed by the project team. During the second summer,
participating teachers will develop their own modules and units for
implementation during the academic year to follow. Activities of the project are
guided by three overarching goals: 1) Increase rural elementary teachers'
content and pedagogical knowledge regarding CT characteristics and dispositions,
2) Increase rural elementary teachers' confidence in integrating CT concepts as
part of transdisciplinary lessons that include mathematics, science, and CT, and
3) Improve student awareness of and skill with CT characteristics and
dispositions. To support teachers in achieving these goals, the project team
will develop a STEM CT Integration Framework that explicitly connects elements
of the Next Generation Science Standards, Common Core State Standards for
Mathematics, and CT characteristics as defined by the International Society for
Technology in Education, and the Computer Science Teachers Association. As
computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (PreK-12).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research and development project will focus on
professional growth opportunities for rural elementary teachers that help them
learn how to create and teach interdisciplinary lessons at grade four that
explicitly link concepts in mathematics and science with CT concepts. Research
on the impacts of this project will be guided by two research questions: 1) To
what extent do elementary teachers? practices shift and self-efficacy change
when they create and implement an integrated curriculum that includes CT
concepts, science and engineering practices, and mathematics practices? And 2)
How do elementary student CT dispositions change with the implementation of an
integrated curriculum that includes CT concepts, science and engineering
practices, and mathematics practices? The project team will use a mixed-methods,
participatory research approach for collecting, analyzing, and integrating
quantitative and qualitative data. Twenty-four grade 4 teachers who teach both
mathematics and science in rural school districts will participate in the
project, and their individual classes are expected to have 20 students on
average. An array of validated instruments, tailored surveys, observation
protocols, and teacher interviews will be used to gather teacher data and
document changes over time, and students will be tasked with solving a
predetermined problem and interviewed about CT dispositions. Qualitative teacher
data will be analyzed using an emergent dimensional coding schema, and
triangulated with findings from student responses. The project will examine
shifts in teacher practices and changes in beliefs and attitudes regarding
learning how to create and implement science and mathematics curricula that
feature computational thinking. The project will also examine how dispositions
and attitudes of students change when exposed to curricula that integrate
computational thinking with science and mathematics
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.