* 1933799
* I-Corps: Electro Hydraulic Mobile Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Jose Garcia, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project couples the
benefits of a traditional ICE-mechanical or an electro-mechanical drivetrain
with a hydrostatic drivetrain for increased energy efficiency, improved
performance and extended driving range. This concept is fundamentally different
from the existing approaches, since it is based on the design of a compact kit
to hybridize an existing drivetrain for a large transportation vehicle used in
cities. The project will focus on exploring potential customers who own, operate
and maintain fleet vehicles larger than 5 tons. These types of vehicles are
especially suited for the adoption of the proposed kit due to the room in the
engine compartment facilitating ease of installation in a short time. Examples
of potential customers include passenger bus fleets in urban areas, refuse
vehicles, parcel distribution vehicles, material handling vehicles and in
general vehicles with frequent stop and go drive cycles.

This I-Corps project is a radical improvement to a vehicle drivetrain system
because it effectively captures larger amounts of kinetic energy from a moving
vehicle compared to existing and other proposed methods, such as electric
batteries, flywheels, or supercapacitors. A hydraulic accumulator will be
compactly coupled to a hydraulic pump/motor to conform a regenerative
hydrostatic transmission mounted to the front axle of the vehicle. The proposed
technology will lead to the improvement of energy efficiency in vehicles with
high start and stop duty cycles. The proposed hydraulic add-on kit serves as an
auxiliary powertrain to extend the driving range of the vehicle, reducing the
stress of the battery discharge or reducing engine use during the vehicle
accelerations, and provide extra capability for propulsion and braking. The
advantage of using the hydraulic accumulator is its power density, which will
lead to an ideal solution for energy management and performance of the system. A
hydraulic accumulator will be compactly coupled to a hydraulic pump and
hydraulic motor to conform a regenerative hydrostatic transmission mounted to
the front axle the vehicle.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.