* 1933387
* Doctoral dissertation research: Impact of academic entrepreneurship on doctoral student innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Maria Roche, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 10/31/2021
* USD 25,469.00

This project examines the impact advisor entrepreneurial activities on the
innovative output of doctoral students. Entrepreneurial ventures are widely
considered a fundamental engine for employment and economic growth. Individuals
who engage in entrepreneurship come from a variety of backgrounds, including
(and increasingly) academe. The participation of university professors in
entrepreneurship has experienced a surge in recent years, which has contributed
to the creation of technology- and knowledge-intensive companies. This increase
of entrepreneurial activity comes partially as a response to universities
promoting entrepreneurship among the faculty. As universities and public policy
makers increase the incentives for faculty members to start companies, they
should, however, also carefully consider the implications for the other roles
played by university professors. Despite the time and resources invested in
promoting academic entrepreneurship, little is known about the implications of
faculty engagement in entrepreneurship on, for example, creating public
knowledge and training students. This project examines the latter by analyzing
the extent to which an advisor's engagement in entrepreneurship impacts their
doctoral students' innovative output, highlighting the trade-off between two
different channels of knowledge transfer from universities to private firms. One
is through the creation of university spinoffs, while the other is embodied by
students. Overall, this research provides a better understanding of how
professors' commercial activities may have long-lasting effects on their
students' innovative productivity and careers, thereby ultimately influencing
the rate and direction of inventive activity.

This project uses rich administrative data on doctoral students and professors
in computer science and engineering at a highly-ranked US research university,
to assess variation in doctoral students' innovation and career outcomes, before
and after research faculty transition into entrepreneurship. The data encompass
information on professors' nationality, gender, ethnicity, age, salaries,
federal funding, the number and quality of publications, as well as information
on their patenting output and the number of startups they have established.
These data are complemented by matching professors to their doctoral students,
based on information provided by the Registrar's Office of the examined
institution. For doctoral students, data includes detailed information on
nationality, age, year of admission and graduation, major, GRE scores, GPAs,
gender, and ethnicity, previous degree-granting institutions, careers before and
after graduation, as well as publication, and patent records. The empirical
approach applied to this study makes use of the richness of the available data
to address potential biases induced by sorting and endogeneity of
entrepreneurial activity. The findings of this study enhance our knowledge about
the potential side-effects of professors' commercial activities on the
innovative output and career trajectories of the doctoral students they advise.
As such, this project takes an important step towards understanding the
consequences of academic entrepreneurship for both universities and future
innovators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.