* 1933786
* Hyperplane Arrangements and Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Alexandru Suciu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 10/31/2021
* USD 24,000.00

This award provides partial support for US-based participants in the
international conference "Hyperplane Arrangements and Singularities" to be held
at the University of Tokyo (in Tokyo, Japan), during the period December 2-6,
2019. The conference will be research-oriented, intended to disseminate recent
developments, but it will also include introductory lectures at a level
accessible to graduate students. Additionally, there will be discussion
sessions, so as to better strengthen connections among the various research
groups represented and to provide accessibility for junior researchers and
graduate students.

The conference will focus around recent developments in the study of hyperplane
arrangements and singular spaces, with applications to algebraic and geometric
topology, algebraic geometry, group theory, and combinatorics. The topics to be
discussed will include, but will not be limited to, the following areas, all of
which have seen important new developments in the past several years: Topology
and geometry of hyperplane arrangements, Milnor fibrations, Cohomology jump
loci, Arrangements of smooth submanifolds, Geometry and topology of non-isolated
singularities, Perverse sheaves, and mixed Hodge modules. These topics intersect
a broad range of research endeavors in fields ranging from pure mathematics to
more applied areas, and thus conference participants will reflect a broad cross-
section of mathematical disciplines. An important objective of the conference is
to promote dissemination of information and cross-fertilization between
hyperplane arrangements, singularity theory, and related fields. By sharing
their respective techniques and perspectives, participants are expected to form
new collaborations and make advances at the meeting points of those fields. More
details about the conference are available at:
https://sites.google.com/umich.edu/hyper-jarcs/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.