* 1933383
* SBE-UKRI: Collaborative Research: Centering Women of Color in STEM: Data-Driven Opportunities for Inclusion
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Angela Johnson, St Mary's College of Maryland
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 120,973.00

The economic prosperity of the United States relies on progress in science, the
advancement of national health initiatives, and overall national prosperity in
an increasingly technical economy. These advancements rely on a talented
workforce with the ability to nimbly address new challenges and develop
innovative technologies. Colleges and universities can best prepare this future
workforce by ensuring that educational environments are effective for a diverse
range of students. Women received only 20% of bachelor's degrees in physics and
computer science between 2004-2014; Black women and Latinas earned only 2% of
the physics degrees and 6% of computer science degrees. Math has similar rates:
although 44% of bachelor's degrees were earned by women, only 6% were awarded to
Black women and Latinas. The numbers are similar in the United Kingdom. This
project is jointly funded with the UK's Economic and Social Research Council
(ESRC) under the SBE-UKRI Lead Agency collaborative research
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support institutions
concerned with addressing this underrepresentation by creating a portal through
which US and UK STEM departments can measure their success at graduating women
(especially women of color) to that of comparable institutions and to their own
prior performance. The portal will make use of sophisticated visualization tools
and will be accessible and user-friendly. Users of this portal will include:
STEM professors who want to contribute to progress in science by recruiting and
supporting the most talented young scientific professionals of all backgrounds,
and are in need of baseline information about their own institution as well as a
way to measure their improvement over time; researchers in need of information
to better understand the dynamics of underrepresentation and identify powerful
practices for broadening participation; and students seeking out more effective
places to study. The project will allow for identification of exemplary
predominantly white, coeducational institutions, and to create opportunities for
peer institutions to document their own progress towards inclusion. Since most
women of color attend predominantly white institutions, this work has the
potential to improve the postsecondary educational environment where the
majority of these women work and learn. Improving the diversity of the
scientific workforce has immediate benefits from science and also the prosperity
of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.