* 1933217
* Earthquake Resilience of the Western Power Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Michael Olsen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 441,792.00

A large earthquake, such as a Cascadia Subduction Zone (CSZ) earthquake, with
potential to trigger a devastating tsunami could destroy infrastructure and
electrical power systems in communities along the west coast of the United
States. Research is lacking on electrical grid performance in the context of an
earthquake disaster. Estimating the performance of the entire western grid under
the widespread damage of a Cascadia Subduction Zone (CSZ) earthquake and the
hazards that follow (e.g., tsunami,landslides) is extremely challenging. No
single method or tool is adequate to tackle this problem. An interdisciplinary
approach combining power system operations and analysis, geotechnics, earthquake
engineering, mapping, and geospatial analytics, along with human expertise, is
required to understand assumptions and complications of the power flow analysis
of such a large electrical system. This project will estimate the total damage
and recovery time of a Cascadia Subduction Zone earthquake, and inform the best
avenues for mitigation for the overall short and long term economic benefit of
the region. As the total direct and indirect costs of a large earthquake for the
west coast soar into the billions of dollars, any estimates of impact and
avenues for mitigation for the electrical lifeline will have a significant
benefit for millions of residents and businesses. Outcomes of this research will
be disseminated through graduate classroom, online professional and continuing
education instruction. Project results and updates will also be discussed with
industry leaders via presentations to the Cascadia Lifelines Program (CLiP)
board, the 2022 IEEE Power and Energy Society general meeting, and the Oregon
STEM Hub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the proposed
research are to understand how CSZ earthquakes will impact the extent,
distribution, and duration of the western electrical grid failure as a function
of earthquake intensity and possible aftershocks; develop a framework for the
identification of critical grid locations and components that will aid decision
makers and planners, and also be broadly applicable to any seismic zone in the
US; estimate expected initial load loss and load recovery time due to a major
CSZ event; explore impacts of Remedial Action Schemes (RAS) on grid performance
and recovery. The proposed multidisciplinary research activities to meet these
objectives are: (1) creating rules and automation for an augmented large-scale
electrical power flow model of the western electrical grid; (2) developing
fragility functions and restoration rates for electrical components in the
augmented model; and (3) improving understanding of grid performance and
critical points for improved resilience via Monte Carlo analyses of hazard
levels and grid scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.