* 1933861
* Fundamental Understanding of Lignin Transformation into Graphene via Direct Laser Writing for Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Caixia Wan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 403,036.00

Direct laser writing (DLW) is an unconventional technique for producing porous
graphene from various&lt;br/&gt;carbon precursors using a laser as an energy
source. Biomass with higher lignin content appears to be a suitable feedstock
for graphene formation by DLW, but the underlying mechanisms of lignin
production from biomass for laser-induced graphene (LIG) production are not well
understood. Furthermore, the mechanisms involved in lignin conversion into
graphene under laser-induced reaction conditions also remain unclear. The
proposed research aims to develop fundamental understanding of lignin
transformation into graphene via DLW and develop a new process for upgrading
waste lignin produced by paper mills and biorefineries into porous graphene for
energy storage applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
investigate how lignin chemistry and structure affect LIG properties in terms of
porosity, composition and degree of graphitization. Photothermal and
photochemical effects of lignin-laser interactions will be studied to identify
key laser parameters (e.g., power, scanning speed, image density) governing LIG
properties. Transient chemical and physical processes of lignin-to-LIG will be
studied at the atomic level by reactive force field molecular dynamics (ReaxFF
MD) simulations. The lignin-derived LIG will be explored as active electrode
material for supercapacitors. The project will train graduate and undergraduate
students in research, with a focus on recruiting members of underrepresented and
minority groups to join the research team. A new upper level
undergraduate/graduate course will be developed based on the knowledge generated
from the proposed research. There is also a plan for developing teaching modules
for K-12 students to stimulate their interest into pursuing STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.