* 1933425
* Society for Developmental Biology Annual Meetings 2019-2021
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ida Chow, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 90,000.00

The quintessential question, "How does a single, fertilized egg cell produce all
the different cell types, tissues and organs of the adult organism?", and the
genetic, molecular and cellular mechanisms that conduct these complex processes
are study objectives of the field of developmental biology. The Society for
Developmental Biology (previously the Society for the Study of Development and
Growth) annual meetings have provided the forum for reporting of new findings,
as well as exchange of ideas and cross-fertilization of new methods among
developmental biologists around the World since 1939 (except for two years
during WWII). Cutting edge technologies have moved the field into the genomic
era and allowed the investigators to analyze and monitor the processes leading a
single fertilized egg to a complete individual, from plant to invertebrates to
vertebrates including human; to understand how cells and tissues may change from
normal to disease; and why some tissues are able to regenerate while others
cannot. These new technologies have also raised awareness for ethical practices
and the SDB annual meetings have also provided the venue for rational discourse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three annual meetings of this proposal aim to continue
to be the primary meeting venue for scientists in this and related fields world-
wide, with plenary and concurrent sessions with talks by seasoned and new
investigators, dedicated poster sessions and workshops/roundtables on topics of
special and current interest. In keeping with the educational mission of the
Society, we will offer professional development workshops for trainees and pre-
tenure faculty (Boot Camp for New Faculty), education symposia, postdoctoral
symposia and networking opportunities for all. One feature that makes this
meeting different from other scientific societies' meetings is the Hilde Mangold
Postdoctoral Symposium, where two postdoctoral fellows review all eligible
abstracts from their peers, select the top eight for short talks and co-chair
the symposium. They practice peer review and session chairmanship under the
mentoring of the SDB president, a critical career training for these junior
scientists. We also will focus to provide a welcoming, inclusive and respectful
atmosphere for the participants, to encourage frank exchange of ideas and
fomenting of future collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.