* 1933738
* A Genetic Blueprint for Differences Between Males and Females in Early Mammalian Development
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Rob Kulathinal, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,080,000.00

Although male and female mammals have different reproductive organs, other
organs, such as the heart and lungs, seem to be identical. However, when looking
at the genes being expressed in male and female cells in any organ, there are
substantial differences. Some of these are due to the fact that female cells
have two X chromosomes and males have one X and one Y chromosome. In addition,
the hormones produced by the gonads can influence the genes expressed. How these
molecular differences are established and how they affect functionality is not
known. The objective of this project is to investigate the molecular differences
between male and female mice, starting soon after fertilization and throughout
embryonic development by characterizing gene expression and epigenetic features
at successive stages of embryogenesis. The data generated will allow comparative
studies with other model organisms and lend insight into how evolution has
shaped male and female genetic and hormonal differences. The project includes
outreach and educational programs to increase awareness of how male and female
physiologies differ among students, both at the graduate and undergraduate
level. This project will also provide training opportunities for undergraduate
hands-on research experiences. In addition, it will contribute towards creating
a resource to train students to teach genomic and bioinformatic concepts to high
school students in the area. These students are generally from underrepresented
backgrounds, especially in the STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beginning
soon after fertilization, the X and Y chromosomes program autosomal gene
expression and the epigenomic landscape, establishing male- and female-specific
gene networks. The mechanisms underlying these effects are unknown, as well as
how male and female biases evolve across development and in different lineages.
The objective of this project is to fill this knowledge gap by integrating
experimental and systems level analyses in vitro and in vivo. It examines the
hypothesis that regulatory factors encoded on the X and Y chromosomes dictate
differential expression and epigenetic profiles of autosomal genes. Hormones
equalize some of these differences, but others persist, affecting cellular
phenotypes even in the adult organism. This hypothesis will be tested by: 1)
determining the transcriptional and epigenetic effects of differentially
expressed regulatory factors in early embryogenesis; and 2) identifing the
biases in gene expression and epigenetic patterns dependent on the X and Y
chromosomes before and after the appearance of gonadal hormones. These
experiments will exploit a mouse model that allows segregation of the genetic
and hormonal components of the male and female phenotypes. Since epigenetic
marks established in early development can be latent and relevant to gene
expression at later stages, this research will also serve as a paradigm for
understanding how events in embryogenesis influence dimorphisms after birth and
beyond. Moreover, these studies will lay the groundwork for mechanistic studies
on the effects of transcription and epigenetic factor dosage on the
transcriptome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.