* 1933628
* Collaborative: Summit on Big Data and Cyberinfrastructure in Material Research
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Tillmann Kubis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 106,913.00

Materials science research is focused on development and deployment of new or
enhanced materials to create value in virtually every aspect of modern life.
Recent advances in data collection and application provide the promise of more
efficient and novel materials discovery to accelerate creation and use of novel
materials to serve society. To realize the opportunities of such data, however,
we require more open and integrated ways to understand and share information
across the materials domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a community-
based effort that takes a multifaceted approach to strengthening the Materials
Data Infrastructure (MDI) core by facilitating direct action across the breadth
of materials domain stakeholders. It fits NSF's priority to Harness the Data
Revolution (HDR) as one of 10 Big Ideas to drive important aspects of the
research agenda. HDR goals dovetail with the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI)
launched in 2011 to create a framework for government agencies to support
research programs that build materials research data infrastructure. Nearly
eight years into the MGI and as the community reaches to Harness the Data
Revolution, we have an acute need to evaluate progress and develop specific
guidance to help move the materials domain toward realization of its data-
centric vision. Our effort is focused on how to bring centers of data creation
into a unified vision to truly share data in FAIR (findable, accessible,
interoperable, and reusable), functional ways to advance materials research. The
project includes five, coordinated activities:&lt;br/&gt;1. Survey of current
U.S. academic materials research data infrastructure and management
practices.&lt;br/&gt;2. Education and promotion of FAIR data
principles.&lt;br/&gt;3. Convening a summit on Big Data and cyberinfrastructure
in materials research.&lt;br/&gt;4. Publication of a report of summit findings
and outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;5. Creation of a Materials Research Data Coordinating
Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.