* 1933380
* Career Workshops for Teaching Track Faculty
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Andrew Bernat, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,706.00

The Computing Research Association (CRA) proposes a short series of workshops on
professional development (PD) and departmental policies for Computer Science
(CS) teaching faculty. CS departments nationwide are experiencing significant
increases in undergraduate majors and undergraduate course enrollments,
resulting in an increased reliance on teaching faculty positions. For many PhD
producing departments, positions such as these with academic rank and an
expectation of scholarship are new, and the departments are still defining their
role and career path opportunities. At the same time, new PhDs, current teaching
faculty, and individuals considering a career change seek information about such
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The series of workshops will include a 1-day PD
Workshop for current teaching faculty and 2 half-day Academic Landscape
Workshops for graduating PhD students, post-docs and industry professionals
considering an academic position. The PD Workshop will be held in conjunction
with the SIGCSE 2020 Conference. The workshop will fill a crucial need as
departments have limited experience on how to mentor, evaluate, and promote
teaching faculty. The workshop will highlight ways to be successful in advancing
one's career, build understanding of expectations and opportunities, and provide
ways to connect teaching faculty with each other. The Academic Landscape
Workshops are designed for those considering teaching faculty positions and will
be held in conjunction with conferences attended by a diverse range of
participants. The workshops will introduce participants to the different
academic teaching faculty careers, increase awareness of the landscape of
academic career options in PhD granting departments, and highlight exemplars of
successful career paths. They will also discuss such topics as how to best
prepare, how to interview, and how to negotiate offers for teaching faculty
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.