* 1933353
* 2019 NSF Workshop on Connecting Large Facilities and Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Ewa Deelman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 06/30/2020
* USD 96,402.00

Cyberinfrastructure (CI) is a fabric that pervades and enables modern science
and has been long-supported at NSF. CI comprises advanced computing, data,
software, and networking infrastructure, as well as the necessary specialized
human capital. NSF-supported Large Facilities are major scientific research
platforms and represent some of the NSF's most substantial investments.
Facilities rely heavily on existing CI and new CI capabilities and solutions to
support their scientific communities. However, CI used by facilities is
currently predominantly built independently by each facility. In 2015, NSF began
to support a series of workshops focused on CI for Large Facilities to bring
together the facility and CI communities to share common experiences and
challenges, discuss potential collaborations and opportunities for leveraging CI
within the community. The 2019 Workshop on NSF Large Facilities and CI aims to
continue and advance the discussion, exchange, and community building, through a
forum for sharing of ideas and experiences and, importantly, prepare for future
CI research, development, and deployment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals
of the workshop include 1) identifying common cyberinfrastructure challenges
among facilities, 2) understanding the facility data lifecycle, including the
commonalities and differences between data lifecycle stages, 3) exploring
opportunities for joint training and education among facilities and large CI
projects, 4) sharing experiences in CI project management, and 5) discussing
approaches to building a community of CI professionals. An important focus of
the workshop will be the CI needed to support the entire facility science
lifecycle, which spans data capture and processing, data storage and archiving,
and data access, analysis, visualization, and dissemination. The exploration of
potential collaborations on common CI challenges is another important aim. Other
workshop topics may include computation, network management, and education and
workforce development. A workshop report will be posted online to disseminate
the discussions and findings to the broader CI community. Participation will be
encouraged from a diverse set of CI researchers and professionals at various
stages in their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.