* 1933130
* Collaborative Research: Improving and calibrating a Tunable Infrared Laser Direct Absorption Spectroscopy (TILDAS) system for clumped isotope analysis of CO2
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Katharine Huntington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2022
* USD 50,205.00

The study of “clumped-isotopes” concerns the tendency of heavy isotopes to
“clump” into bonds with each other rather than with light isotopes in natural
materials, a tendency that is temperature dependent. The co-occurrence of two
rare and more massive isotopes of carbon and oxygen clumped in CO2 holds
information on the temperature of the most recent chemical reactions involving
these molecules. Clumped-isotope geochemistry has been applied to a wide range
of subjects – from constraining atmospheric CO2 budgets to the temperature
histories of meteorites. Measurements of clumping in CO2 have enabled new
advances in reconstructing hydrothermal systems, climate history,
paleoelevation, and the cooling history of the upper crust. The primary reason
that this methodology is not more widely practiced is the difficulty of the
measurement. This award will deliver a new laser-based instrument for
measurement of clumped isotopes in carbonates that is much faster, cheaper, and
requires less sample material than existing mass spectrometer systems. This new
instrument will completely alter the landscape for clumped isotope research,
making it a commonplace analysis. Such a system would be adopted quickly by
laboratories around the world for application to geologic, oceanographic,
biologic, and atmospheric samples, leading to new research possibilities in many
scientific disciplines. This project also expands training and educational
opportunities in this unusual sub-discipline of geochemistry. This project will
support a postdoctoral researcher, strengthen international collaborations, and
disseminate results through a conference session on laser methods. The project
will also integrate research and education, broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups, and broadly disseminate results by supporting a STEM
Futures Fellowship research experience for undergraduates who identify with
historically underrepresented groups in geoscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds on our previous funded work to develop a working laser-based
(Tunable Infrared Laser Direct Absorption Spectroscopy - TILDAS) instrument for
the rapid and precise measurement of clumped isotopologues of CO2 (e.g.,
13C18O16O). The basic instrument has been constructed, but additional
improvements in stability and development of practical sample processing are
needed to produce an instrument that can be used widely in the scientific
community. This laser-based measurement has major advantages over the currently
used mass spectrometry approach in that it is much faster, taking only 20
minutes of analysis to achieve the required precision. Small sample size
(comparable to the smallest mass spectrometer systems, and with the potential
for further reductions) and a major increase in through-put will allow
geochemists to extract previously unobtainable detailed temperature information
from finely layered archives such as shell, fish otoliths, speleothems, soil
carbonates, tufas and travertines. Fine sampling will also allow researchers to
more effectively dissect diagenetic histories in carbonates, address questions
related to solid-state reordering, study zoned fracture-filling cements
precipitated in the sub-surface, and study kinetic and vital
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.