* 1933194
* Illustrating the Impact of the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Michelle Schwalbe, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The long-term impact of research in the mathematical sciences is often difficult
to track, measure, and communicate. As a result, researchers or policymakers
seeking to understand and assess the value of basic research may not fully
appreciate the impact. In addition, stories highlighting how a mathematical
discovery eventually leads to scientific discovery or a change in policy are
infrequently identified and communicated for a general audience. Identifying and
communicating these stories will increase appreciation for the value of
mathematical sciences within research communities, encourage policymakers to
support long-term investments in the mathematical sciences, and help
mathematical sciences researchers better understand how their work connects to
other domains, often in unexpected ways. Materials such as these will be a
resource for research communities in explaining the roles and contributions of
the mathematical sciences in a variety of sectors including the U.S. economy,
national security, health and medicine, and other science, engineering, and
technology domains. The stories will also improve collaboration among, and
engagement of, stakeholders, policymakers, and researchers and help catalyze the
mathematical science communities to advocate for and communicate the impact of
their work on topics of national importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine's Board on Mathematical
Sciences and Analytics (BMSA) will convene an ad hoc committee with expertise in
the mathematical sciences and science communication to conduct a study that will
identify and illustrate the broad impact of the mathematical sciences in
society. To complete the study, BMSA will facilitate the formation and
operations of the ad hoc committee and will be responsible for printing and
distribution of materials. To identify compelling narratives and graphics, the
study committee will solicit suggestions from various stakeholders, including
sponsors of research in the mathematical sciences, representatives from research
institutes and national laboratories, researchers, and policymakers familiar
with the mathematical sciences. The study will generate narratives and graphics
for general audiences that demonstrate the fundamental role of the mathematical
sciences in the U.S. economy, national security, health and medicine, and other
science, engineering, and technology domains. These narratives and graphics will
be summarized in a brochure designed for policymakers and adapted as a Web
interactive infographic. In addition, the study will produce a short consensus
report and a public webinar series for further explanation and exploration of
the topics that are discussed. These materials can be used to convey the
significance of mathematical discoveries to students, educators, policymakers,
scientists, engineers, and other stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.