* 1933521
* CAREER: Evolutionary Genomics of Enzymes for Complex Carbohydrate Metabolism
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Yanbin Yin, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 656,429.00

This project intends to study the core enzymes that drive the production and
breakdown of carbohydrates. These enzymes, called the carbohydrate active
enzymes (CAZymes), are found in all living organisms and particularly in plants
and plant-associated microbes. The complex carbohydrates found in plant cell
walls are the most abundant, and renewable, organic material on Earth. If we had
efficient systems to convert them to biomaterials and biofuels they would be
attractive targets for bio-manufacturing projects. Important effects in the
natural world are (i) the CAZymes produced by plant microbial pathogens cause
plant cell wall breakdown leading to devastating crop loss ($5 billion in the
United States and Canada each year) and (ii) bacteria in animal guts produce
hundreds of CAZymes that digest the carbohydrates in the diet, some of which may
have positive, and others toxic, consequences to the host. The research approach
combines genomics and bioinformatics: the genome of a green algae will be
sequenced and then bioinformatics tools will be used to carry out data analysis.
This green algae is the common ancestor of all land plants, its genome compared
to those of plants will show how evolution has modified core carbohydrate
chemistry to meet changing environmental challenges. Bioengineering of these
enzymes may well contribute to the development of a more sustainable and secure
bioeconomy (e.g., bioenergy and agricultural industries) in the US, as part of
the global Genomics market, whose value is expected to reach $20 billion by
2020. Students trained in the course of this project will be poised to become
the next generation of scientists, able to exploit their understanding of
comparative genome sequence analysis to create new understanding and novel
applications. The educational and outreach objectives of this project are to
engage students as active participants in the research activities, including
data analysis, and to to train undergraduate students and K-12 Science teachers
to understand the basics of genome sequencing and comparison methods, including
hands-on skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first Aim, new
bioinformatics programs will be developed to allow in-depth CAZyme annotation
with predicted biochemical activities. In the second Aim, the genomic context of
CAZymes will be studied in microbial genomes and metagenomes of various
ecological environments. Overall four computational tools will be developed,
integrated, and delivered as a CAZyme bioinformatics web portal named dbCAN2.
These free online tools will facilitate CAZyme research in various research
fields such as genomics, carbohydrate, bioenergy, plant disease, food security,
human gut microbiome, evolution and ecology. In the third Aim, this project will
sequence and mine the genomes and transcriptomes of algae and early plants for
CAZymes. This includes sequencing the genome and transcriptome of a green alga
Zygnema circumcarinatum, the immediate ancestor of all land plants that is
extremely critical for understanding the early evolution of carbohydrate-rich
cell walls. The specific education activities include: (i) working with the
Office of Student Engagement and Experiential Learning (OSEEL) of Northern
Illinois University to bring undergraduate students, particularly under-
represented minority students, into CAZyme bioinformatics research; (ii)
collaborating with the Center for Secondary Science Teacher Education of NIU to
integrate DNA sequencing and data analysis topics into the curriculum of the
Teacher Licensure Program as well as the professional development programs for
K-12 Science teachers; and (iii) incorporating Zygnema genome annotation as new
lab components into BIOS308 (Genetics) and BIOS441 (Practical Bioinformatics).
Research products of this project will be disseminated at:
http://cys.bios.niu.edu/dbCAN2/.