* 1933078
* Learning Internal Visualization Skills for Complex Engineering Concepts in Active Learning Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Martina Rau, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE:EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving engineering students' ability to understand
graphs and other visual representations. Engineering instructors often use
visual representations, such as Cartesian and polar coordinate graphs, to help
students learn. However, these visualizations can be confusing to students
unless they know how the visualizations show information. This project will use
an intelligent tutoring system to help students learn how particular visual
features show specific foundational engineering concepts. It will also target
student fluency in understanding visual representations, akin to fluency in a
language. The intelligent tutorial system will also train students to imagine
the visuals when they are no longer present. It is expected that these
"internal" visualization skills will help students learn more easily from text
and equations. Experiments will investigate which supports lead to most
improvement in students' internal visualization skills and content learning. The
experiments will be carried out in situations in which students learn
individually and collaboratively, allowing the project team to establish which
aspects of visual representations are best learned alone and which are best
learned in a team. Such understanding is important for understanding the limits
and maximizing the effectiveness of active learning
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internal visualization skills enhance learning
when the visual representations are subsequently replaced by abstract equations.
Two critical knowledge gaps will be addressed in the project: i) how best to
support representational competencies in a way that enhances internal
visualization skills; ii) how to effectively support representational
competencies for both individual and collaborative activities, the latter being
increasingly important in active learning. The project will provide new insights
into how instruction can help students benefit from visual representation.
Although the project focuses on the learning of foundational engineering
concepts, it may yield results that inform the development of educational
technology resources for other disciplines. The project will lead to an
innovative educational technology resource that provides support for individual
and collaborative learning with visuals, which may enhance students' success in
STEM. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the IUSE program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.