* 1933318
* A wearable monolithic wireless multi-sensor system based on reflected impedance
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Ellis Meng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2023
* USD 361,109.00

Wireless sensing of many biomedical parameters of interest at once can provide
crucial information about disease or overall health state. However, in current
practice, biomedical sensing is most often limited to tracking only a single
parameter which is inadequate to monitor the multiple factors and their
interplay that influence health or disease state. Although many sensor types are
currently available, their miniaturization and integration are greatly limited
by the need for many additional discrete components necessary for functions such
as data readout, powering, and wireless operation. Consequently, resulting
multi-sensor system are complex assemblies with significant bulk that prevent
their practical implementation in a wearable format. Compact, wearable multi-
sensor systems that operate wirelessly have many potential applications in
personalized and preventative medicine and monitoring health. In the proposed
project, the reflected impedance wireless sensing technology will be leveraged
to develop wearable systems that chronically monitor analytes in sweat and
interstitial fluid. Potential applications include the artificial pancreas to
achieve tight glucose regulation in diabetics comparable to that of healthy
individuals, wound healing monitoring to prevent sepsis and infection, real-time
quantification of hydration and exertion in high performance athletes, and heart
failure monitoring in patients with cardiovascular diseases. This project will
provide training opportunities via research experiences for female and
underrepresented minority student researchers. To provider further opportunities
for diverse audiences to engage with the research outcomes, educational products
such as laboratory demonstrations and exercises will be developed that are
suitable for both undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
leverage the recent discovery of wireless operation using the reflected
impedance principle so that multiple unpowered microsensors can wirelessly
communicate data capturing changes in electrochemical impedance. For this
effort, we will utilize a core wearable platform consisting of a flexible
microcoil, integrated thin film bridge capacitor, and sensing electrodes. An
external reader wirelessly linked to the wearable platform completes the system.
To advance ultra-compact form factor wireless multi-sensor systems, the major
tasks include: (1) advancing the theory of wireless reflected impedance sensing,
(2) determining factors that enable maximization of performance, (3) developing
general design rules for reflected impedance systems that support multiple
sensors, and (4) demonstrating under simulated conditions the wireless sensing
of multiple analytes by reflected impedance. For the purpose of demonstration,
tailored coatings will be applied to the sensing electrode as needed to achieve
selectivity to well characterized markers: glucose, cortisol, and ions. The
underlying principle of reflected impedance sensing is generalizable for
application to other areas of biomedical sensing, including chronically
implanted sensors. Adapting different functional coatings enable impedance-based
detection of other analytes relevant to other disease
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.