* 1933723
* Rational Design of Atomically Precise Catalysts for Parahydrogen Enhanced Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Clifford Bowers, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 652,229.00

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a powerful chemical and biological
analytical method that provides information about the arrangement of atoms in
molecules by probing responses of atomic nuclei to strong magnetic fields.
Improving the sensitivity of NMR will enable new imaging modalities in
biomedicine for drug-discovery, protein interactions, magnetic resonance
angiography, identification/monitoring of metabolic dysfunction for tumor
detection, and brain perfusion. NMR signals used in these and other applications
can be preferentially detected when a molecule contains two hydrogen atoms from
the same hydrogen source molecule. However, when hydrogen addition is performed
on metal surfaces the reaction is prone to transfer of hydrogen atoms from
different hydrogen molecules, and therefore no NMR signal enhancement results.
The investigators propose to synthesize catalysts that drive reactions which
selectively add two hydrogen atoms from the same hydrogen source molecule by
systematically varying the catalyst particle size and reaction site composition.
Molecules synthesized using these new catalysts, with improved magnetic
resonance signals, can be used as biomarkers in various diagnostic techniques.
This advance will represent a transformative development in the field of
biomedical imaging and new understanding of catalyst structure-activity
relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is based upon the
hypothesis that pair-wise selectivity in alkene and alkyne hydrogenation can be
increased by restricting hydrogen ad-atom diffusion on the metal surface.
Selectively blocking surface sites is predicted to reduce para-ortho back-
conversion that results from the hydrogenation reaction's dissociation-
recombination process. The hypotheses will be tested through rational design and
atomically precise synthesis of catalysts using atomic layer deposition (ALD).
Well-defined catalysts will be synthesized through careful deposition of active
metal onto nanoparticle oxide shapes with specific surface facets. Through this
approach, together with careful catalyst characterizations, the effects of
particle size on the activity and pairwise selectivity in the hydrogenation of
propene and propyne, as model systems, will be determined using particles
ranging from atomically dispersed species to metal nanoparticles. State-of-the-
art catalyst synthesis (area-selective ALD) will also allow blocking of specific
metal sites, i.e. terrace sites or coordinatively unsaturated corner and edge
sites. The systematic approach in the proposed research can reveal the relative
importance of different active metal sites and facilitate structure-activity
relationships. The use of nanoparticle oxide shapes together with appropriate
catalyst characterization methods will lead to a new understanding of electronic
metal-support interactions and how they affect the probe
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.