* 1933976
* Holistic Analysis and Control of High-Dimensional Dynamical Systems via Operator-Theoretic and Data-Driven Approaches
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jr-Shin Li, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 09/30/2023
* USD 488,811.00

The rapid increase in availability of affordable ubiquitous computing power and
measurement data in the age of Big Data and Internet of Things is presenting
unprecedented opportunities for novel control engineering and automation
solutions for a wide range of dynamic systems in nature and engineering. This
project will conduct fundamental research that will contribute new knowledge on
how to best utilize these recent advances in data acquisition and computing
technologies to significantly enhance the performance, as well as broaden the
scope of, control engineering design methodologies and principles. New
formulations and frameworks pioneered in this project will allow for a more
holistic understanding and treatment of increasingly complicated and high-
dimensional dynamical systems that escape the scope of state-of-the-art
approaches. This will also provide a solid and rigorous basis for more
abstractly defined and widely encompassing high-level tasks, such as "modelling
or controlling the dynamics in the brain", to be tackled in a systematic manner.
The investigation in this project draws from and promises new contributions to a
variety of different disciplines, such as, systems and control, data science and
engineering, cell biology, brain science, and healthcare, and will in turn
enhance the infrastructure for research and education across these disciplines.
Concerted effort will be made to attract underrepresented groups in this multi-
disciplinary research program and to engage the general public and pre-college
K-12 students in scientific research through the Institute of School
Partnerships at Washington University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
initiate a fundamental, theory-driven investigation aimed at enabling holistic
analysis and control methodologies for high-dimensional nonlinear systems via
merging advanced operator-theoretic and density-based approaches with
differential geometric and algebraic geometric techniques. Specifically, the
research team will investigate and leverage Koopman operators to establish a
novel data-integrated framework for transforming nonlinear control systems
defined on a on a finite-dimensional manifold to linear systems defined on a
higher dimensional, possibly infinite-dimensional, vector space. The study of
the dual problem using density-based system descriptions and moment-based
representations will enable a data-driven framework that facilitates a more
holistic control design methodology. The feasibility of the theoretical and
computational advances in this project will be highlighted in diverse cutting-
edge areas in science and engineering, such as in the study of brain dynamics in
neuroscience and cancer treatment in cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.