* 1933331
* 2019 Waterman Award
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Mark Braverman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) has named Dr Mark Braverman as a 2019
recipient of its Alan T. Waterman Award. This award is NSF's highest honor that
annually recognizes an outstanding researcher age 40 years or younger and funds
his or her research in any field of science or engineering. This year's awardee
will receive a $1 million grant over a five-year period for further advanced
study in his field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr Braverman is a computer science
professor at Princeton University, and is internationally recognized for
numerous contributions for his interdisciplinary research at the boundary of
computer science and mathematics. His work has yielded new insights into a wide
range of areas including: information complexity, pseudorandomness, algorithmic
game theory and economics, continuous computation and dynamical systems, machine
learning, and applications of computer science in healthcare and medicine. His
work has reinvigorated two of the hottest current research areas in theoretical
computer science: information complexity and mechanism design. Dr. Braverman has
used information complexity to study the famous direct sum problem for
communication complexity, and has settled a longstanding open question by
proving a direct sum theorem for randomized communication complexity. Dr.
Braverman has also made breakthrough solutions to longstanding problems open for
decades, including proving the Linial-Nisan conjecture on pseudorandomness and
disproving Krivine's conjecture about the value of the bound in the Grothendieck
inequality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Braverman is the recipient of several
awards, including Best Full Paper Award in Economics and Computation (2018) for
the paper "Selling to a no-regret buyer," the European Mathematical Society
Prize (2016), the Presburger Award from the European Association for Theoretical
Computer Science (2016), a SIAM Outstanding Paper Prize for "How to compress
interactive communication" (2016), the Stephen Smale Prize from the Society for
the Foundations of Computational Mathematics (2014), a Packard Fellowship in
Science and Engineering (2014), a Turing Fellowship Award of the John Templeton
Foundation (2012), an NSF CAREER Award (2012) and a Sloan Research Fellowship
(2011).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.