* 1933054
* Understanding and Controlling Wax-Water Interactions in Pores of Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Nicholas Brunelli, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Fischer-Tropsch synthesis (FTS) is a chemical reaction that converts carbon
monoxide and hydrogen into water, carbon dioxide, and hydrocarbons. This
reaction is a critical and commercially relevant process for upgrading
feedstocks such as natural gas (including shale gas resources), coal, and even
biomass into useful chemicals and fuels. FTS is catalyzed by metal catalysts
(e.g., iron, cobalt or ruthenium) and occurs within very small pores of
inexpensive oxide supports (e.g., silica, alumina or titanium dioxide). This
research project aims to unravel longstanding mysteries concerning the role of
water in FTS catalysis and to leverage those discoveries to create new materials
that can lead to more efficient and selective FTS catalysts. The outcomes of
this research project will lead to improvements in converting natural gas, coal,
and biomass into liquid fuels and chemicals. Furthermore, this project will
leverage programs at the University of Florida and Ohio State University to
support the involvement of K-12 and undergraduate students, with a focus on
under-represented groups, in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The water
formed during FTS has been shown to increase the rates of FTS as well as shift
selectivities towards more desirable long-chain hydrocarbons. However, these
promotional effects are not universal, as some studies have shown that water
either has a minor impact on FTS rates or causes them to decrease. The effects
of water depend on the pore size and hydrophilicity of the oxide support being
used in a manner that suggests that water may condense within the pores of the
support. These pores are filled with hydrophobic liquid hydrocarbons during FTS,
and this hydrophobic environment may assist in capillary condensation of water
by effectively reducing the pore size of the support. The first objective of
this research project is to determine whether water is condensed within the
pores of ruthenium-based FTS catalysts under industrially-relevant conditions by
synthesizing and testing Ru catalysts on SBA-15 silica supports. Organosilane
surface modifiers will be used to alter the pore size and hydrophobicity of the
support. The second objective is to clarify the mechanistic role of water on
carbon-oxygen bond activation and carbon-carbon bond formation pathways relevant
to the rate and selectivity of FTS. DFT calculations will be performed to study
water-assisted reaction pathways with and without extended water solvation
networks. The results of this research project will provide additional evidence
for the role of water during catalysis and determine whether the influence of
water on reaction rates and mechanism requires condensed water phases or simply
water vapor. The discovery that water is condensed within the pores of FTS
catalysts at industrially-relevant conditions would provide a shift in our
understanding of FTS and would have the potential to create new strategies for
improving FTS catalyst reactivity, selectivity, and
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.