* 1933264
* Microbiota Effects on Neonatal Brain Development
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Nancy Forger, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/29/2024
* USD 800,000.00

All animals, including humans, live in close association with a huge collection
of microbes (the “microbiota”) that inhabits every exposed surface (e.g., our
skin and digestive tract). Most of these microbes are bacteria and reside in the
gut. Recent studies have shown that the gut microbiota influences the brain and
behavior of adults, and many of these effects are assumed to be due to altered
neural development. However, few studies have actually studied effects of
microbes on the developing brain. Because the womb is sterile, mammals first
encounter microbes at the moment of birth. The investigators on this project
recently reported differences in the brain within the first hours after birth
between mice that encountered a normal microbiota versus no microbiota at all.
This project will determine whether the effects are due purely to postnatal
exposure to microbes, or whether exposure of the mother during pregnancy also
plays a role. Specific brain regions affected by the first exposure to microbes
will be identified, and the investigators will examine the route by which
microbes signal to the brain, as well as how various changes to the microbiota
affect brain development. Humans routinely alter the microbiota of infants,
either by hygiene practices or antibiotic treatment of the mother. Thus, in
addition to addressing basic scientific questions about the relationship between
our microbes and our developing brains, this work also has important
implications for obstetric practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Striking
differences were recently found in developmental neuronal cell death,
colonization of the brain by microglia, and the expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines between mice born into a conventional environment versus those born
into an environment devoid of microbes (germ-free, GF). Remarkably, these
differences were already present 10-14 hours after birth, but were not seen
prior to parturition. Effects were also brain region-specific, with the
paraventricular and arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus showing large effects.
By cross-fostering mice that are gestated GF to conventionally colonized mothers
within an hour of birth, this project will establish whether the effects are due
purely to postnatal microbe exposure, or whether maternal factors also play a
role. The impact of selective perturbations to the microbiota on the brain and
gut microbiota will be examined by treating dams with non-absorbable antibiotics
and, in a complementary approach, by examining the brains of newborn mice
colonized with a defined, but markedly reduced microbiota. This project will
also use chemical vagotomies of newborns to test the hypothesis that microbes
signal the brain at birth via the vagus nerve. Throughout evolutionary history
all mammals have been born into an environment replete with micro-organisms.
Thus, our brains may be “microbiota-dependent,” in a similar way that developing
sensory systems are “experience-dependent.” This is a fundamental concept that
could change textbooks on neural development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.