* 1933397
* 2020 Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) - Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE) Conference; Rio Grande, Puerto Rico; January 2-6, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Guohao Dai, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

The award will support participant travel costs for the 2020 Biomedical
Engineering Society (BMES)-Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE)
Conference being held at the Wyndham Rio Grande Resort in Puerto Rico, from
January 2-6, 2020. Funds will be used to support travel awards for 12
student/postdoc fellows and 8 junior faculty, selected based on submission of a
research abstract for presentation at the meeting. Networking opportunities for
the awardees with leaders in the field of cellular and molecular bioengineering
will be provided. The meeting will also highlight the research in this field
being conducted at the University of Puerto Rico.

The conference program includes podium sessions with keynote and topical invited
speakers, including both women and members of underrepresented groups. The
primary objective of the meeting is to broaden the boundaries of current
capabilities in cell and molecular bioengineering through pursuit of fundamental
research, development of novel techniques and biological models, and translation
of these discoveries into real-world technology and medical applications. The
conference will introduce and integrate a diverse group of engineers and basic
scientists possessing clinical and/or entrepreneurial experience. Invited
speakers and keynotes will discuss how they bridge the gap between fundamental
research and translation in their specific fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.