* 1933751
* Brain-controlled Functional Electric Stimulation after SCI
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Karen Moxon, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2023
* USD 340,116.00

Recovery of function after severe spinal cord injury (SCI) has not yet been
achieved, producing undue burden on patients, their families and society as a
whole. The long-term goal of this work is to develop interventions for those
subjected to severe neurological injury or disease that restore function. The
goal of this project is to develop novel machine learning approaches that are
able to control functional electrical stimulation (FES) into the spinal cord to
restore function. Electrical stimulation will be combined with physical therapy
to work to optimize recovery. The investigator hypothesizes that combinations of
traditional physical therapy, known to improve functional recovery after severe
SCI, and the proposed FES will significantly improve outcome over either alone.
It is important to understand this interaction because, in the case of FES,
maintaining muscle mass, bone density and overall cardiovascular health through
physical therapy is necessary. This is especially true for the case of those
with paraplegia (loss of use of both legs) who desire to walk using their own
legs. The Intellectual Merit of this work is that there are currently on-going
studies in humans that use brain-derived signals to augment physical therapy
after severe neurological injury or disease. The studies planned are expected to
provide insight into the mechanisms that support improved outcome in order to
provide guidance into how best to use these brain-derived signals. To date,
these signals have been almost exclusively applied to restoration of upper limb
function. The planned work is significant because it will expand these
capabilities to lower limb functions. Restoring lower limb function after SCI is
distinctly different from restoring upper limb function because much of the
lower limb movements are rhythmic locomotion and brain control of lower limbs is
more often associated with adjustments to these rhythmic movements (e.g.
avoiding obstacles) than that of upper limbs. Moreover, this work will engage a
new generation of girls and young women in neuroscience and engineering through
workshops, undergraduate research opportunities and graduate thesis work. This
will be accomplished by performing one-on-one mentorships with members of the
Society for Women Engineers to connect female engineering students with research
projects of interest to them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to develop Brain Machine Interface (BMI) controlled functional electrical
stimulation (BMI-FES) that can account for the impact of physical therapy on the
encoding of motor control in the brain using a rat model of complete mid-
thoracic spinal transection. The driving hypothesis is that combinations of
traditional physical therapy, known to improve functional recovery after severe
spinal cord injury (SCI), and BMI-FES will significantly improve outcome over
either alone. To test this hypothesis, the research plan is organized under
three objectives. The FIRST Objective is to identify the impact of physical
therapy on learning BMI. The BMI task for the SCI animal model is to learn to
control a platform that is being tilted to the right or the left, which involves
postural control and bilaterally engages the cortex. Initial recordings will be
used to parameterize the decoder based on a peristimulus time histogram
(PSTH)-based classifier developed by the PI. BMI Performance (functional
recovery and limb kinetics) will be compared without and with physical therapy
(motorized bike and treadmill locomotion) over a 12 week time frame. The
expected outcome is that BMI with therapy will improve BMI Performance because
therapy will create a new cortical circuit that can encode for movements of the
tilt platform better than the cortical circuit that develops after SCI in the
absence of therapy. The SECOND Objective is to develop a dynamical systems model
of BMI-FES. Using systems identification analysis, a dynamic model of motor
cortex will be developed to identify the state-space within which a linear model
is sufficient. Data recorded from OBJ 1 will be used to develop a first pass of
the model system. In the second pass, neural data will be recorded while a broad
range of stimulations are delivered via the epidural stimulator (EES) that
excite the neural system. The recorded responses across electrodes will be used
to extract information about the structure of the system under stimulation,
which allows complete specification of a linear time-invariant (LTI) system. The
expected outcome is that a single linear model can account for all of the tilts
and relevant EES stimulations tested within a given recording session. Model
parameters are expected to change over time, but as plasticity in response to
therapy and BMI performance in the task stabilize, that a single model will
emerge. The THIRD Objective is to design a closed-loop control system for BMI-
FES that accommodates plasticity from three sources: 1) physical therapy, 2)
learning BMI control and 3) somatosensory feedback from the response of the
rat's sensorimotor system to FES. Experiments will determine if BMI controlled
FES can improve functional recovery of the animal in the tilt task, on the
treadmill and in the open space, and will assess the impact of therapy on this
functional recovery. The expected outcome is that controlled FES will improve
functional recovery more than no stimulation or tonic stimulation and that BMI-
FES will be more effective in animals that receive therapy compared to those
that do not. This is important because it would suggest that the dynamical
system framework is an effective method to generate stimulation patterns and
that plasticity induced by therapy is synergistic with plasticity induced by
learning the BMI control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.