* 1933179
* Student Participation in the 2019 NanoFlorida International Conference: ?Advances in Translational Nanotechnology"
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Robert Frisina, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal requests funding to support the registration and/or travel of
undergraduate and graduate students and trainees across the State of Florida and
the United States, so that they can attend the upcoming 2019 NanoFlorida
International Conference. The College of Pharmacy Graduate Programs at the
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL will host the conference with an aim to
provide new perspectives on challenges and opportunities for improving
nanotechnology applications in various sectors including medicine, pharmacy,
agriculture, energy and environment sectors. The NanoFlorida Conference is a
unique event with a long, successful tradition of student researchers sharing
their discoveries in nanotechnology within the State of Florida. It includes all
12 State Universities including Florida A&amp;M (a minority institution) and
Bethune Cookman University, both historically black universities, and schools in
the Florida State University System that have an enrollment of 60% women. For
the first time, the NanoFlorida Conference, traditionally restricted to Florida,
has been extended to include students from the USA and from around the world and
thus renamed as the NanoFlorida International Conference. The conference will
include symposia addressing advances on nanomaterials and devices for
biosensing, and their applications in energy, medicine, and agricultural
sciences; and provide new opportunities for students to network with researchers
from academic institutions and the broader nanotechnology industry. NSF funding
will reimburse the registration fees and/or travel of up to two hundred
students, enabling more students to participate. This in turn increases the
beneficial impact of these new professional development activities for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will 1) create a forum for
researchers in fields of nano- and nanobio- technologies for scientific exchange
and to help identify emerging challenges at the frontiers of nanoscience and
nanotechnology; 2) promote and foster collaborative research ties and networking
opportunities within the nanoscience communities in Florida, across the US, and
globally; 3) foster and encourage collaborative research efforts between
academicians from different Florida universities and institutes and beyond
nationally and internationally; 4) forge strong industry-academia partnerships
in the field of nanoscience and nanoengineering technology to promote market
driven research and innovation in Florida and beyond; and 5) encourage and
showcase the contributions of undergraduate and graduate, students and
postdoctoral trainees by creating a student-friendly event where they can
present their research among their peers thereby ensuring a new generation of
nano-bio scientists. Thus, the conference will have a dominant student component
with an emphasis on participation, enhancement of leadership and success.
Students will meet researchers from other schools and from industry, and these
professional relationships will provide long-term benefits to students' careers
in STEM fields. NanoFlorida conferences are an educational experience that
reveals to students the latest nanobiotechnology research and its applications.
Learning about nanobiotechnology, developing communication skills, and
networking with researchers from academia and industry are important steps that
prepare students to join the nanotechnological workforce upon their graduation.
Post-conference surveys and the publication of presenter research will serve as
a measure of the success of this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.