* 1933932
* GOALI: Manufacturing USA: Energy Efficient Processing of Thermosetting Polymers and Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Moore, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,999,005.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
research a new method for the manufacture of plastics and fiber reinforced
composite materials, which are critical elements in structures like aircraft,
automobiles and wind turbine blades, where light weight and high strength are
required. Current methods for manufacturing these materials are costly and
energy intensive, due to the high temperatures and long times required for
processing. Drawing inspiration from how living system develop, this
multidisciplinary research project will result in new plastic materials that
require only small initial energy input to rapidly trigger the entire
manufacturing process and dramatically reduce environmental impact. This new,
more efficient method has significant potential to improve U.S. economic
competitiveness in the critical area of composites manufacturing. The energy
efficient concepts under development also provide an ideal platform to motivate
and educate the next generation of students, postdoctoral researchers,
entrepreneurs, industry and the general public on the importance of sustainable
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A new manufacturing method for
thermosetting polymers, coatings and composites will be developed based on an
autocatalytic (self-propagating) polymerization reaction occurring in a system
undergoing reaction and diffusion of its components. The system uses the
exothermic release of energy to provide a positive feedback to the reaction. In
turn, this stimulates further exothermic energy release and a self-propagating
reaction front that rapidly moves through the material; a process called frontal
polymerization. Once triggered, the reaction progresses with zero energy input.
The self-sustained propagation of a reaction wave through the material gives
rise to entirely new ways of rapidly manufacturing high performance polymers and
composites, without the use of conventional autoclaves or ovens. The planned
research will lead to scientific advances in the organic chemistry of self-
propagating reactions, machine learning driven design and synthesis of new
monomers for frontal polymerization, multiscale characterization and modeling of
front instabilities, and control of frontal polymerization for manufacturing.
The research objectives are designed to improve fundamental understanding of
frontal polymerization and to apply this knowledge to the rapid out-of-autoclave
production of thermosetting coatings, fiber-reinforced composites and 3D printed
architecturally complex, reinforced polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.