* 1933981
* Waterbird Society - Workshop to Increase Diversity in STEM
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Jurgen Schwarz, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 38,495.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) supports conferences and workshops that seek to increase the research and
education capacity of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
students and faculty at HBCUs. The University of Maryland Eastern Shore will
support workshops at the annual meeting of the Waterbird Society in an effort to
address the underrepresentation of African Americans in the areas of natural
resource conservation and management. Undergraduate and graduate students from
five institutions will attend this conference on November 8, 2019 to present
their research, engage with speakers, and build a network of support.

During the one-day meeting, the 350 invited students will have the opportunity
to attend panels that are focused on student success and careers, listen to
speakers, present posters, attend poster sessions, and participate in
discussions around demonstration papers. Students will come from the University
of Maryland Eastern Shore, Hampton University, Delaware State University,
Virginia State University, and Howard University. The Waterbird Society realizes
that not all of the students who will attend will be interested in a niche as
small as waterbirds. However, the goal of the workshop is to not only increase
interest in the study of waterbirds, but rather to increase interest in the
academic and career aspects of the natural sciences overall, natural resource
conservation and management in particular.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.