* 1933984
* Improving Introductory Physics for Life-Science Students through a Biomedically Relevant Multimedia Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ralf Widenhorn, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2023
* USD 165,318.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving physics instruction for life science and pre-
health students. These physics courses are generally taught by physics
departments. As a result, the courses often seem less relevant to these students
unless the instructor and curricular materials explicitly connect to themes in
the students' chosen majors. This project is a collaborative effort by Portland
State University and Rockhurst University to develop a full year of modular,
multimedia, biomedically-relevant educational material for use in physics
courses. It addresses the important need to improve pre-health and life science
physics curricula, with the aim of helping pre-health students appreciate the
study of physics as both necessary and relevant to future biomedical careers.
Design of the multimedia curricula will be accomplished through collaboration
with biomedical professionals. The videos and supplementary materials adopt an
active learning model based on real world applications to enhance
interdisciplinary efforts and provide significant potential for increasing the
learning that occurs in undergraduate physics. The significance of this project
lies in addressing the need for future biomedical professionals to be well-
versed in fundamental physics principles. These principles are involved in every
aspect of analyzing functions of the human body, as well as the detection,
diagnosis, and treatment of illnesses. If successful, the project will
contribute to a better prepared generation of healthcare
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to transform Introductory
Physics for Life Sciences education by filling two main needs. First, it will
provide students with a curriculum that stresses the importance of physics as a
basic science that is integral to medicine. Second, it will provide faculty with
a coherent physics curriculum that can be implemented in multiple educational
environments. These materials will be especially valuable to faculty members
unfamiliar with biomedically-related interdisciplinary content. Curriculum
materials developed in this project will include videos of interviews with
biomedical experts, as related to the key ideas covered in an Introductory
Physics for Life Sciences course. It will also include a written manuscript that
will explicitly integrate videos with physics principles, and provide conceptual
and quantitative pre/post class problems as well as formative and summative
assessments. To enhance use of the curriculum materials, the project will study
their transferability to multiple educational environments. It will also examine
the implementation of the curriculum with active learning pedagogies in
introductory physics classrooms at both a large public university (Portland
State University) and a small, liberal arts university (Rockhurst University).
The project is designed to assess student content learning and attitudes toward
learning physics. Formative and summative assessment will be conducted through
logging clickstream data, pre-post content assessment, attitudinal assessment,
and focus group exit interviews. The materials will be available to
undergraduate physics teaching and education research communities without cost,
for use on different digital learning platforms that enable students to complete
assignments online, or in printed form for classroom or lab use. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.