* 1933539
* JAMI Conference on Higher Dimensional Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Christopher Hacon, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 10/31/2022
* USD 40,000.00

The Johns Hopkins University Department of Mathematics, together with the
Japan-U.S. Mathematics Institute, will organize a week long conference: "Recent
progress in higher dimensional algebraic geometry" from March 16-22, 2020 at the
Johns Hopkins University. The conference website is:
https://sites.google.com/view/jami-program-2019-2020/home. It will be organized
by Caucher Birkar (University of Cambridge), Christopher Hacon (the University
of Utah), Chenyang Xu (M.I.T.), and Jingjun Han (Johns Hopkins University,
Internal Organizer). Additional Japanese Principal Organizers are Keiji Oguiso
(University of Tokyo) and Shunsuke Takagi (University of Tokyo). The main focus
of the proposed activity will be on topics related to the Minimal Model Program
(MMP). An algebraic variety is a shape defined by polynomial equations, and the
MMP seeks to classify and understand the structure of algebraic varieties up to
what is called "birational equivalence." Understanding the structure of
algebraic varieties is of fundamental importance in algebraic geometry and is
also of interest in other areas of mathematics (e.g., mathematical physics,
computational geometry, and number theory) and in related disciplines (e.g.,
statistics, coding theory, complexity theory, and communications). Conference
funds will support transportation and lodging costs for U.S. mathematicians that
will participate in the conference, and will principally support graduate
students and early-career mathematicians who do not have other sources of
sponsorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MMP and its applications to the
study of higher dimensional algebraic varieties has matured rapidly in the last
40 years and has produced many exciting results. In the last 15 years, several
breakthroughs, including the finite generation of canonical rings, the existence
of flips, the ACC (ascending chain condition) for log canonical thresholds, and
most recently, the Borisov-Alexeev-Borisov Conjecture (the boundedness of Fano
varieties with mild singularities), were inspired by seminal works of Shokurov.
It is the purpose of the proposed conference to cover the latest developments
concerning the structure of higher dimensional
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.