* 1933836
* GOALI: BGaAs and BGaInAs Detectors Lattice-Matched to Silicon
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Terry Golding, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2022
* USD 390,135.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated circuits based on silicon have
transformed modern life. They are the basis of microelectronics and digital
computers. Silicon has also been used for optoelectronics devices that convert
light into electricity, such as solar cells and photodetectors, or electricity
into light, such as light-emitting diodes and lasers. However, silicon is
sensitive only to visible light and a limited portion of the infrared spectrum.
Also, the speed with which silicon-based devices can detect light is
fundamentally limited. This project will study a new family of boron-containing
materials that are sensitive to a broader range of infrared light as well as
greatly increased speed of detection. One key advantage of these materials is
that their crystal structure is compatible with silicon. This allows for them to
be grown as high-quality crystals directly on silicon and take advantage of the
sophisticated silicon manufacturing infrastructure. This project will
demonstrate several types of photodetectors, as well as determine the
fundamental physical properties necessary to gauge their ultimate potential.
Applications include autonomous vehicles, communication systems, and biomedical
instrumentation. The project will also provide unique mentoring and research
experiences for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students. Outreach
activities will include inspiring K - 12 students through classroom visits, as
well as events like Science Thursdays and the Edison Lecture
Series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monolithic
integration of direct bandgap, lattice-matched, semiconductor alloys with
silicon remains a holy grail of photonics for both lasers and photodetectors.
The resulting devices would enable tremendous advances in functionality for
silicon-based photonic integrated circuits, with applications ranging from
imaging systems and laser radar, to telecommunications, chemical sensing, etc.
Current approaches towards monolithic integration of direct bandgap materials on
silicon suffer from a variety of challenges, and there is no clear path to the
lattice-matched materials needed to address important emerging applications in
the near- and mid-infrared. A solution to this critical challenge is proposed:
one focused on BGaInAs photodetectors on silicon that could span cutoff
wavelengths from 1 to 5 microns. It is underpinned by the commercial
availability of GaP/Si substrates, as well as the team's recent success
demonstrating (1) record high boron contents up to ~22% into GaAs, nearly
sufficient to lattice-match with silicon, (2) prototype pn and pin BGa(In)As
photodetectors and light emitting diodes on GaAs, and (3) successful initial
growths of coherent direct bandgap BGaAs on GaP and GaP/Si. While the focus will
be on realizing direct bandgap lattice-matched photodetectors, it is important
to note this approach will be applicable to emitters as well. This project will
couple the expertise of the University of Texas at Austin with molecular beam
epitaxial growth and device fabrication of epitaxial BGa(In)As photodetectors
with the mid-infrared nBn detector expertise of Amethyst Research Inc. to: (1)
realize high-performance pn- and pin-junction photodetectors on silicon, (2)
illuminate and quantify the accessible bandgaps and band alignments on silicon
and GaAs, and (3) use these properties to design and demonstrate silicon-based
nBn detectors in the 3-5 micron range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.