* 1933812
* Enabling the Access, Publishing, and Preservation of Curated Research Data at Dryad
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* John Chodacki, University of California, Office of the President, Oakland
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 870,922.00

The Dryad Digital Repository (datadryad.org) is a popular general purpose
repository for datasets predominantly, though not exclusively, from the
biosciences. Since 2009, Dryad has published 28,000 research datasets that
represent over 900 academic journals. By curating data from a broad diversity of
scientific studies, quality research data are now available around the world.
Dryad's open licensing of published research data promotes discover-ability and
access of research findings, which enables the reuse and reproducibility of an
ever-increasing collection of diverse and high-quality data to advance research
and education. Datasets in Dryad are indexed for easy discovery, freely
reusable, and cite-able. Dryad has been broadly adopted by the biological
community with more than 3 million downloads. The data packages submitted to
Dryad are diverse in format and scientific content. Two key distinguishing
features of Dryad are: the ease with which researchers can deposit their
datasets through the integrations Dryad has with over 140 journals, and the
curation applied across all submitted datasets in accordance with the FAIR
principles for data repositories (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and
Reusable). However, the reach and impact of Dryad goes far beyond the set of
journals that have direct integrations. Over the past 10 years, Dryad has
allowed hundreds of journals to give their data policies teeth and 96,000
researchers a resource for funder and publisher mandate compliance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dryad is a membership-based 501c3 non-profit and
membership-led organization that provides transparent governance by the
community of stakeholders (including scientific societies, publishers,
institutions, and others) to ensure the continued free availability of the
research data entrusted to it. Dryad is working in partnership with California
Digital Library to build wider institutional support and a more robust longevity
plan. This project will provide limited support for the curation, preservation,
and access of research data at Dryad, with the goal of Dryad becoming a self
sustaining service. With this support, Dryad is on track to reach sustainability
within three years at which the operational costs of running the organization
are fully funded by Data Publishing Charges and membership fees. The Dryad
Digital Repository may be accessed at
https://datadryad.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.