* 1933825
* I-Corps: Aluminum Nitride-based Power Transistors
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Debdeep Jena, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to expand the
limits of high-frequency, high-power signal amplification. This will be
necessary for future wireless communications systems, including sixth generation
(6G) wireless technology. 6G will require higher operation frequencies to enable
much faster data transmission. As frequency increases, signal strength
diminishes over much shorter distances. To offset this issue, signals must also
be transmitted at higher powers to be able to carry the signal the necessary
distance. The demand for this combination of high-power, high-frequency is
expected to continue to grow, and the devices developed here are designed to
achieve such performance. High-power, high-frequency data transmission is also
an issue for self-driving cars. High-frequency signals enable detailed, real
time mapping of a car's surroundings. High-power ensures the signal can travel
through rain and fog, and return to the car before weakening beyond detection.
The devices developed here can enable more detailed mapping at a longer range to
make self-driving cars smarter and safer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This i-Corps
project develops aluminum nitride (AlN) as a new platform for gallium nitride
(GaN) transistors. The material advantages of an aluminum nitride platform over
the traditional GaN platform are two-fold. AlN is much more electrically
resistive than GaN, which prevents undesired leakage currents that hurt device
performance. At the same time, the thermal conductivity of AlN is approximately
50% larger than that of GaN. The result is more efficient heat dissipation,
enabling device operation at higher power. The research behind AlN-based power
transistors is focused on crystal growth and device fabrication. Optimized
crystal growth enables high quality AlN and GaN, improving device performance.
The as-grown crystal is then processed into transistors, which requires state-
of-the-art fabrication tools and refined processes. The AlN transistors have
demonstrated high breakdown voltages when compared to state-of-the-art GaN-based
transistors, a key measure for power performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.