* 1933583
* Engineering Bifurcations in High-Dimensional Dynamical Systems Using Isostable Reduction Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Dan Wilson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 384,579.00

This grant will support research that will promote progress in the physical,
chemical, and biological sciences thereby enhancing national health and
prosperity. Over the past quarter century rapid progress of supercomputing
capabilities has resulted in an explosion in the size and complexity of
computational models. Model reduction is an imperative preliminary step in the
mathematical analysis and subsequent implementation of active control strategies
in these complex and high-dimensional systems. Unfortunately, existing reduction
strategies are ill-equipped to understand the mechanisms governing qualitative
changes in dynamical behavior, particularly when the underlying behavior is
dominated by system nonlinearities. This award supports fundamental research
that will develop mathematical reduction strategies that can be used to
anticipate and engineer desired changes in the behavior of high-dimensional,
nonlinear dynamical systems. These new methods will find use in a wide variety
of applications such as cardiac electrophysiology, neural networks, and fluid
flows with resulting benefits to national health and security. Important
research findings will be incorporated into educational programs that benefit
students from underrepresented backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to study how a newly developed isostable reduction framework can
be used to predict and engineer bifurcations in high-dimensional, nonlinear
dynamical systems. The isostable reduction approach explicitly incorporates
dominant system nonlinearities while retaining analytical tractability; as such
it replicates system behaviors that well-established linear reduction strategies
cannot. As part of this research, novel nonfeedback control frameworks will be
created that can be used to stabilize chaotic and unstable dynamical systems of
arbitrarily high dimension. Additionally, mathematical frameworks will be
created to anticipate bifurcations that lead to the onset of spontaneous
synchronization in strongly coupled oscillator networks. Strategies will also be
developed to infer the necessary terms of isostable reduced equations in
experimental applications which will allow for the implementation of these
reduction strategies in systems for which the underlying model equations are not
explicitly known. The primary applications in this project will be to models of
cardiac and neural electrophysiology in pursuit of better disease treatment
options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.