* 1933328
* Novel photonic devices based on the concept of space-time duality
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Govind Agrawal, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 407,916.00

Nontechnical Description &lt;br/&gt;This project explores the interaction of
light pulses inside optical fibers. Specifically, intense light pulses can
change the optical properties, like the index of refraction, of a glass fiber.
Just as the change in the index of refraction between air and a piece of window
glass causes some of the incident light to be reflected, the index of refraction
change caused by an intense optical pulse can also alter the propagation of
light. This change is transient and propagates at the speed of light in the
fiber. If two light pulses of different frequencies propagate in an optical
fiber, they will travel at different velocities. If one of those pulses is
intense enough to change the material properties of the fiber, the second pulse
will split into two pulses at two new frequencies. A temporal version of total
internal reflection can also occur such that the entire pulse energy never
crosses the temporal boundary across which the index of refraction changes its
numerical value. These phenomena have been predicted but have not yet been
observed. Observing these interactions will enable a new class of photonic
devices where light is controlled by light. The proposed research will further
advance our understanding in the field of ultrafast optics and provide us new
tools for pulse manipulation and shaping. Such devices are likely to find
applications in a variety of technical areas ranging from telecommunications to
biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description
&lt;br/&gt;The concept of space-time duality will allow us to apply the
techniques known from spatial diffraction of optical beams to control short
pulses in the time domain. The proposed research will develop novel photonic
devices through well-thought experiments that will be guided by the theoretical
and numerical expertise the PIs have developed in recent years. The initial
experiments will realize a temporal waveguide using the nonlinear phenomena of
cross-phase modulation inside an optical fiber. The resulting waveguide will be
used to control timing jitter between two pulse trains emitted by independently
running mode-locked lasers. Another objective is to synthesize pulses of
arbitrary shapes using an electro-optic phase modulator. Since our approach is
based mostly on phase changes, it is expected to have lower insertion losses
compared to alternatives and would be suitable for applications where energy
efficiency is a top requirement. We shall also employ the temporal version of
the Talbot effect to convert a continuous-wave signal into a source of optical
pulses whose repetition rate is tunable. In this project, we will work with
graduate and undergraduate students to explore fully the implications of space-
time duality and develop novel photonic devices with functionalities and
applications in the areas of ultrafast science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.