* 1933148
* Workshopping and relationship-building to promote pathways in STEM higher education: UCLA and NTU
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Aradhna Tripati, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,580.00

Higher education transformation leads to opportunities to influence culture at
multiple scales. However, higher education STEM culture and the low levels of
diversity in the geosciences and related STEM fields pose major barriers that
adversely impact scientific innovation, workforce development, and social and
economic justice. The STEM cultures at both UCLA and NTU both are poised to
transition to become more inclusive because of a group of faculty that have
developed relationships through an initial visit. This funding will support the
exchange of students and faculty to provide opportunities to learn about
environmental challenges and scientific questions being addressed in ongoing
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of a new initiative at the Center for
Diverse Leadership in Science, faculty and students are developing relationships
between UCLA and minority-serving institutions to promote pathways in STEM
higher education. One of the major objectives is to increase the recruitment and
retention of indigenous students within the environmental sciences. This fits
into the Center's long-term goal of changing the culture of STEM higher
education to empower a diverse national and global community to address
environmental and technological challenges, while moving towards a more just and
inclusive world. To help achieve the objective, this proposal supports meetings
and relationship-building between students and faculty at Navajo Technical
University (NTU) and UCLA. Outcomes will include strengthened pathways in STEM
higher education for indigenous students, higher rates of recruitment and
retention in the geosciences and related STEM fields, and improved cultural
awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.