* 1933903
* Student Participant Support for Conversational Intelligence Summer School 2019
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Anna Rumshisky, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2019
* USD 14,976.00

From commercial personal assistants and customer service chatbots to intelligent
tutors and voice control interfaces, dialogue systems and conversational agents
are presently in high demand in a variety of industries and are becoming
ubiquitous in our everyday lives. While recent advances in artificial
intelligence have placed some of these practical applications within reach, some
tough challenges need be addressed before such systems are able to support
human-level conversation. The Conversational Intelligence Summer School (CISS)
aims to train young researchers interested in this challenging and exciting
field in state-of-the-art techniques and provide them with hands-on skills to
develop such applications. This one-week intensive program offers participants
the opportunity to build a solid understanding of core conversational AI
concepts and techniques, with the goal to train a core of talented practitioners
to take on unsolved problems in this domain. This proposal requests funding to
subsidize student participation in the 2nd International Summer School for
Conversational Intelligence (CISS 2019), to be held at the University of
Massachusetts Lowell from June 24 to 29, 2019.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will receive hands-on training in
contemporary deep learning techniques for developing chit-chat conversational
agents, providing (a) exposure to current research trends in AI for
conversational agents, which they will be able to use in their own research and
(b) practical skills in demand in the industry which they will be able to carry
on to the workforce. The program includes a combination of lecture instruction,
programming tutorials, invited lectures by top researchers, and supervised
project work. Participating students will benefit from the opportunity for
interaction with their peers at other domestic and international institutions,
as well as instructors and senior organizers. Networking hours following guest
lectures allow the students to have close interactions with prominent
researchers invited to give guest lectures. The program brings together students
and researchers from different countries, exposing participants to a wider range
of educational and research perspectives and creating ties that can help to
foster future international collaborations. The opportunities provided by this
program encourage student participants to continue in their efforts to develop
technical expertise and further their interest in careers at the forefront of AI
research. Project code, teaching materials, and invited lectures will be made
accessible publicly whenever possible in order to increase the impact of this
program outside of the audience of immediate
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.