* 1933056
* DASI Track 2: Low-latitude Ionospheric Sensor Network (LISN) Investigations of Traveling Ionospheric Disturbances and Plasma Irregularities
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Cesar Valladares, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 09/30/2023
* USD 899,997.00

This project supported by the Geospace Facility's Distributed Arrays of Small
Instruments (DASI) is to provide the operations and maintenance of the Low-
Latitude Ionospheric Sensor Network (LISN). This distributed array is spread
across South American and measures dynamics of the ionosphere. This is
synergistic with other Geospace Facility's investments in South America such as
Jicamarca Radio Observatory. It provides important geographic coverage.
Examination of the ionosphere is called out in several of the benchmark
recommendations in the 2015 National Space Weather Action Plan. Monitoring of
the ionosphere as daily weather is monitored on the surface of Earth is
important because radio communications can be significantly impacted by
ionospheric activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project to operate LISN
distributed observatory for the three years will allow detailed observations and
investigations of the origin, dynamics, coupling, and mapping of traveling
ionospheric disturbances (TIDs) and the formation and evolution of plasma
irregularities in the low- and mid-latitude ionospheres to be carried out. LISN
contains Global Positioning System and Global Navigation Satellite System
receivers for determining total electron content and ionosondes for measuring
TIDs. These simultaneous measurements may provide insight into how multi-scale
TIDs at low latitudes seed plasma phenomena, such as equatorial plasma bubbles,
at mid latitudes. The complexity of the plasma dynamics requires multiple
perspectives on the natural system. This award also supports an upgrade to the
servers and data products for public dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.