* 1933229
* Empowering Dementia Caregivers using a Culturally Relevant Cyber-Human System
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Mohd Anwar, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/28/2021
* USD 200,000.00

African Americans are more frequently diagnosed with dementia than other groups
in the United States. Despite the prevalence, there is little research targeting
technology use to enhance the functioning of African Americans living with
dementia and their caregivers. This study utilizes a novel approach to develop a
research model that advances cyber-human systems research on dementia caregiving
in the African American community. The project uses a cultural foundation to
explore the needs and preferences of users to drive the development of
technological systems that can be readily adopted by the African American
community. Moreover, this study will contribute to increasing awareness of
culturally-sensitive research approaches to improve the understanding of the use
of technology in dementia. Ultimately, this project will serve as the catalyst
for future technological advances in culturally-relevant smart and connected
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to develop
a culturally-relevant cyber-human system than can improve the effectiveness of
caregivers of people with dementia -- and subsequently other diverse populations
-- by reducing caregiver burden. This cyber-human system modeling approach
utilizes information from dementia agitation episodes, self-reported caregiver
response (e.g., mood and perceived stress), as well as unique attributes of the
African American community with dementia. These data are used in a cyber-human
system to predict unbiased agitation models so that caregivers and can be primed
with an optimal response that reduces their burden and supports the functioning
of the person with dementia. The results of this study will enhance the use of
cyber-human systems for family caregiving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.