* 1933367
* Collaborative Research: Wettability Control on the Mechanics of Fracture in Granular and Porous Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* John Dolbow, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 352,676.00

The way that fracture networks develop in granular and porous media is a
question of importance to a wide range of applications, ranging from natural gas
exploration to the failure of modern fuel cells. This award will support
fundamental studies of how fluid flow can drive the evolution of fracture
networks in granular systems. The inquiry is supported by recent observations
indicating that "wettability", a measure of attraction between the fluids and
the granular media, may play a vital and previously unexplored role in governing
the fracture response. Insights from this study will help scientists and
engineers identify the optimal process conditions to either increase or decrease
fracture growth, as desired. The development of the new experiments and models
will also provide training for new doctoral students from under-represented
groups, transferring the requisite skills for them to address technologically
important and challenging problems in flow-induced fracture. Finally, outreach
activities to under-represented minority students in the STEM area are planned
as part of this effort through a novel partnership with NC-SLI. In particular, a
joint MIT-Duke workshop on emerging research in civil and environmental
engineering will be set up to facilitate students from these groups pursuing
summer research opportunities in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
focused on the morphodynamics of hydrocapillary fracture in granular and porous
media with an emphasis on the role of wettability. In particular, it concerns
the response of idealized cells that are densely packed with quasi-porous media
and saturated with a viscous defending fluid. Observations indicate a
surprisingly strong dependence of fracture morphology on wetting properties,
even at high injection rates where viscous forces dominate. The main objectives
are to significantly advance the current understanding of hydrocapillary
fracture, and to develop model-based simulation capabilities that are useful and
predictive in this space. This will be effected through the development of an
integrated suite of novel experiments and accompanying computational tools that
allow emerging models of these systems to be fully explored. This joint effort
will allow several open questions to be examined, such as the conditions that
promote stable fracturing. A central question this project seeks to answer
concerns the apparent "fracture toughness" of granular media, and how such
toughness evolves as the media approaches a more conventional poroelastic
solid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.