* 1933058
* Collaborative Research: Hydrologic Dynamics in a Coastal Aquifer During an Extreme Multi-Hazard Coastal Storm
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* James Heiss, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 496,453.00

Coastal population growth has led to coastal water quality impairment from
excess input of nutrients and other contaminants. Fresh groundwater flowing from
land to the coast and discharging through the seabed to the sea can serve as a
significant source of chemicals to coastal surface water, resulting in algal
blooms, fish kills, and loss of biodiversity. Beach aquifers provide a valuable
ecological service of chemically filtering groundwater contaminants prior to
discharge to the ocean. The chemical reactivity of beach aquifers depends on
groundwater flow behavior and mixing between fresh water and seawater. The
objective of this study is to use field measurements and numerical models to
understand the effects of extreme multi-hazard coastal storms (including surge,
heavy precipitation, and coastal erosion) on groundwater flow and mixing
patterns in beach aquifers. Field observations will be conducted at the Army
Corps of Engineers Field Research Facility near Duck, NC. The work will help
estimate future nutrient and contaminant release to coastal waters due to more
frequent and intense storms, coastal erosion, and sea level rise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to integrate
hydrogeological and physical oceanographic methodologies to obtain new
understanding of groundwater dynamics and redox behavior in beach aquifers
during severe coastal storms. The proposed study will combine field observations
and numerical models to 1) characterize the individual and combined effects of
storm surge, extreme precipitation, and coastal morphological change on beach
groundwater dynamics, 2) assess aquifer recovery time for different storm and
morphological scenarios, and 3) evaluate spatiotemporal patterns of saltwater-
freshwater mixing during and after an extreme storm event. This study will take
place as part of the DUring Nearshore Event eXperiment (DUNEX) at the Army Corps
of Engineers Field Research Facility to leverage meteorological, oceanographic,
and geomorphological measurements and logistical support funded by the U.S.
Coastal Research Program (USCRP). The study is applicable to coastal managers
aiming to 1) assess the ecological value of sandy beaches as moderators of
chemical and material fluxes between land and sea, 2) estimate the timing of
chemical release to coastal waters during and after coastal storms, 3) predict
changes to chemical delivery due to more frequent and intense storms, coastal
erosion, and sea level rise, and 4) design post-storm beach nourishment
strategies to promote beach aquifer ecological services. The study will
integrate with educational opportunities coordinated by USCRP during the
experiment, including lectures, hands-on activities for students, coastal
professionals, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.