* 1933554
* High Performance Terahertz Spectroscopy Systems for Advanced Biological Studies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mona Jarrahi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 535,402.00

Near-field microscopy systems such as Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, Atomic
Force Microscopy, Scanning Optical Microscopy, and Electron Microscopy can yield
highly detailed structural information of biological samples. However, their
spectral and operational constraints have limited their use for studying
dynamics of biological processes. Alternative single-molecule approaches use
various labeling techniques for characterizing structural dynamics of
biomolecules. Labeling biomolecules near their active sites can be a major
challenge and can affect the natural behavior of molecules in many biological
processes. To address these limitations, this project proposes an innovative
Scanning Terahertz Nanoscopy system as a powerful label-free biological study
tool to advance the research in biophysics. The proposed label-free probing
system would allow studying the complex behavior of biomolecules under native
conditions, while avoiding exhaustive genetic and biochemical characterization
of labeling reactions. The proposed system offers significant flexibility for
biological studies in practical settings (flexibility in large area scanning,
simultaneous optical excitation, and adding external chemical stimuli) through a
fully packaged and fiber-coupled platform. Therefore, the proposed research
would benefit the biological research communities conducting research on single-
molecule biophysics, cellular structure, nanomedicine, protein folding, etc. As
a part of our dissemination, we work closely with the members of the biological
research community to utilize and evaluate the developed terahertz spectroscopy
system for various biological studies. A special training program is constructed
to assimilate graduate students working on this type of interdisciplinary
research, undergraduate students and summer interns are recruited for these
research activities and special priority is given to recruitment of talented
undergraduate and graduate candidates from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terahertz waves offer unprecedented functionalities for
label-free characterization of biomolecules and studying the structure, dynamics
and operation of biological systems. This is because terahertz photon energies
are comparable with the low binding energies of molecules inside heavy
biomolecules, offering a platform for differentiating proteins and providing
information about their conformation states through terahertz spectroscopy.
Additionally, since distinct terahertz signatures of biomolecules are dependent
on their intermolecular and intramolecular vibrations and rotations, terahertz
spectroscopy enables investigating living cells and their interaction inside
various biological systems including cell metabolism and reproduction as well as
chemical transfer from the environment to cell through cell membrane and
possible conformational changes. Moreover, since terahertz spectroscopy can
capture femtosecond-scale dynamic variations, it is very well suited for
investigating kinetics of molecular motions during protein rearrangement,
folding, and binding to other biomolecules. Despite its great promises, the
scope and potential use of terahertz technology for biological studies is still
limited by low sensitivity and limited spatial resolution of existing terahertz
spectroscopy systems. The proposed nanoscopy system solves both limitations,
while offering significantly higher sensitivities and bandwidths compared to the
state-of-the-art. The proposed time-domain terahertz spectroscopy system
consists of a plasmonic photoconductive terahertz source and an electro-optic
crystal for broadband terahertz wave generation and detection, respectively. The
plasmonic terahertz source and the electro-optic crystal are integrated with a
novel terahertz probe, which consists of a tapered waveguide used for focusing
the generated terahertz beam onto the biological sample with nanoscale focus
dimensions and coupling the reflected terahertz beam from the sample to the
electro-optic crystal for detection. The terahertz probe is designed to allow
terahertz spectroscopy at the nanoscale without a considerable impact on the
spectral bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.