* 1933016
* Collaborative Research: CIBR: Cyberinfrastructure Enabling End-to-End Workflows for Aquatic Ecosystem Forecasting
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Cayelan Carey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 719,851.00

Aquatic ecosystems in the United States and around the globe are experiencing
increasing variability due to human activities. Provisioning drinking water in
the face of rapid change in environmental conditions motivates the need to
develop forecasts of future water quality. Near-term water quality forecasts can
guide management actions over day to week time scales to mitigate potential
disruptions in drinking water and other essential freshwater ecosystem services.
To maximize the utility of water quality forecasts for managers and decision-
makers, the forecasts must be accessible in near-real time, reliable, and
continuously updated with environmental sensor data. However, developing
iterative, near-term ecological forecasts requires complex cyber-infrastructure
that is widely distributed, from sensors and computers collecting information at
freshwater lakes and reservoirs to cloud computing services where forecast
models are executed. Consequently, significant software challenges still remain
for environmental scientists to easily and effectively deploy forecasting
workflows. This project will address this need by designing, implementing, and
deploying open-source software — FLARE: Forecasting Lake And Reservoir
Ecosystems — that will enable the creation of flexible, scalable, robust, and
near-real time iterative ecological forecasts. This software will be tested and
widely disseminated to water utilities, drinking water managers, and many other
decision-makers. FLARE will greatly advance the capability of the ecological
research community to perform near-real time aquatic
forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FLARE forecasting system is novel in its
architecture, as it integrates a software-defined virtual distributed
infrastructure spanning resources from sensor gateway devices at the edge of the
network to cloud computing and storage. FLARE will support the flexible
deployment of software in close proximity to water quality sensors in lakes and
reservoirs, and in cloud resources for end-to-end data acquisition and
processing. FLARE interconnects its distributed resources through a virtual
private network to ensure data integrity and privacy in communications, and
supports a flexible model applicable across a variety of lakes and reservoirs.
Reusing best-of-breed technologies, FLARE builds upon and integrates several
contemporary, widely-used open-source software frameworks in a manner that
lowers the barrier to the deployment and management of ecological forecasting
workflows by ecologists. Importantly, this project’s development of scalable and
open-source cyberinfrastructure tools and end-to-end workflows for creating
iterative aquatic forecasts will provide a critical resource for advancing the
ecological forecasting research community, as well as provide a template for
forecasting in other ecosystems. This project will build on and expand an
existing program for cross-disciplinary teaching tools and research exchanges of
undergraduate and graduate students to provide training at the intersection of
computer science, freshwater science, and ecosystem modeling. Ultimately, this
project will develop scalable, robust, secure workflows that will advance the
capacity, practice, and training opportunities for ecological forecasting
worldwide. Results from this project can be found at http://flare-
forecast.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.