* 1933698
* Engaging Preschoolers in Data Collection and Analysis to Promote Computational Thinking in Mathematics: Exploring a Technology-Based Approach
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Ashley Lewis Presser, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,994,801.00

This three-year exploratory project responds to the urgent and persistent need
to foster high-quality mathematics learning opportunities for children who are
at risk of starting school behind their peers. There is a pressing need to
invest in preK STEM efforts to build a solid basis for children's STEM skills
later in life. Yet there is a dearth of high-quality instructional resources
that integrate early mathematics and computational thinking (CT). This project
addresses this need by advancing research and development into how to foster
preK children's (4-5-year-olds) mathematical knowledge and computational
thinking. Specifically, this project will create and test a set of
developmentally appropriate, play-based, problem-solving activities that
integrate mathematics and computational thinking by engaging children in
mathematical investigations with hands-on materials and the use of a digital
tool to collect and display data. The team will target specific math skills that
are naturally attractive to young children (such as counting and categorizing)
and that provide a foundation for later academic math competencies in data
collection and analysis, setting the stage for young children to succeed in
mathematics and computational thinking tasks in elementary school and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this project are to
understand how young children can apply their mathematical knowledge (i.e.,
organizing data through counting, sorting, and classifying) to answer real-world
questions and leverage computer technology to facilitate this learning. Using an
iterative, design-based research approach, the team will (1) develop a set of 9
hands-on, play-based, real world learning activities, (2) develop an
accompanying digital tool to collect and display data, both of which are
intended to improve preschoolers' mathematical and computational thinking, (3)
develop assessments intended to better understand preschoolers' mathematical and
computational thinking, and in turn, (4) create and refine a learning blueprint
and conjecture map that can inform early childhood curriculum development. Year
1 of the project involves the development of classroom instructional activities
and assessment tasks through observational studies of children using the
activities. The process will begin with defining the learning goals in a
learning blueprint and detailing the specific outcomes in the conjecture map,
which describes the theory of how these instructional activities will lead to
improved learning outcomes. In Year 2, the research team will conduct two pilot
tests of the instructional tasks in ten preschool classrooms that serve low-
income children in the New York City and Boston metropolitan areas. Data
collection will include observation and interviews with children, as well as
teacher surveys and interviews. Year 3 will focus on data analysis and
dissemination, as well the revision of instructional tasks based on study
findings. In this way, the project has potential for transforming current
conceptions of young children's computational thinking and narrow opportunity
gaps in children's mathematical learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.