* 1933704
* Effect of Extreme Nanoconfinement on the Thermodynamics and Transport Phenomena in Multiphasic Nanocomposite Coatings
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Daeyeon Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 10/31/2023
* USD 393,141.00

Due to their flexibility, low density and recyclability, polymer films and
coatings are playing an increasingly important role in the regulation of gas
transport in a wide range of applications such as gas barriers for food,
beverage, microelectronics and medical device packaging. Adding nanoparticles
and/or blending multiple polymers together have proven to be effective methods
to tune gas transport properties of nanocomposite films. Adding high
concentrations of nanoparticles, in particular, is a powerful approach for
producing high performance gas barriers and gas separation membranes. In this
work the investigators will produce polymer films with high nanoparticle
loadings via solvent-driven infiltration of polymers (SIP) into layers of
nanoparticles. In this process, layers of nanoparticles, sitting on top of a
polymer layer, are filled with a solvent. Some of this solvent moves into the
polymer layer and softens or plasticizes, the polymer material. Once the polymer
is plasticized, it can move into the nanoparticle layer, filling in the gaps
between nanoparticles, by attractive interactions with either the solvent or the
nanoparticles. The investigators will study which of these interactions are most
important for polymer infiltration and how to tune these interactions to obtain
polymer films with high loadings of nanoparticles. These hard, solid
nanoparticles maintain barriers which limit polymer's ability to expand. These
constrained polymers are expected to exhibit improved gas barrier properties,
making them attractive for various packaging
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators hypothesize the dynamics
and thermodynamics of polymer chains in the interstices of nanoparticle packings
under extreme nanoconfinement will be dominated by the thermodynamics of the
interfaces. Solvent-infiltration of polymers (SIP) provides an ideal platform to
characterize the dynamics and thermodynamics of confined polymers and transport
of gas molecules through a binary polymer phase under extreme nanoconfinement.
This work will lead to fundamental understandings of how polymer-solvent-
nanoparticle interactions affect the infiltration mechanism and dynamics, as
well as the thermodynamics of polymers under extreme nanoconfinement. The
dynamics and resulting structure of SIP will be studied using in situ
spectroscopic ellipsometry as well as molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.
Efficient field-theoretic simulations, including self-consistent field theory,
will be used to understand the thermodynamics in the packings and guide both the
experiments and MD simulations. The structure-transport property relationship of
SIP nanocomposites for different polymer molecular weight and polymer-
nanoparticle interactions will be established by characterizing the structure
using transmission electron microscopy, MD, and by testing the transport
properties through quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation. Because
theoretical frameworks to predict the dynamics and thermodynamics of SIP are not
currently available, whenever possible, computation-based approaches will
provide important guidelines for experimental conditions. The investigators will
support involvement from underrepresented minority students by leading
cooperative efforts with University of Puerto Rico-Humacao, Advancing Women in
Engineering and Louise-Stoke Alliance for Minority Participation and Rachleff
Scholars Program. The PIs also plan to develop educational programs and exhibits
that showcase the nanocomposites with ultra-high loadings of natural
nanomaterials with the help of undergraduate/graduate students for use during
outreach activities organized through local high schools and science cafe
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.