* 1933291
* Epigenetic regulation of developmental phase transition
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Min Ni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 07/31/2024
* USD 603,908.00

The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is an important regulator of gene
expression and development. PRC2 proteins are conserved in fungi, worm, fly,
mammals and many plant species. In the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, PRC2
controls the development of the endosperm, the tissue in the seed that provides
nutrients for the embryo. In monocots, like maize the endosperm constitutes the
major volume of mature seeds and it the bulk of the edible kernel. Because the
endosperm is a major constituent of seeds, an understanding of endosperm
development has critical implications for agriculture. In many dicots, endosperm
proliferation is the major determinant of mature seed size as has been shown in
Arabidopsis thaliana and the related crop plant, canola. Endosperm proliferation
in these dicots provides nutrient supplies for the subsequent embryo
development. The aim of this award is to better understand how PRC2 regulates
endosperm formation. This project augments the research and education missions
of NSF. Researchers at different stages of their career development are trained
in the fields of genetics, molecular biology and biochemistry. Students and
trainees are mentored in the areas of career development, teaching,
communication and interpersonal skills and professional development. Vigorous
outreach activities foster scientific literacy and public engagement with
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In angiosperms, double fertilization leads to the
formation of a diploid embryo and a triploid endosperm. In many dicots, seed
development involves an early endosperm proliferation to form a large embryo sac
followed by a second phase in which the embryo grows to replace most of the
endosperm at maturity. The expression of a few genes critical for endosperm
proliferation such as MINI3 and IKU2 is activated after fertilization. At 4 days
after pollination (DAP), the endosperm proliferation genes are repressed for a
transition to embryo development. PRC2s play important roles in developmental
phase transition. Of the three PRC2 complexes, Fertilization Independent Seed
(FIS)-PRC2 silences the endosperm proliferation genes through histone
methylation. None of the PRC2 subunits bind DNA in a sequence-specific fashion,
and the knowledge of how PRC2s are recruited to a particular genomic locus is
limited. MEA is the histone methyltransferase of the FIS-PRC2 complex and
accumulates 4 DAP. Parallel to MEA accumulation, two AGAMOUS-LIKE (AGL) MADS-box
genes are actively transcribed 4 DAP. The two AGL proteins bind the IKU2
promoter and interact with MEA. Therefore, the dynamic accumulation of MEA
regulates the duration of endosperm proliferation, and the two AGLs are the
readers to recruit MEA histone writer to the IKU2 and other potential loci.
Their co-action facilitates a phase transition to embryo development. In this
project, the dynamic MEA accumulation in relation to histone modification at the
IKU2 locus and the recruitment of MEA to the IKU2 and other loci is
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.