* 1933261
* Collaborative Research: Parsing out the controls of climate, geology, and land use on riverine (234U/238U) ratios in Texas river basins
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Pamela Sullivan, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 227,150.00

This proposal will investigate the variations of uranium isotope ratios
(234U/238U), a naturally occurring and easy-to-detect geochemical signature, in
large Texas rivers that flow from northwest to southeast across the state. This
study aims to understand in detail how changes of climate parameters (such as
rainfall and temperature), rock type (sandstone, shale, limestone, and
evaporite) and land uses (agricultural, urban, and natural) in Texas river
basins control the river (234U/238U) ratios. Knowing this important information
will advance knowledge of 1) how fast natural rocks break down to form soils and
release solutes and mineral nutrients into river basins; 2) how surface water
interacts with groundwater flow and whether certain observed water quality
issues are related to agricultural or urban water uses; and 3) how to interpret
(234U/238U) ratios in geological records such as carbonates in soils, caves, and
travertine deposits to reconstruct past environmental and hydrological
conditions. The gained knowledge will advance the scientific fields of low
temperature geochemistry, hydrology, paleoclimatology, and environmental science
with important societal impacts especially related to water resources
management. This study will support a team of 4 early to mid-career faculty, 3
graduate, and 8 undergraduate students from University of Texas at El Paso (a
minority serving and Carnegie R1 university), Oregon State University/University
of Kansas, and El Paso Community College (a large urban community college). This
proposal will provide a valuable research and education opportunity for graduate
and undergraduate students, and especially community college students from two
geographically distinct regions (Southwest and Central USA) facing different but
equally pressing water and environmental issues due to agriculture and urban
development. Investigators will develop environmental science development
programs (ESPD) with hands-on training both in the field and laboratory, online
training modules, geohydrological field trips for the general public, and
outreach events with the Kay Bailey Hutchison Desalination Plant and Earth
Science day at El Paso. These experiences will allow students to develop
necessary scientific research skills for their future career in Geoscience,
Environmental Science, and Critical Zone Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Riverine
(234U/238U) ratios have great potential to advance the understanding of
watershed functions, ecosystem services, water sustainability, surface and
groundwater management, and global carbon and nutrient cycles. However, their
widespread adoption for solving many critical geochemical and hydrological
issues has been hindered by the inability to decipher the multitude of
mechanisms that control (234U/238U) ratios across climate, lithology, and land
use gradients. Here, researchers will test the umbrella hypothesis that riverine
(234U/238U) ratios can be predicted by quantifying factors of alpha recoil and
chemical dissolution at the weathering interfaces that are controlled by 1)
climate parameters (precipitation and temperature) of the watershed; 2)
lithological parameters of the weathering bedrock (e.g., grain size and mineral
weatherability); and 3) water residence times; while land uses (agriculture and
urban development) can overprint these natural signatures. Their approach is to
leverage the strong environmental and geologic gradients across Texas river
basins with sizes ranging from 10s-100s of km, at a critical regional scale that
will fill the gap existing in current watershed studies. They will conduct a
combined geochemical, geological, and geographic information system (GIS) study
to investigate the controls of precipitation, lithology, and land uses on the
riverine (234U/238U) ratios in Texas. They will also test (234U/238U)
fractionation models in the existing literature across this matrix of drivers
for the first time with the observed U isotope fractionation in these
watersheds. The gained knowledge will be transferable outside of Texas as
(234U/238U) fractionation is a ubiquitous signature observed in rivers,
watersheds, and the geological record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.