* 1933699
* Earth Education for Sustainable Societies Workshop
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Cathryn Manduca, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2021
* USD 99,110.00

Current priorities in science education include efforts to engage students in
scientific reasoning and using the knowledge and practices of science to
understand natural phenomena and constructively respond to local and global
challenges. This project responds to these priorities by bringing together
representatives of diverse geoscience education communities in a workshop to
identify high-priority needs for strengthening geoscience education broadly, and
to initiate plans for addressing the identified needs through curriculum
development and teacher professional development activities. In the context of
global and local environmental challenges, workshop participants will consider
educational priorities associated with understanding Earth systems, promoting
geoscience literacy, and exploring sustainable solutions. Workshop participants
will also consider desirable skills students might acquire for future employment
in the sciences, with particular emphasis on ways to diversity the population of
students prepared to address issues of sustainability. Working groups
established during the workshop will continue after the workshop, using virtual
meeting tools to continue collaborative efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-day
Earth Education for Sustainable Societies workshop will extend and enhance
activities initiated by the previously funded STEP Center: InTeGrate:
Interdisciplinary Teaching of Geoscience for a Sustainable Future (NSF award
1125331). The Center has developed curriculum materials for teaching geoscience
in the context of societal issues, and it has initiated teacher professional
development programs and communities of practice. This project will build on
those efforts by bringing together participants in the previous project with
other researchers and educators within and outside the geoscience education
community who want to engage in teaching, research, or outreach activities
related to learning about sustainability and Earth systems. A comprehensive
recruitment strategy will be used to ensure broad diversity of disciplinary
perspectives, cultural perspectives, and institutional affiliations. Prior to
the workshop, participants will be invited to attend a Town Hall and or webinars
to gain background information and an overview of project resources and
expectations. By providing multiple ways of preparing for and participating in
the planned workshop, the project will both expand and diversify the existing
community of practice and promote ongoing collaborations to address high-
priority needs identified by workshop participants. Participants will be
encouraged to form ongoing Working Groups and use virtual meeting tools to
continue discussions and collaborative efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by PreK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.