* 1933208
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Securing the Voice Processing Pipeline Against Adversarial Audio
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Thomas Shrimpton, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,199,996.00

In a world in which many new computing devices have limited or no traditional
user interface (e.g., smart thermostats, personal digital assistants including
Amazon's Alexa, etc), voice interfaces are becoming a primary means of
interaction. Such systems not only simplify interaction with conventional
devices for traditional users, but also promote broader inclusion for both the
elderly and those with disabilities. These interfaces have been made
significantly more accurate in recent years through the application of deep
learning techniques; however, these techniques are subject to a number of
attacks using modified audio. While previous researchers have demonstrated such
attacks using significant knowledge of specific deep learning models, our
initial work demonstrates that knowledge of signal processing (or how voices are
turned into the inputs deep learning models require) can create attacks that
work across a wide variety of systems. The work proposed in this grant will
allow us to fully characterize the security challenges in the space between
signal processing and deep learning, and to develop strong defenses to ensure
that these systems can continue to operate in the presence of malicious inputs.
A wide range of systems, from the Internet of Things (IoT) to infrastructure
such as air traffic control, will benefit from improved resilience to malicious
audio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort is focused on the design methods and
tools to protect the entire voice processing pipeline. In our view, this
naturally segments our efforts into three logical thrusts, beginning with an in-
depth analysis of the algorithms used for audio preprocessing and an
investigation of comprehensibility metrics from the field of psychoacoustics.
These efforts naturally lead into our second thrust, which focuses on the
algorithms used in the second step of the audio processing pipeline. Here, we
exploit weaknesses in the most popular feature extraction algorithms to produce
new attacks, and then develop defenses against such attacks and techniques to
protect speaker privacy. Our final thrust investigates the impact of attacks in
the two previous thrusts and their impact on the underlying machine learning
algorithms. With these insights, we will investigate additional methods of
protecting particularly vulnerable layers of models against these attacks. The
researchers possess the unique expertise in areas including information
security, voice interfaces, adversarial machine learning, privacy-preserving
data synthesis, and statistical signal processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.