* 1933864
* Collaborative Research: Structures, Mechanism, and Functional Relevance of Filament Formation by Non-Cytoskeletal Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dmitry Lyumkis, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 545,652.00

This project will increase the understanding of a newly discovered mechanism of
controlling enzyme activity, which involves the formation of linear self-
assemblies (i.e. filaments). In particular, the reason for this behavior, and
those situations where such behavior is advantageous, will be uncovered. Such
understanding will aid in the understanding of enzyme function in normal
biology, but also in many different diseases as well. The behavior can also be
harnessed for new applications such as in biotechnology, material science, and
the creation of new diagnostic tools. Broader impacts to society include
opportunities for training of students at the high school, undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral levels in scientific approaches and methods. Outreach
and recruiting efforts will be made to broaden opportunities for training to
include members from communities under-represented in science. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall scientific goal of this project is to discover the
purposes and advantages of regulation of enzyme activity via homogeneous, linear
polymerization (or filamentation). Specifically, the hypotheses that this
mechanism is superior in rapid activation, and in controlling substrate
specificity to secondary substrates under only particular reaction conditions,
will be tested using the SgrAI enzyme system. In addition, hypotheses derived
from structural studies will be tested, namely in how filamentation activates
the enzyme for DNA cleavage, and how DNA sequences of the two types of
substrates control enzyme activity by controlling filamentation. Finally, the
research will be broadened to include a second filament forming enzyme,
phosphofructokinase-1, to develop a full kinetic model so that key advantages of
filamentation to this enzyme's regulation may be identified. Methodologies to be
used include global kinetic modeling of enzyme activity data derived from single
turnover reactions and detected via changes in FRET signals or conversion of
radiolabeled substrates to products. Structural studies will utilize state-of-
the-art cryo-electron microscopy and x-ray crystallographic methods. Mutagenesis
will be used to create variants of the enzymes to test specific hypotheses, and
DNA cleavage or fructose phosphorylation assays used to measure reactivity and
substrate specificity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.