* 1933897
* Bridging to STEM Excellence:  Leveraging a Consortium of National STEM Education Initiatives to Improve Undergraduate STEM Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Ellen Iverson, The POGIL Project
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 10/31/2023
* USD 299,987.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE:EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by increasing capacity for institutional transformation in
STEM education. Implementing research-based improvements to STEM programs and
instruction at all levels is a national priority. This priority is underpinned
by the recognition that evidence-based teaching and related programmatic support
(e.g., faculty professional development; connections with student services; and
co-curricular activities) improve outcomes for all students and increase
participation by groups that are underrepresented in STEM. This project seeks to
create a pilot program to accelerate adoption of department- and program-level
interventions proven to improve student learning outcomes and retention in STEM.
The project plans to establish and train a consultancy corps of experienced
faculty developers from five national initiatives that aim to improve
undergraduate STEM education. The initiatives include the BioQUEST Curricular
Consortium, the National Association of Geoscience Teachers, the National Center
for Science and Civic Engagement's Science Education for New Civic Engagements
and Responsibilities (SENCER) program, The Process Oriented Guided Inquiry
Learning (POGIL) Project, and the Summer Institutes for Scientific Teaching.
Each three-member team that works with an institution will include
representation from three of the five initiatives, chosen to match the
institution's desired change focus. The five partner institutions with whom this
approach will be piloted are Bakersfield College, California State University-
Chico, Georgia State University, The Ohio State University, and the University
of Richmond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, five well-established
initiatives will come together as a Consortium to work with an initial set of
five institutional partners. This effort leverages NSF investments over the past
two decades by supporting the integration of national, NSF-supported STEM
education initiatives to provide holistic support that will help educators
achieve improved student outcomes. Consortium members will collaboratively build
a community of practice and develop a consultancy corps that is knowledgeable in
the improvement practices of all five initiatives. The Consortium will then
undertake a cycle of consultation, action, and follow-up support with the five
institutional partners. The goal of the project is to accelerate change in
higher education by developing a community of practice among five national
initiatives, thus increasing their reach and coordinating their support for
professional development and programmatic change. In addition, the program's
consultancy program will serve as a bridge between these coordinated national
initiatives and individual institutional efforts to improve instruction and
student support practices. Evaluation activities will provide formative and
summative feedback on the consultancy model, using a community of practice lens.
Research conducted during the project will examine the impact of the change
efforts at each institution, including the development of new tools to study
readiness for change. The collective expertise of Consortium members and their
available resources and approaches, along with a set of new materials to support
the consultancy corps, will be made available through a public web repository.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is in the
Institutional and Community Transformation track, through which the IUSE: EHR
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.