* 1933243
* Optimizing Risk in a Gauss-Markov Process - Energy Storage Strategies for Renewable Integration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Matthew Peet, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 304,590.00

All power derived from renewable energy resources such as wind and solar depends
on the weather. Changes in power from renewables can be predictable, e.g. due to
the rising and setting of the sun - or can be hard to predict, e.g. due to
clouds blocking out the sun. Consumer demand for power, likewise, has always
been partly predictable and partly random. The amount of power a utility must
generate is the consumer demand minus the renewable power generated. As power
from renewables increases, the unpredictable part of this required generation
also increases. Utilities have begun to respond to this increased risk by
investing in battery storage and quick-start generators. However, there is
currently no way to quantify the risk caused by renewable energy resources
meaning utilities don't know how many batteries to buy or how to use them
efficiently. For example, a utility might buy 1 GWh of battery storage. However,
the 1 GWh is useless if it is discharged too early in the day and is unavailable
when a storm blows in and reduces solar production unexpectedly. The goal of
this project, then, is to develop accurate weather-based models to forecast the
probability that renewable generators will experience large drops in production.
The project then proposes algorithms to use these risk models to determine
optimal battery charge-discharge programs for both consumers and utilities. In
addition, the project uses these models to determine optimal electricity pricing
structures including demand charges for a regulated utility. The project
includes several educational and outreach activities. An established program at
Arizona State University called Science is Fun will be utilized for outreach to
K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three areas of focus. The
first focus is to develop useful Gauss-Markov (G-M) models of solar generation.
These models are based on datasets provided by Wunderground and Arizona utility
SRP and condition on pressure changes, humidity and temperature. Machine
Learning is then used to map daily forecast data to the model which is most
effective at reducing cost. The second focus is to solve stochastic Dynamic
Programming (DP) problems with non-separable objective functions. Specifically,
minimizing the expected maximum of a G-M process and computing the probability
distribution of the maximum of a G-M process over a finite time-interval. Such
stochastic DPs are reformulated using the recently proposed Naturally Forward
Separable (NFS) framework which allows them to be solved recursively using the
Bellman equation with minimal computation time. The third focus is to apply the
NFS DP framework to newly developed models of solar generation and produce
algorithms for optimal battery programming and associated spinning reserve.
These algorithms are then used to propose a model for optimal utility pricing of
consumption and demand charges based on principles of feedback and not based on
marginal pricing. The algorithms are also used to evaluate the impact on risk
and cost of utility-owned solar vs rooftop solar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.