* 1933157
* Oceanhackweek: A Workshop to Explore Data Science in Oceanography; August 2019; Seattle, Washington
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Amanda Lehr, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2020
* USD 49,967.00

Oceanhackweek 2019 will be a 5-day intensive "learning hackathon", held during
August 26-30, 2019 at the University of Washington. The hackathon provides an
avenue for expediting the adoption of data science methodologies and
computational tools for data-intensive research in the ocean sciences community.
These skills are indispensable for modern-day oceanographers to tackle complex
scientific questions by harnessing the data revolution. Oceanhackweek differs
from traditional academic conferences and one-off hackathons by its immersive
curriculum, collaborative learning environment, and a set of carefully crafted
participant selection criteria that helps promote diversity and inclusivity.
These designs help spurs collaborative interdisciplinary ideas and help ingest
best data science practices into ocean sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
hackathon will focus on a variety of ocean data, including data from the Ocean
Observing System, an ocean data facility supported by the National Science
Foundation's Division of Ocean Sciences. Other databases that will be used
include the CLIVAR and Carbon Hydrographic Data Office (CCHDO) and Rolling Deck
to Repository (R2R) database. Oceanhackweek focuses not only on promoting data
science literacy but also on building an inclusive and cohesive community of
oceanographers for learning and sharing. The hackathon opportunity will be
advertised nationally and internationally in traditional academic venues and via
social media. Participants will be selected by an advisory committee that will
seek to create a diverse community of ocean data users. The organizers plan to
encourage and empower participants to bring the skills gained and the sense of
community formed during the hackweek back to their own labs and institutions.
Beyond the intensive in-person workshop, Oceanhackweek tutorials will be
maintained as persistent open online resources to allow anyone to partake and
self-learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.