* 1933646
* Role of nanominerals on photochemical derived atmospheric NH3 and N2O
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Nga Lee Ng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 12/31/2023
* USD 498,650.00

Significant evidence suggests that the global nitrogen cycle is not balanced.
The intensification of agriculture and rising emissions from the burning of
fossil fuels are largely responsible for this imbalance, as both of these
anthropogenic activities have enhanced reactive nitrogen emissions by a factor
of three over the last century. Furthermore, these harmful environmental
pollutants are responsible for the formation of certain aerosols, which have
negative implications for both natural ecosystems and human health. A chief
challenge in engineering solutions to this imbalance lies in quantifying and
identifying all global nitrogen fluxes in the atmosphere and pedosphere. This
requires high-resolution measurements of both natural and anthropogenic sources
and sinks. This research will aim to quantify the rate of natural nitrogen-based
atmospheric emissions that arise due to nanoscale interactions between soil
nanominerals and sunlight. Currently, anthropogenic sources are generally more
accurately mapped than emissions from natural or semi-natural sources.
Therefore, further efforts to identify which nanoscale phenomena aid the
formation and nitrogen-based emission in soils is important to advance our
understanding of the global nitrogen cycle. The work will also support
undergraduate education, serving as the basis of a capstone project through
Georgia Tech's Food-Energy-Water initiatives, which is enabled through the
Serve-Learn-Sustain program. This capstone project will engage undergraduate
seniors from a range of academic disciplines including engineering and social
sciences. In addition, this work seeks to engage the non-scientific community
through a collaboration with the Atlanta wide initiative Science-Art-Wonder.
Through this program, researchers will collaborate with artist to transform key
scientific findings into art pieces that will be displayed at the Atlanta
science festival. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research objective of this
project is to understand how photocatalytic earth-abundant nanominerals in soils
and sands contribute to reactive nitrogen emissions. Specifically, the PI will
investigate the role mineral, soil and atmospheric properties play in increasing
the activity of nanominerals for ammonia and nitrous oxide production. The
nanoscale structure-property relationships of common nanominerals will be probed
through photo(electro)catalytic testing to discern the impact mineral size and
surface nanostructure have on catalytic activity. In depth first-principles
calculations and atmospheric testing will also elucidate which nanoscale
chemical mechanisms and physical phenomena promote sunlight driven reactive
nitrogen production and emission from soils and sands. This fundamental
understanding will provide insight into the role terrestrial nanominerals play
in mediating the natural nitrogen cycle, providing a foundation for more
accurate models of nutrient fluxes in terrestrial and atmospheric settings. The
project will seek to establish a holistic view of the role soils and agriculture
play on atmospheric pollution. The impact of the work will be enhanced by
outreach and educational efforts. The findings will be highlighted through a
publicly accessible website and YouTube videos that demonstrate key findings and
suggest simple experiments that can be performed with household
items.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.