* 1933404
* I-Corps: Reusing Electric Vehicle Batteries for Low-Cost Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Jae Wan Park, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the large-
scale reuse of electric vehicle batteries in low-cost, stationary energy storage
systems. Society is becoming increasingly dependent on batteries. Electric
vehicles, which are powered exclusively by batteries, represent an increasing
share of total vehicle sales. Similarly, large, stationary batteries are now
commonly connected to electric grids to increase the affordability and
reliability of electricity. Over 75% of an electric vehicle battery's original
capacity typically remains at the end of its useful life in a vehicle, and
recycling the batteries is expensive and inefficient. To defer the expense of
recycling and reduce e-waste, electric vehicle batteries may instead be reused
for years more. Reuse would also limit the nation's dependence on imported
batteries and the precious metals required to manufacture them. Finally, reused
batteries can meet a critical market need for affordable energy storage.
Electric utilities and grid operators demand energy storage to reduce the cost
of providing reliable electricity. This demand will grow as variable, renewable
electricity generators (e.g. wind turbines and solar panels) continue to gain
popularity. Similarly, consumers demand energy storage for backup power and to
reduce their electricity bills.

This I-Corps project will further develop a technology which enables the safe,
efficient, low cost reuse of electric vehicle batteries. The technology reduces
the time required to test used batteries, optimizes used battery reassembly, and
improves used battery performance. The algorithms accurately measure the health
of individual battery cells in minutes, rather than hours. Then, the algorithms
optimize the reconfiguration of used battery cells, which increases the
efficiency and longevity of used battery systems. Finally, the system equips the
used batteries with advanced control systems, which account for variable battery
characteristics to further extend lifetime and boost efficiency. These
capabilities have enabled a commercial-scale demonstration system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.