* 1933361
* CBMS Conference: Analysis, Geometry, and Partial Differential Equations in a Lower-Dimensional World
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Aleksandr Reznikov, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 11/30/2022
* USD 35,153.00

The CBMS conference "Analysis, geometry, and PDEs in a lower-dimensional world"
will take place in Florida State University on 17-21 of August 2020. During the
conference, there will be discussed recent groundbreaking advances pertaining to
connections between analytic, partial differential equations, and geometric
properties of multi-dimensional sets. These problems have surprising and
intricate applications across several areas of physics, materials science, and
engineering, and the audience will have a unique chance to have a direct
exposure to the ways in which seemingly abstract concepts and results at the
cutting edge of pure mathematics can immediately influence state-of-the-art
engineering of photonic devices and the physics behind them. When advertising
the conference, we will make special efforts to encourage underrepresented
groups to attend. The main speaker Dr. Mayboroda is a well-respected expert, and
interacting with such an accomplished female researcher is important for junior
participants and will boost their confidence in pursuing careers in mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The last few years have marked groundbreaking advances
pertaining to connections between analytic, PDE, and geometric properties of
(n-1)-dimensional sets in R^n. This includes the first converse to the 1916 F.
and M. Riesz theorem regarding absolute continuity of harmonic measure with
respect to Hausdorff measure and an array of beautiful characterizations of
rectifiability, from boundedness of the Riesz transform on L2 (a much thought-
after solution of the David-Semmes conjecture) to Carleson measure estimates and
similar properties of harmonic functions. We will quickly survey those and
concentrate on a mysterious world of lower-dimensional sets when virtually none
of these characterizations is available and search for meaningful and powerful
analogues revealed some completely new phenomena: a prominent role of degenerate
PDEs, new non-linear integration operators in place of classical singular
integrals, a new smooth distance function, an existence, for every lower-
dimensional set, of a special "elliptic" operator whose harmonic measure is
absolutely continuous with respect to the Hausdorff measure on this set.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information about the conference can be found on the
website: https://cbms2020.math.fsu.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.