* 1933284
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Creation of Active Granular Materials and Study of Emergent Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Kirstin Petersen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Imagine on a hike that on command your walking
stick becomes a chair, and should you fall and break your arm, the chair becomes
a splint. Such taskable "super-materials" are the stu&amp;#64256; of science
fiction and will require drastic advances in material science. Such materials
will depend not only on the properties of constituent elements, but also the
emergent dynamics governing them. Research in programmable matter and swarm
robotics is increasingly popular, but has largely been in the domain of
engineers and computer scientists. The bulk of active matter studies in physics
have been conducted theoretically, and often fails to adequately capture real-
world physical interactions between elements which may critically influence the
overall behavior. The proposed work will focus on a simple and accessible
framework combining experiments, simulations, and theory via active granular
materials (entangled robots), and explore distributed control schemes by which
such materials can sense, locomote, and change properties and morphologies both
locally and globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Combining insights from swarm robotics and experimental and
soft matter physics, this project will focus on the physics principles by which
entangled robot swarms, or "active granular matter", can alter local mechanical
states to produce global emergent behaviors; i.e. where the physical
interactions dominate explicit coordination between robots. While active matter
physics is a vibrant area of research, there are few well-controlled
experimental systems in which theoretical advances can be tested in controlled
situations, where parameters like material shape, density, and activity can be
rapidly varied, and even fewer that incorporate the role of sensing and feedback
into the dynamics. Therefore, to enable discovery of new dynamics in dense soft
matter physics this project involves 1) a scalable, granular robotics platform
with 100+ individuals; 2) theoretical and experimental tools for analysis and
validation, such as hopper flows, shear cells, and numerical multi-physics
simulations; and 3) distributed algorithms for producing and transitioning
between emergent behaviors and material properties such as motion, morphology,
porosity, and yield strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.