* 1933773
* NSFGEO-NERC: Sulfur Cycling at Subduction Zones
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Terry Plank, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 455,659.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation's
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sulfur is a critical element in Earth's
environment. When volcanoes erupt, sulfur is ejected into the atmosphere with
cooling effects. Sulfur is also the transport agent and host of economic metals
such as lead and zinc. The cluster of factors that control how much sulfur is
available to volcanoes and metal deposits is still a major question in science,
one that this project seeks to answer. One possible source of sulfur includes
the sediments on the seafloor, which are subducted into the Earth to the depths
where magmas form. This project is testing this hypothesis by measuring for the
first time the sulfur forms and fluxes that feed volcanic systems at different
subduction zones. A team of scientists from the US (Columbia University), the UK
(Oxford University) and Italy (University of Palermo) will partner with the
Ocean Drilling Program at Texas A&amp;M University and the NERC Ion Microprobe
Facility at the University of Edinburgh to make novel measurements of sulfur and
its isotopes in sediments and volcanic material. Most of the project budget will
support a Columbia Ph.D. student, a Columbia undergraduate, and an Oxford
postdoc. The PI Team of Mather, Aiuppa and Plank will incubate special sessions
at international meetings and a special journal issue focused on Deep Sulfur.
This project, aimed at the very origins of sulfur in magmatic systems, may lead
to novel connections between the sulfur supply to ore deposits and volcanic
emissions at convergent margins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international
project targets major unknowns in the sulfur cycle at subduction zones. The US-
NSF focus of this project will fill a key knowledge gap in terms of S inputs to
the mantle at subduction zones. It will involve extensive analysis of
sedimentary sections at the Tonga, Marianas, Aleutians, Alaska and Central
America trenches, chosen to represent end-member oceanic environments for sulfur
deposition and diagenesis and extreme isotopic variations. Ocean Drilling
Programs cores will be analyzed by XRF core scanning, a strategic approach to
quantify heterogeneously disseminated pyrite and barite, major hosts of sulfur
in sediment. Core scanning results will guide discrete sampling for bulk sulfur
and sulfur isotope analyses at the University of Palermo by coupled Elemental
Analyzer-Mass Spectrometry with a focus on the sulfide- vs. sulfate-dominated
regimes that may occur in a single sedimentary section. The outcome will be the
first comprehensive estimates (with uncertainties) for the fluxes and isotopic
compositions of S into end-member trenches and improved global estimates. The
UK-NERC part of this project will take a novel approach to understanding
volcanic arc S outputs. It will measure for the first time the sulfur isotopic
composition in undegassed olivine-hosted arc melt inclusions. Planned work will
include well-studied melt inclusions suites from the same subducting systems as
the sediment targets above. This will ensure close collaboration between the US,
UK and Italian parts of this project, and allow for the first-time direct
tracing of sulfur isotopes from sediment input to arc output. This project will
not only provide the first comprehensive sediment input sulfur fluxes and arc
isotopic compositions for any subduction zone, but also test the competing
hypotheses that the concentrations and isotopic compositions of arc volcanic
sulfur reflect a) the subducted inputs or b) the fractionation of sulfur species
and isotopes in the subduction zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.