* 1933837
* Establishing extraterrestrial 3He as a Plio-Pleistocene constant flux proxy
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Gisela Winckler, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 477,004.00

Deposition flux records of windblown dust, biologic material, and hydrothermal
minerals preserved in seafloor sediments yield valuable constraints with which
to investigate atmospheric, oceanographic, biogeochemical, and solid Earth
responses to past climate conditions. However, such records can be complicated
because of the redistribution of sediments on the seafloor. Constant flux
proxies (CFPs) are required for the reliable construction and interpretation of
such sedimentary records of past climate variability. To date, however, there
are no CFPs calibrated for the examination of the climate system prior to
500,000 years ago. In this project, investigators will evaluate and calibrate
extraterrestrial helium-3 (3HeET) for use as a CFP over the past 5 million years
of Earth history, known as the Plio-Pleistocene. The Plio-Pleistocene includes
many major transitions in the global climate system as well as multiple episodes
of warmer than modern climate conditions. This research will develop a new
method that could have broad applications in helping to understand past climate
change and predicting future climate system responses to a warming world.
Funding supports an early career researcher with no prior NSF support, and will
engage students from underrepresented groups through the Lamont-Doherty
Secondary School Field Research Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constant flux
proxies are an integral part of paleoceanography because CFP-derived mass
accumulation rates are independent of the lateral sediment transport biases that
can confound traditional age model-derived mass accumulation rate records. 3HeET
has the potential to serve as a Plio-Pleistocene CFP, but current applications
of this method are limited by the lack of constraints on the global 3HeET influx
over this time period. This project will develop the first constant flux proxy
for Plio-Pleistocene oceanography by calibrating the global 3HeET influx over
the past 5 Myr using sedimentary beryllium-10 (10Be). Investigators will
constrain the global 3HeET influx by generating three 10Be-based 3HeET influx
records spanning 0.5 to 5 Ma in existing sediment cores from low particle flux
ocean regions, where Plio-Pleistocene variations in 10Be deposition rates are
expected to be minimal. Anticipated results will enable the community to employ
3HeET in Plio-Pleistocene applications spanning a wide range of dynamic
depositional environments and thus enable new frontiers in a variety of topics
in marine geology and geophysics, including: paleoceanography, paleoclimate,
marine sedimentology and sediment transport, as well long-term interactions
between submarine volcanology and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.