* 1933104
* 7th Annual HBCU Climate Education Conference; New Orleans, LA - November 2019
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Beverly Wright, SOUTHERN CENTER FOR ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE INC., DEEP SOUTH CENTE
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,500.00

The Deep South Center for Environmental Justice will partner with the Barbara
Jordan-Mickey Leland School of Public Affairs at Texas Southern University, in
collaboration with thirty-two (32) Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and fifteen (15) community-based organizations, to host the Annual HBCU
Climate Education Conference in New Orleans, Louisiana on November 13-17, 2019.
The Conference addresses the significant need for climate education for HBCU
students who are largely under-represented in scholarship in climate science,
but over-represented as members of communities most vulnerable to climate
impacts. Conference sessions will explore the dynamics of racial, social, public
health and economic disparities in the wake of climate-related disasters,
serving as a call to action for students at HBCUs to become engaged in the
conversation around climate impacts and equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
the Conference is to bridge the gap between theory and the experiential
realities of climate impacts by bringing together HBCU faculty and students,
researchers, climate scientists, and environmental justice and coastal community
residents impacted by climate related issues (e.g., severe weather events). The
major purpose of the Conference is four-fold: (1) introduce HBCU students to
climate science; (2) engage students with Gulf Coast communities experiencing
climate impacts; (3) engage students in professional development elements
through the presentation of research findings; and (4) interact with and learn
from professional experts in the field. The Conference is a one-of-a-kind
national meeting that strives to create synergy between academia and vulnerable
communities; contribute to addressing chronic or emerging challenges related to
climate impacts in coastal regions and port cities that can be exacerbated by
energy extraction operations and natural disasters; and foster the development
of leadership and communication skills, competencies in science literacy, and
capabilities of participating HBCU students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.