* 1933848
* Integrating Human Computer Interaction, Machine Learning, Game Design, and Educational Assessment in a STEM+C Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Leanne Ketterlin Geller, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,521,616.00

Integrating computing into science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
education at the K-12 level is critical to creating a competitive, innovative
workforce that is capable of the computational thinking needs of the future.
Efforts to increase intrinsic interest in math and data science have proven
difficult to apply evenly across gender, race, and socio-economic factors. This
research project will assist in creating a more stable, ethical, and inclusive
data science workforce by broadening interest in data science to a more diverse
population of students. This research spans the fields of game design, human
computer interaction, machine learning, curriculum design and educational
assessment by integrating a STEM+C based curriculum directly into Minecraft. It
advances knowledge in game-based learning and produces an infrastructure that
will serve as a vital computing resource for middle and high school educators
that will be sustained beyond the current project. As computing has become
integral to the practice of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address emerging challenges in
computational STEM areas through the applied integration of computational
thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and learning in early
childhood education through high school (preK-12).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key
initiative of STEM+C is to cultivate the skills for the next generation of data
scientists, information scientists, and engineers in the nation. A virtual world
provides a technique to engage the next generation of students in a fun and
intuitive manner. A virtual world is developed around fundamental activities, or
gameplay atoms, which reflect the experiential learning process through a trial
and error feedback loop. These atoms are combined in multiple ways with slight
variations to form a group of related activities referred to as game mechanics.
These activities will be mapped to education standards to introduce or reinforce
various STEM+C concepts. This project uses design-based research methodology to
iteratively develop and refine the activities through meaningfully integrating
feedback from educational stakeholders, including teachers and students. Key
outcomes from this research include changes in students' interest, attitudes,
beliefs, and self-efficacy in STEM+C, engagement in collaborative open-ended
solution making, and achievement in related computing and mathematics concepts.
This research will help broaden interest in computing to a more diverse pool of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.