* 1933487
* MIP: BioPolymers, Automated Cellular Infrastructure, Flow, and Integrated Chemistry: Materials Innovation Platform (BioPACIFIC MIP)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Craig Hawker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2025
* USD 20,221,642.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The BioPACIFIC MIP (BioPolymers, Automated
Cellular Infrastructure, Flow, and Integrated Chemistry: Materials Innovation
Platform), located at the University of California's (UC) Santa Barbara and Los
Angeles campuses, is a research platform dedicated to exploiting yeast, fungi,
and bacteria as biological factories to generate building blocks in order to
make polymeric materials (plastics) with superior properties to existing
materials. Robotic automation is used to quickly prepare the bio-derived polymer
materials, these materials are incorporated into higher order structures using
advanced 3D printers, and cutting-edge characterization tools are used to
determine how structure and organization at the atomic and molecular level
affect materials properties. Dedicated and broadly accessible databases record
properties and processing information from these tools, which are integrated
with computer modeling and machine learning to help close the design loop and
optimize these plastics derived from living organisms, in alignment with the
methodology of the Materials Genome Initiative. Together these state-of-the-art
tools in a national user facility, combined with world-class services, allow
users and in-house researchers to accelerate the discovery and development of
new materials with performances exceeding those of materials produced through
traditional petrochemical-based methods. The BioPACIFIC MIP is a scientific
ecosystem with researchers coming from materials science, biology, chemistry,
and engineering, where researchers share tools, samples, data, software, and
know-how for the collective advancement of science and technology. Through in-
person interaction with expert staff and at an annual technical workshop, the
BioPACIFIC MIP also educates and trains researchers, especially facility users
and potential users, in automated synthetic biology, chemical synthesis, and
advanced biomaterials characterization, while promoting diversity and inclusion
at all organizational levels and in all aspects of
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The discovery
and development of advanced biomaterials with novel properties is the central
focus of the BioPACIFIC MIP. This goal is realized through tight integration of
synthesis, and physiochemical characterization of tactic, sequence-controlled,
or stimuli-responsive polymers constructed from libraries of chiral,
regioselective, and functional bio-sourced monomers in a feedback loop with
simulation. The automated, high-throughput Living Bioreactor Platform at UC Los
Angeles produces monomers with stereospecific functional groups from yeast,
fungi, and bacteria that feed into a Materials Genome Initiative-based loop of
hierarchical computation, automated polymerization, and flow chemistry at UC
Santa Barbara. Cutting-edge materials characterization tools include a cryogenic
microcrystal electron diffraction system that enables rapid determination of the
structures of the building blocks and polymers in both two and three dimensions
as well as x-ray scattering and high-throughput micro-rheology. Integrated
state-of-the-art simulation tools are used to predict the properties of
synthesized materials and systematically explore the design landscape of new
chiral, regioselective, and functional bio-sourced monomers. Taken together, the
BioPACIFIC MIP provides in-house researchers and facility users the unique
opportunity to determine structure-property relationships that serve to guide
molecular-level engineering and chemical formulation toward specific materials
targets and provides insight into how natural, bio-based materials assemble and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.