* 1933009
* Toward Increasing the Impact of Grand Innovation Prizes: Lessons from the Emergence of an Autonomous Vehicle Innovation Ecosystem
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Christopher Hayter, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2023
* USD 48,668.00

Innovation prizes have become an important tool for federal agencies to improve
the impact of public investments in research and development. For example, the
recent emergence of autonomous vehicles (AVs) are attributed to the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) grand challenge competitions
(2004-2007). However, there is little understanding of why and how innovation
prizes function to improve technology, education, and commercial outcomes
associated with research and development. This project thus seeks to understand
the specific elements responsible for innovation prize impact. Understanding how
and why technological, educational, and commercial impact occurred will not only
contribute to the prize model literature, it will also generate insights
important to the establishment and effective management of innovation prizes,
improving the social and commercial impact of future innovation prize
competitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fulfill the project goals, the research
team will implement an embedded, multiple case study design, an approach well-
suited for investigating complex, interconnected phenomena over time, at
different levels of analysis. The study team will conduct case studies through
focused interviews individuals from universities, government agencies,
companies, and other organizations involved in AV development that participated
in the DARPA grand challenge competitions. The study will also include case
studies of similar organizations involved in AV development that did not
participate in the grand challenges. These case studies will generate both
primary and rival theoretical explanations of AV development and impact and,
through comparison among cases, illuminate how and why innovation prize impact
occurred. In the addition to publication, project findings will be disseminated
in a workshop focused on the utility of grand challenge models for improving
STEM education and entrepreneurship outcomes among
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.