* 1933772
* NSF Student Travel Support for the 52nd IEEE/ACM Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Anys Bacha, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 09/30/2020
* USD 20,000.00

The IEEE/ACM Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) is a flagship conference in
the area of computer architecture. The 2019 annual conference, along with
several collocated workshops on related topics, will take place in Columbus,
Ohio in October 2019. The conference is an important venue for reporting current
research on important topics addressing grand challenges in computing resulting,
e.g., from the impending Moore's law slowdown of performance of computing
machines. MICRO is a venue where major results of research supported by the
program gets presented, discussed, debated and future direction of research are
charted. This award will support approximately 30 students by defraying part of
their cost for travel and attendance for MICRO 2019. Since attendance to MICRO
can be viewed as an integral part of computer systems design education and
research in academia, the proposal would go a long way towards supporting
workforce development in the important area information technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MICRO conference is attended by leading researchers
from technology companies and provides a basis for interaction between academia
and industry, thus potentially enhancing technology transfer on problems of
current and future societal needs. The grants to students seek to enhance the
diversity of the attendees, thus maintain a balance between underrepresented and
other groups among the participants supported from the grant. Upon completion of
the project, the awardee will submit a report to NSF with details of student
experiences and the details of the expenditures towards supporting them to
attend the conference and workshops collocated with
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.