* 1933819
* Scalable Manufacturing of Perovskite Photovoltaics by Controlled Crystallization During Slot Die Coating
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jason Baxter, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2023
* USD 568,652.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge related to a novel
process for manufacturing solar panels. This research focuses on perovskite
solar cells, a new type of solar cell with the potential to revolutionize the
solar cell industry due to power conversion efficiencies that surpass those of
state-of-the-art solar technologies. However, perovskite solar cells are
currently made using slow, low yield, laboratory-scale processes that are not
amenable to be scaled up to the large areas and high throughputs required for
industrial production. To overcome these barriers, this project investigates a
continuous slot-die coating and crystallization process that enables the
fabrication of high-quality perovskite thin films, and ultimately large-area
solar panels, at high speed and low cost. Perovskite solar panels have the
potential to provide electricity at lower cost than other solar technologies and
could provide a boost to the U.S. renewable energy industry. This research
involves several disciplines including manufacturing, engineering, and materials
science and helps broaden participation of women and students from
underrepresented minority groups in research and positively impacts engineering
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient, low-cost photovoltaics (PVs) based
upon perovskites have the potential to transform the global energy portfolio.
The greatest remaining challenge in perovskite PVs is the development of
scalable, rapid manufacturing strategies that maintain the perovskite
performance at low cost. Prior knowledge of processing-structure-property
relationships in PV films shows that performance depends on microstructure,
composition, thickness, uniformity, and stability of the wet film during
deposition, drying, and thermal treatment. This project focuses on understanding
the crystallization and microstructure formation during slot-die coating,
drying, and annealing processes as well as validating transport and kinetic
models with experiments to control the properties of the perovskite films during
processing and scale-up. The key scientific outcomes are rheological and
interfacial assessment of slot-die ink formulations, a predictive nucleation and
growth model accounting for thermal and concentration gradients during slot-die
coating, validation of retrograde solubility (i.e. inverse temperature
crystallization) as an engineering control for crystal nucleation, and
evaluation of double slot-die coating to create composition gradients and
thereby decouple crystallization from drying. This allows for rationally
designed inks for perovskite synthesis and a road map to address the challenges
of coupled drying and crystallization common to rapid polycrystalline thin-film
manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.