* 1934607
* WORKSHOP: Graduate Student Consortium at the 2019 Designing Interactive Systems Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Deborah Tatar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2020
* USD 5,841.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 10
promising graduate students (4 from the United States who will be supported by
this award), along with a number of distinguished research faculty. The event
will take place in conjunction with the 2019 Designing Interactive Systems
Conference (DIS2019), which will be held on June 23-28, 2019, in San Diego,
California. DIS is an annual international conference that brings together
200-300 researchers and corporate leaders, as well as students, to present and
discuss the latest multidisciplinary work on the design and evaluation of next-
generation interactive user interfaces, systems, and applications. Topics of
special interest to the conference include: methods, tools, and techniques for
engaging people; researching, designing, and co-designing interactive systems;
user experience; usability; engagement; empowerment; well-being; designing
things that matter; diversity; participation; making; sensors and actuators;
mobile devices; novel artifact design; hybrid materials and surfaces; bio-
electric systems; multi touch and touchless interaction; social media; personal,
community, and public displays; health informatics; children-computer
interaction; sustainability; digital arts; and new media. Approximately 100
papers will be presented; accepted papers will be published in the DIS
Conference Proceedings as well as in the Association for Computing Machinery's
Digital Library. The program will also include invited keynote speakers,
demonstrations, a variety of workshops, and poster sessions. The theme of this
year's conference is "Contesting Borders and Intersections." The goal of the DIS
Doctoral Consortium, to be held as a full-day event on Tuesday, June 25, is to
expand student attendance and training in this area. The workshop will help
develop and refine the work of doctoral candidates in the field, under scrutiny
and support from peers and experts that they would not otherwise be able to
access. Graduate student development is key to building a sustainable and
vibrant intellectual community, engaged with the most important topics and
approaches of the field. Graduate student participation in the consortium by
itself broadens the field; the impact is multiplied by what they bring back to
their institutions and (eventually) to their workplaces and the students that
they train. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Consortium is designed to give
students exposure to their research community, and the opportunity to present
their work and receive constructive feedback from peers and senior researchers
in the field. The event, which will be held in parallel with the conference
workshops, is designed to encourage PhD students to start building a
professional support network of peers and mentors. During the session, each
student will make a short presentation, followed by an open discussion and
feedback from their peers. A senior researcher will be appointed as a mentor for
each student and will be requested to lead the discussion, ask questions, and
provide specific feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.