* 1934991
* An ultra-sensitive micro sensor for biophysical studies of single cells cultured in 3D extracellular matrix
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Taher Saif, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,976.00

Considerable experimental evidence acquired during the last three decades has
now established that living cells are contractile. They generate force on 3D
tissues or 2D substrates. Forces and matrix stiffness have a profound influence
on a wide range of cell behavior such as growth, motility, and differentiation.
More recently, it is appreciated that cells not only respond to these cues from
their 3D matrix, but also remodel the matrix and hence influence the subsequent
cues. Cancer cells exploit such reciprocity within the tumor to support their
metastatic journey. The precise role of mechanics in determining this
reciprocity remains elusive. For example, how cells transduce mechanical cues
into biochemical processes and vice versa. Which processes are involved in
remodeling the matrix? Probing these fundamental questions need experimental
platforms that allow to evaluate cell-forces in a 3D matrix and quantify the key
parameters that determine the cell-matrix dynamics. Methods to measure single
cell forces on 2D have been advanced over the last three decades. Currently,
there is no method available to measure cell forces in 3D. Centennial High
School (Champaign) drama teacher will assist in developing a drama with high
school students representing cancer development where characters will represent
cancer, fibroblast and immune cells. The scenes will mimic various stages of
cancer. Research will be integrated with education through involvement of
undergraduate students from minorities in research, and web dissemination. The
PI has a long record of outreach activities, including multiple videos series
development for students and public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to close this gap. It will design, develop and test an ultra-
sensitive (~10nN/um) micro force sensor that allows to quantify single cell
force, dynamics, and extra-cellular matrix remodeling in 3D matrix. The sensor
will be applied to quantify force generation and matrix remodeling by
fibroblasts, and to explore force-dependent cross talk between cancer and
stromal cells leading to metastatic progression. The sensor consists of two
grids, one connected to a soft spring and the other to a rigid support. A
droplet of liquid cell-matrix (e.g., collagen) mixture is dispensed on the
grids. It fills the grids due to capillarity and forms a free-standing tissue
bridging between them. The tissue contains one or a discrete number of cells
depending on the questions to be addressed. The cell(s) forms adhesion with the
matrix and generates force, which is sensed by the spring. The extra cellular
matrix stiffness can also be obtained by the sensor by stretching the matrix.
The sensor will be used to study single fibroblasts in 3D collagen for their
force, dynamics and matrix remodeling. Finally, the interactions between cancer
cells and cancer associated fibroblasts in 3D matrix and the role of forces on
the interaction will be explored. The outreach activities will include
developing a drama with high school students representing cancer development
where characters will represent cancer, fibroblast and immune cells. The scenes
will mimic various stages of cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.