* 1934045
* Collaborative Research: Solution Processing with Entropy-Controlled Stratification of Architecturally-Complex Polymer Blends
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Rafael Verduzco, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2022
* USD 267,996.00

A variety of consumer products are manufactured by using solvents to deposit a
thin polymer film on a surface, including anti-fouling coatings, membranes for
water purification, and electronic devices. Solvent-based manufacturing
processes are attractive because they are fast, inexpensive, and scalable to
large areas. However, as the solvent evaporates, the polymers arrange themselves
in ways that are difficult to predict or control. This collaborative research
award develops new solvent-based manufacturing processes where different types
of polymers are spontaneously sorted into layers according to their size and
shape. This unique approach can be used to decouple the surface and bulk
properties of the film, allowing for independent optimization of each attribute.
Furthermore, the polymers can be degradable to facilitate their disassembly and
recyclability. As a result, the principles established through this research can
facilitate the development of high-performing polymer films for end-use
applications in biomedical devices, desalination and filtration systems, and
devices for clean energy, which greatly impacts society and the U.S. economy.
Laboratory research engages graduate and undergraduate students and is
complemented by education and outreach programs that include new modules for
undergraduate and graduate courses at collaborating institutions; short courses
and symposia for the broader scientific community; activities that teach science
to the blind and visually impaired; and a student exchange program between the
two institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative research
project is to develop solution deposition processes that produce vertical
stratification of bottlebrush copolymers and linear homopolymers in thin films.
The research tasks are designed to test the hypothesis that bottlebrush
copolymers are entropically attracted toward the vapor-liquid interface, leading
to "bottlebrush-on-top" stratification for a broad range of material chemistries
and processing conditions. Importantly, by leveraging these entropic effects
during processing, the bottlebrush copolymer additives can be synthesized with
"high energy" polar, ionic and hydrogen-bonding moieties. Such chemistries are
critical for tuning a range of surface and interfacial properties, including
wettability, friction, fouling resistance, adhesion strength, degradability,
conductivity, and stimuli-responsiveness. The research plan examines the
interplay between materials design (polymer architecture, chemistry) and
processing variables (evaporation rate, diffusion rates) on stratification
profiles, using existing models for vertical stratification of colloidal
particles to guide experimental design. The collaboration consists of synthesis
of a set of bottlebrush copolymer additives and characterization of transport-
related parameters. The systematic research plan involves preparation and
characterization of 400 independent samples, evenly split between the two
institutions. Significantly, the principles established by this research
redefines what types of polymers are characterized as "surface active" and
transforms current approaches to surface engineering in polymeric
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.