* 1934979
* HDR TRIPODS: Institute for the Foundations of Graph and Deep Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Raman Arora, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

Classical data-analysis methods were based on mathematical, physical or
statistical models for the data-generation process, which were developed under
the assumption that the data were relatively clean and collected for a specific
task. Over the past few decades, advances in data acquisition have led to
massive, noisy, high-dimensional datasets, which were not necessarily collected
for a specific task. This has lead to the emergence of data-driven methods, such
as deep learning, which use massive amounts of labeled data to learn 'black-box'
models, which do not provide an explicit description of the process being
modeled. Such data-driven methods have led to dramatic improvements in the
performance of pattern-recognition systems for applications in computer vision
and speech recognition for which massive amounts of labeled data can be
generated. However, existing models are not very interpretable, and their
predictions are not robust to adversarial perturbations. Moreover, there are
many applications in science and engineering where data labeling is extremely
costly, and the ability to interpret model predictions and produce estimates of
uncertainty is essential. To address these challenges, a TRIPODS Institute on
the Theoretical Foundations of Data Science will be created at Johns Hopkins
University. The goals of the institute will be to (1) develop the foundations
for the next generation of data analysis methods, which will integrate model-
based and data-driven approaches, (2) foster interactions among data scientists
through a monthly seminar series, semester-long research themes, an annual
research symposium, and a summer research school and workshop on the foundations
of data science, and (3) create new undergraduate and graduate curricula on the
foundations of data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institute brings together
a multidisciplinary team of mathematicians, statisticians, theoretical computer
scientists, and electrical engineers with expertise in the foundations of
machine learning, deep learning, statistical learning and inference on graphs,
optimization, approximation theory, signal processing, dynamical systems and
controls, to develop the foundations for the next generation of data-analysis
methods, which will integrate model-based and data-driven approaches. In
particular, the institute will focus on studying the foundations of deep neural
models (e.g., feedforward networks, recurrent networks, generative adversarial
networks) and generative models of structured data (e.g., graphical models,
random graphs, dynamical systems), with the ultimate goal of arriving at
integrated models that are more interpretable, robust to perturbations, and
learnable with minimal supervision. The goals of the Phase I Institute will be
to (1) study generalization, optimization and approximation properties of
feedforward networks, (2) develop the foundations of statistical inference and
learning on and of graphs, and (3) study the integration of deep networks and
graphs for learning maps between structured datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data
Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.