* 1934755
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Intelligent Cameras in Internet-of-Things via a Holistic Platform, Algorithm, and Hardware Co-design
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Zhangyang Wang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 10/31/2020
* USD 222,725.00

There has been a tremendous demand for bringing Deep Neural Network (DNN)
powered functionality into Internet of Thing (IoT) devices to enable ubiquitous
intelligent "IoT cameras". However, state-of-the-art DNNs have a prohibitive
energy cost, making them impractical to be deployed in resource-constrained IoT
platforms. This project will develop a novel energy-efficient DNN framework, via
a systematic integration of platform, hardware, and algorithm co-design
innovations. Despite a growing interest in energy-efficient DNNs, existing
techniques lack a systematic optimization across the full stack of design
abstraction, from systems through algorithms to hardware implementation. The
proposed research advocates an innovative, holistic effort towards energy-
efficient and adaptive DNN-powered "IoT cameras" by jointly optimizing the
platform-, hardware-, and algorithm-level co-design efforts. On the system
level, we will address how to automatically generate and adapt DNN models and
implementation, to meet a variety of "IoT devices" application-specific
performance needs and device-specific resource constraints. On the hardware
level, we will leverage the observed high sparsity in DNN activations for
energy-efficient hardware implementations of both DNN training and inference by
using low-cost zero predictors and hence bypass unnecessary computations. On the
algorithm level, we will develop innovative factorized sparsity regularization
in DNN training as well as efficient, controllable adaptive inference
mechanisms, fully complementing and closely integrating with our hardware
innovations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will advance the
scientific domain of each level, from system and algorithm, to hardware and a
holistic, systematic cross-level methodology for designing energy-efficient
intelligent systems. Progress on this project will enable ubiquitous DNN-powered
intelligent functions in a significantly increased number of resource-
constrained daily-life devices, across numerous camera-based Internet-of-Things
(IoT) applications such as traffic monitoring, self-driving and smart cars,
personal digital assistants, surveillance and security, and augmented reality.
As camera-based IoT devices penetrate all walks of life, by enabling DNN-powered
intelligence to be pervasive in these devices, the proposed research can have a
tremendous impact on global societies and economies. The research will be
integrated with education on energy efficient deep learning. Educational
activities include curriculum development, undergraduate research, and outreach
to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.