* 1934120
* Collaborative Research: Localized Frontal Curing-Assisted 3D Printing of Thermosetting Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Shiren Wang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 09/30/2024
* USD 559,093.00

This award supports a collaborative research project on a novel 3D printing
method for thermosetting polymers, localized frontal curing-assisted 3D
printing. Thermosetting polymers are widely used in aircraft, space shuttles,
cars, boats, bridges, furniture, and so on. Currently available methods to
manufacture thermosetting polymer parts include conventional molding and newly-
developed mold-free 3D printing. These methods involve two steps: deposition
processing and post-processing curing that are both energy-intensive and time-
consuming. In localized frontal curing-assisted 3D printing, deposition and
curing are completed simultaneously in a one-step process. An external heat
source is used to initialize the curing process and the heat produced by the
exothermic curing reaction enables curing to self-propagate through the material
as it is deposited. The new method has the potential to impact product design,
assembly, and the manufacture of products using thermosetting polymers. As a
result it could potentially lead to significant changes and increased
competitiveness in many industries of national interest, such as the automotive,
aerospace, and marine industries. This project will engage graduate and
undergraduate students in the research activities thus preparing them for the
advanced manufacturing workforce. Outreach activities based on the research will
be used at high school summer camps and for online videos to educate students
and the general public about advanced manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are four research objectives: (1) to determine effects of curing agent
concentration and printing slice size on frontal velocity and front propagation
distance; (2) to understand relationships between localized frontal velocity,
viscoelastic behavior of thermosetting resins, and geometric fidelity of printed
structures; (3) to test the hypothesis that a specific range of frontal velocity
will result in higher interlayer bonding strength; and (4) to reveal effects of
localized frontal velocity on the mechanical performance of printed structures.
To achieve these objectives, the research team will employ both theoretical and
experimental approaches. Specifically, effects of curing agent structures and
concentration on frontal curing velocity and front propagation distance will be
modelled and simulated based on the reaction kinetics and then verified by high-
resolution infrared camera. Viscoelastic behavior of thermosetting resins will
be studied via real-time rheology characterization and data fitting. Effects of
frontal velocity on interlayer bonding strength and mechanical performance of
printed structures will be revealed by experimental tests and statistical
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.