* 1934372
* I-Corps: Plant Growth Chambers and Curriculum for Educational Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Ivis Forrester, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
increase of student engagement in STEM topics, as well as stimulating student
engagement in critical challenges such as space exploration, climate change,
plant-focused genetic engineering and improvement, and feeding an ever-
increasing global population. These deliverables will be implemented via a novel
STEM curriculum and hardware kits to K-12 schools across the United States. The
hardware/curriculum method of combination is purposefully designed to first grab
student interest, then teach the required STEM coursework, and finally
suggesting careers relevant to each STEM topic discussed. Encompassing all of
this will be curriculum design and thorough documentation that does not put an
additional workload on the teachers applying it to their classrooms. Planning
for an impact further in the future, all of the hardware will collect data from
and images of the experiments conducted within them.

This I-Corps project further develops a low cost, reusable plant growth chamber
that features data collection and a controlled environment previously
unavailable on the education market. The technology involved in this includes a
single board computer, temperature/humidity sensors, photoperiod sensors,
sensor-driven actuation of the temperature level and photoperiod, a camera with
limited computer vision capabilities, and equipment to verify nutrient solution
consistency. This combination of hardware allows the enthusiasm and distributed
numerical power of the citizen scientist to be empowered with technical
capability in a way that neither the plant science nor education communities
have seen before. This will encourage and accelerate learning by allowing more
reliable data collection of various defined growing environments in order to
create more accurate plant growth recipes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.