* 1934904
* HDR Tripods: Texas A&amp;M Research Institute for Foundations of Interdisciplinary Data Science (FIDS)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ronald DeVore, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,416,522.00

Data Science is rapidly evolving as an essential interdisciplinary field, where
advances often result from a combination of ideas from several disciplines. New
types of data have emerged and present tremendous complexities and challenges
that require a novel way of interdisciplinary thinking. The Texas A&amp;M
Research Institute for Foundations of Interdisciplinary Data Science (FIDS) will
bring together researchers from five disciplinary areas, Statistics, Electrical
Engineering, Mathematics, Computer Science and Industrial Engineering, to
conduct research on the foundations of data science motivated by problems
arising in bioinformatics, the energy arena, power systems, and transportation
systems. The Institute for Foundations of Interdisciplinary Data Science will be
well-positioned to develop rigorous theories, novel methodologies, and efficient
computational techniques to solve data challenges in many application
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern large datasets are extremely complex and
finding answers to seemingly simple questions often turns into an intractable
problem. To address these challenges, FIDS will advance the foundations of data
science through research on modeling complex data and developing related theory
and algorithms. Development of efficient methods to identify low-dimensional
structures in these high-dimensional complex data will be the key strategy to
recovering high-dimensional signals with related uncertainties. Novel data-
analysis models and algorithms will be developed for representation learning,
information extraction, and knowledge discovery from complex data to enable
better decision making. To complement the research effort, FIDS will educate and
train students and postdoctoral fellows in areas at the interface of
engineering, mathematics, and statistics. Targeted outreach programs will be
developed to increase the pool of women and underrepresented minorities who
pursue data-science careers. An external engagement program will be designed to
facilitate collaborations with domain scientists and external data scientists.
These programs will help to develop the intellectual foundation for a new
generation of scientists poised to make novel breakthroughs in this exciting new
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.