* 1934714
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Subatomic-Scale Quantum Matter Data Using Machine Learning Tools
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Eun-Ah Kim, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,211,285.00

A central goal of modern quantum physics is to search for new systems and
technological paradigms that utilize quantum mechanical aspects of matter rather
than being limited by them. In particular, there is an active search for new
materials that exhibit surprising physical properties because of strong
interaction between individual electrons that leads to strong correlations in
the motion of electrons and as a result, to strongly correlated quantum matter.
The study of Strongly Correlated Quantum Matter (SCQM) has reached a tipping
point through intense efforts over the last decade that have led to vast
quantities of experimental data. The next breakthrough in the field will come
from relating these experimental data to theoretical models using tools of data
science. However, data-driven challenges in SCQM require a fundamentally new
data science approaches for two reasons: first, quantum mechanical imaging is
probabilistic; and second, inference from data should be subject to fundamental
laws of physics. Hence the new data-driven challenges in the field of SCQM
requires "Growing Convergent Research" and "Harnessing the Data Revolution", two
of NSF's Ten Big Ideas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to
develop and disseminate machine learning (ML) tools that can serve as a two-way
highway connecting the data revolution in SCQM experiments at sub-atomic scale
to a fundamental theoretical understanding of SCQM. The specific goals are: (1)
Develop interpretable ML tools for position space image data; (2) Develop
unsupervised ML tools for momentum space scattering data; (3) Design new imaging
modality guided by the insight gained from ML; and (4) Integrate ML tools with
in-operando human interface to the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source
(CHESS) beamline. Goals (1) and (2) are within reach, while (3) and (4) are more
ambitious visions for scaling up to a future institute that can involve more
academic institutions and scattering experiment facilities nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science Foundation's
Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.