* 1934928
* EAGER:  Reprogramming to the Totipotent State
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Gary Gaufo, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Non-Technical Paragraph&lt;br/&gt; Reprogramming somatic or differentiated cells
into embryonic-like stem cells represents a major technical breakthrough in stem
cell biology. Overexpression of four-defined factors in fibroblasts revealed
that lineage-committed cells can revert to an embryonic-like ground state. These
reprogrammed cells or induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) have attributes
similar to naturally-occurring embryonic stem cells (ESCs); and therefore, have
the remarkable capacity to produce all tissue-types in the embryo and self-
renew. However, cells with an even greater developmental potential exists during
a narrow time window between fertilization and ESC formation. These cells are
termed totipotent for their capacity to generate both embryonic and non-
embryonic tissues, such as the placenta. Currently, the totipotent state can be
achieved by natural fertilization, cloning, or genetic manipulation of ESCs or
iPSCs. These approaches are impeded by low efficiency rates and a host of
molecular barriers that have yet be identified. Furthermore, totipotent cells
are unable to self-renew and propagate; thus, limiting large scale applications.
This EAGER grant will test a simple, single-gene manipulation strategy to
transform iPSCs or somatic cells entirely into totipotent cells that are capable
of self-renewing. Success of the research plan will provide a novel
reprogramming strategy that can pave the way to understand a molecular hierarchy
regulating the totipotent state and the potential to generate the entire
mammalian organism. Capitalizing on this novel technical innovation, freshmen
and sophomore students will be recruited from introductory biology courses to
learn basic techniques in stem cell biology. This hands-on-student training
exercise is part of larger strategy to ultimately enhance retention and
graduation rates at a minority-serving institution aspiring for tier-one
research status. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Paragraph&lt;br/&gt; Totipotent
cells have the remarkable capacity to generate both embryonic and extraembryonic
tissues, such as the placenta. Totipotent cells are therefore a defining feature
that contributed to the propagation of the nearly 4,000 placental mammals.
During preimplantation embryonic development, totipotent cells are present
transiently between fertilization and prior to formation of the inner cell mass
(ICM) of the blastocyst. In addition to natural fertilization, totipotent cells
can be acquired artificially by somatic nuclear transfer (cloning) or by
eliminating epigenetic regulators in ICM-derived embryonic stem cells (ESCs) or
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). However, the efficiency of these
approaches is relatively low, and require the presence and/or elimination of a
myriad of factors that establish barriers to the totipotent state. Strategies to
fully-reprogram pluripotent stem or somatic cells to the totipotent state with
defined factors therefore remain a challenge. This EAGER grant addresses this
challenge, and will test a single-gene manipulation strategy that fully-
reprograms iPSCs or somatic cells into totipotent cells. Specifically,
totipotent cells acquired by this approach will be challenged with the mouse
chimera assay. This rigorous approach will determine whether newly-acquired
totipotent cells have the potential to generate both embryonic and
extraembryonic tissues. Successful completion of this research program will
profoundly impact the scientific community by providing an alternative
reprogramming strategy, insight into a molecular hierarchy regulating
totipotency and preimplantation embryonic development. As part of the Broader
Impacts of this grant, undergraduate students will be recruited to the lab to
engage in basic methodologies in stem cell biology. Targeting freshmen and
sophomores is part of a larger strategy to help retain and enhance graduate
rates at a minority-serving institution striving for tier-one research
status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.