* 1934392
* Collaborative Research: Interhemispheric and Zonal Asymmetries of the ITCZ
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Shang-Ping Xie, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2024
* USD 97,770.00

Satellites views of the earth typically show a narrow band of deep precipitating
clouds over the tropical oceans where the trade winds converge. This band, known
as the inter-tropical convergence zone, or ITCZ, is generally found north of the
equator with a mean latitude of about 6N. Many aspects of the ITCZ including its
existence, its role in global atmospheric circulation, and its preference for
the Northern Hemisphere can be understood by thinking of the ITCZ as a uniform
strip of convection with the same width, central latitude, and rainfall
intensity at all longitudes. But this longitudinally averaged view of the ITCZ
overlooks substantial variations in ITCZ latitude around the tropics. In
particular the ITCZ is found south of the equator in the Indian Ocean and it has
a southwest to northeast slope across both the Pacific and Atlantic oceans. The
latitude of the ITCZ can thus be anywhere from from 4S to 10N depending on the
ocean basin, the longitude within that basin, and the time of
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses combination of observational
analysis and carefully designed model simulations to study regional variations
in ITCZ latitude and other properties. For instance the northward displacement
of the ITCZ in the eastern Pacific has been attributed to the geography of the
North and South American coastlines, an idea which can be tested through
simulations in which the west coasts of the Americas are mirror images of each
other. The importance of oceanic processes is tested using simplified ocean
configurations which allow some mechanisms but disable others. Ocean model
configurations include a simple motionless "slab" ocean, a modified slab ocean
which captures near-surface heat transport driven by surface winds, and a
"shallow water" ocean model which allows surface cooling due to the upwelling of
cold water from the deep ocean. In addition, the project develops a version of
the Community Earth System Model (CESM) in which flux corrections are applied to
improve the representation of the ITCZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of
practical interest given the importance of the ITCZ for tropical rainfall as
well as its outsized effects on the climate and atmospheric circulation of the
earth. Despite its importance the ITCZ is not well simulated in models used for
weather prediction and climate change projections, thus a better understanding
of ITCZ dynamics could be quite useful for model improvement. The work also has
value for the broader research enterprise, as model configurations developed for
the project will be openly available for adoption by the worldwide research
community. In addition, the award provides support and training for two graduate
students, thereby contributing to scientific workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.