* 1934367
* Manipulating Nanoparticle-Modified Melt Pool Dynamics in Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Wing Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/2023
* USD 873,932.00

Metal additive manufacturing (AM), the layer-by-layer printing of 3D shapes, is
an emerging and potentially disruptive technology that allows the efficient
fabrication of intricate parts that cannot be made using other manufacturing
methods. However, because of the high temperature and repeated melting and
solidification to which the metal is exposed as it is printed, structural flaws
such as pores and cracks are common in AM parts, and only a small number of
metals have been successfully used in the process. This research will study the
benefits of adding nano-sized ceramic particles to the material during the AM
process. Early experiments have shown that the presence of nanoparticles can
favorably affect the flow of the molten metal and the formation of microscale
structures, eliminating cracking and improving part quality. In many cases,
however, the causes of these experimental results are not well understood.
Through the development of predictive theory and models for these phenomena, the
current work aims to provide scientific understanding of nanoparticle effects,
and yield new strategies for controlling and optimizing AM part quality.
Broadening the use of AM will advance the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing
and significantly impact U.S. industry by enabling the rapid production of
highly customizable parts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main technical objective of
the researched work is to cultivate a physical theory and computational
simulations for the dynamics of a nanoparticle-modified melt pool in metallic
AM. The research will be undertaken through three interrelated tasks. First,
thermophysical behavior of liquid metal with dilute and dense nanoparticles will
be investigated by combining spatially inhomogeneous population balance
equations (PBEs) and computational thermal fluid dynamics (CTFD). The effects of
nanoparticles on thermophysical properties in liquid metal will be characterized
and validated. Second, transport and aggregation of nanoparticles will be
predicted by building a mechanistic model of aggregation and breakage processes;
the model will be validated against measurements of particle distributions in
solidified material. Finally, to unravel mechanisms of nanoparticle-induced
grain refinement and hot cracking reduction, the thermal and particle
information obtained from previous thrust areas will be coupled with a detailed
solidification model, in which a cellular automaton (CA) grain growth simulation
and an intergranular flow model will predict cracking susceptibility. Effects of
nanoparticles will be included via a physics-based nucleation model to elucidate
nanoparticle-affected hot cracking mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.