* 1934146
* ACM-IMS Interdisciplinary Summit on the Foundations of Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Jeannette Wing, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2020
* USD 49,862.00

The ACM-IMS Summit on the Foundations of Data Science will take place in San
Francisco on June 15th, 2019. Society increasingly relies on data and computing
to create knowledge, to make critical decisions, and to better predict the
future. Data Science has emerged as a new field to support these data-driven
activities by integrating and developing ideas, concepts, and tools from
statistics, computer science and domain fields. Data science now drives fields
as diverse as biology, astronomy, material science, political science and
medicine, not to mention vast tracts of the global economy, key government
activities, as well as quotidian social and societal functions. Intellectually,
data science builds on the academic disciplines of computer science and
statistics and, in turn, is profoundly impacting both disciplines. ACM, the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and IMS, the Institute of
Mathematical Statistics, represent the key scholarly organizations in these
areas, and the goal of the meeting is to bring them together to galvanize a new
community that secures the foundations of data science.

The Summit represents the launch event for a new ACM-IMS joint venture that has
three goals: (1) provide a platform to ensure rich intellectual exchange and
collaborations between computer scientists and statisticians; (2) emphasize the
central role of data-science practice in informing the data-science research
agenda; and (3) highlight the complexity and necessity of responsible data
science. For this inaugural event, summit organizers have assembled a program
that brings together top-flight scholars and practitioners from the two
disciplines. In addition to high-profile keynotes, the program includes panels
on deep learning, reinforcement learning, and the role of methods in data
science, robustness and stability in data science, and fairness and ethics in
data science. The meeting will conclude with a panel discussion on the future of
data science. More information can be found at https://www.acm.org/data-science-
summit

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.