* 1934292
* HDR: I-DIRSE-FW: Accelerating the Engineering Design and Manufacturing Life-Cycle with Data Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Magdalena Balazinska, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

The manufacturing life cycle begins with the discovery of new molecules and
materials. This first step is often initiated through computer simulations that
explore the space of possible molecules and materials, and identify promising
candidates that can later be tested in laboratories. As simulations have grown
in scale and complexity, this step has become a critical bottleneck. New data-
driven approaches present the opportunity to increase the speed and accuracy of
such predictions, with broad potential impact on the US Manufacturing sector.
This Harnessing the Data Revolution Institutes for Data-Intensive Research in
Science and Engineering (HDR-I-DIRSE) Frameworks award brings together Engineers
and Data Scientists to conceptualize a new Engineering Data Science Institute
where these tools can be applied for new discovery. The effort will develop new
data science approaches to accelerate the engineering life cycle: design,
characterization, manufacturing, and operation. This life cycle starts with the
discovery of new molecules and materials, followed by advanced characterization
with high throughput methods augmented by machine learning. Then, efficient
manufacturing and operation of systems that use these materials can be designed
and developed. By focusing on this holistic lifecycle, the researchers will
build a broadly applicable foundation in Engineering Data Science methods. The
new Institute will seek to create an Engineering Data Science environment that
supports engineers and scientists (students, postdoctoral researchers, and
faculty) through a synergistic set of collaboration and education
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative effort follows
three thrusts. The first focuses on the reduction of the experimental design
space with data science tools targeting the discovery of new molecules and
polymers. The research develops a new, formal framework for pairing accurate
predictive simulations with data-driven models to create a scalable and
transferable workflow that can be deployed across multiple examples of molecular
engineering applications. The second thrust addresses a manifold of cross-
cutting needs at the intersection of image data analytics and characterization
of materials and systems. It also builds community cyberinfrastructure through
open-source software resources with support for execution in public clouds. The
final thrust focuses on improving manufacturing, optimization, and control. It
further enhances cyberinfrastructure resources through a suite of open-source
software solutions to systematically develop digital twin models for complex
engineering and manufacturing systems, and apply them for optimization and
control. This project is part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing
the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity and is co-funded by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.