* 1934313
* Production, Migration, &amp; Differentiation: Analyzing the Co-Evolution of Careers &amp; Knowledge Production
* SBE,SMA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Jeannette Colyvas, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 11/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Doctoral recipients represent a vital role in the economy, in the conduct of
science and innovation; the transfer of knowledge between industry, government,
and academe; and the education of the next generation of scientists and
engineers. Several studies have sought to examine the production of innovation,
commercialization, and publication of science. Less understood, however, are the
conditions for the production of scientists and engineers. This project examines
the conditions of doctoral training and how these conditions are related to
career trajectories and future research and innovation of these students. The
project will provide essential knowledge on the contextual factors which
contribute to a robust scientific environment. These results will be of use to
STEM departments and programs as they hire faculty, seek industry partnerships,
and construct policies for doctoral training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines doctoral training in the context of materials science and engineering
utilizing a multi-level comparative research design at the individual, lab, and
university levels with three interrelated goals. First, this project develops a
novel conceptual model for characterizing how labs manage and organize research.
It combines interviews with graduate students, faculty, and research staff with
data that are localized and readily available to universities (such as sponsored
projects data, disclosures, and annual reports) to analyze how different models
of lab management work on-the-ground. Second, it examines the relationship
between different lab models and the employment outcomes and research
productivity of individual doctoral recipients, sourcing data for the latter
from publicly available databases. To estimate the causal effect of the factors
in the lab where students train and address issues of endogeneity, this project
uses a quasi-experimental sample design and a model that accounts for sample
selection. Third, taking advantage of advances in machine learning and
computational text analysis, this project compares the outcomes of individual
graduates within and across labs and describes how graduates' career choices
impact the kind and content of research they produce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.