* 1934844
* GCR: Microbial Response to a Changing Planet: The Role of Microbes in Mineral Precipitation Resulting in Exceptional Fossil Preservation and CO2 Sequestration
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* John Scannella, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 09/30/2024
* USD 638,751.00

This Growing Convergence Research project will test the overarching hypotheses
that exceptional preservation of organic material was influenced, in part, by
microbially mediated, rapid deposition of carbonate minerals in response to
elevated atmospheric pCO2, and that the mechanisms by which these microbes
sequestered atmospheric CO2 as carbonate minerals can be discerned and harnessed
to mitigate rising atmospheric concentrations of this greenhouse gas. To
effectively study these hypotheses, a research team spanning microbiology,
proteomics, paleoimmunology, sedimentology/geochemistry, paleontology, and
engineering was assembled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project
will enhance understanding of: (i) mechanisms of exceptional preservation and
their potential application, (ii) the relationship between CO2 levels and
microbial evolution, (iii) characterization of environments under
greenhouse/high-pCO2 conditions, and iv) microbial participation in carbon
sequestration. Microbial mechanisms investigated within this proposed work may
provide a route for the development of economical and scalable methods to
sequester CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.