* 1934467
* Robust Estimation and Control of Dynamic Systems Experiencing Large Random Outliers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jason Speyer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 270,988.00

The bell shaped curve, known technically as the Gaussian probability density
function (pdf), has been a central element in engineering and financial
algorithms that process data and automate a desired operation. Unfortunately,
the Gaussian is quite limiting. For example, in air traffic control the distance
and bearing to an aircraft in a dynamic environment is measured by active radar.
This measurement is not exact, having an uncertainty or error in its value. This
uncertainty is not described well by the Gaussian pdf because the portion of the
bell shaped curve far from zero, called the tail of the pdf, is far smaller than
the radar data suggests: the Gaussian bell shaped curve is known to have a
light, rapidly decaying tail, while radar data is said to have a heavy tail. It
has been well recognized that reliance on the Gaussian pdf can be dangerous,
since many practical systems in engineering, economics, biology, financial
movements, earthquakes, atmospheric turbulence, etc., are poorly described by
Gaussian pdfs and better described by heavy tailed ones. However, the majority
of current data processing algorithms are based on the Gaussian pdf assumption
mainly because it leads to tractable, real-time implementations. The newly
proposed theory is a paradigm shift, which proposes new recursive and analytic
algorithms based on the very heavy tailed Cauchy and Laplace pdfs. Although no
physical process is explicitly Cauchy or Laplace distributed, since their tails
over bound other realistic densities, estimators and controllers that are based
on the Cauchy or Laplace pdfs are hypothesized to be robust to unknown realistic
physical densities. This robustness is especially true for the Cauchy pdf which
has a very heavy tail. Robustness is meant in the statistical sense, where the
estimator achieves adequate performance when faced with outliers or unexplained
events, and where these events may arise either as large measurement errors,
large process deviations, or due to misspecification of the dynamic model. There
is an adaptive aspect to these new estimators not found in the algorithms
commonly used today. Since extreme data is likely, the estimator is rich in
structure and hence is computationally more intense than its Gaussian
counterparts. The primary goal of the proposed study is to determine robust,
implementable, real-time, estimators and stochastic controllers by uncovering
their fundamental properties and constructing metrics that measure stability and
robustness. Thereby, these algorithms can be realized on computational hardware,
such as graphic processing units. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new class of robust,
implementable, real-time, vector-state, estimators and stochastic controllers
for linear dynamic systems with additive heavy-tailed Cauchy process and
measurement noises are to be further developed. The estimation methodology for
this vector-state, linear dynamic system with additive Cauchy noises was
realized only by developing a recursion for the analytic measurement update and
propagation of the character function of the unnormalized conditional
probability density function (ucpdf) of the state given the measurement history.
Over the last grant period, we noticed that a similar algorithm could be adapted
to linear systems with additive Laplace noises, in which the ucpdf is determined
directly using analytic and recursive relations. Both of these algorithms entail
significant numerical complexities due to their rich analytic structure. The
primary goal for the implementation of real-time vector-state estimators and
stochastic controllers is to determine approximations that will conserve the
basic structure of the character function of the Cauchy and the ucpdf of the
Laplacian, which are shown to be convergent with negligible performance error.
This study was performed with a colleague from the Technion in Israel under a
Bi-national Science Foundation (BSF) Grant. This international collaboration
will continue under the NSF/ENG/ECCS-BSF and BSF
grants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.