* 1934649
* Research Data Alliance Ideate Incubator (RDA-I2) : Conceptualizing an Interdisciplinary Research Framework for Strengthening Community Impact and Advancing an Innovation Platform
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Lynn Yarmey, Ronin Institute for Independent Scholarship Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 11/30/2023
* USD 2,202,049.00

The Research Data Alliance (RDA) is a global organization providing a community
infrastructure of researchers, data scientists, librarians, practitioners who
work within and across disciplines to identify and solve grand challenges of
data sharing and interoperability. This project augments the RDA infrastructure
with an incubator framework that can be used to accelerate data sharing and
data-driven innovation, by providing targeted community support and strategic
dissemination of community outputs. The goals are to establish mechanisms to
integrate and link work across different RDA working groups and improve the
discoverability and usability of RDA outputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
includes a pilot facilitation training program for RDA group chairs, to share
strategies and tactics for building better connections across efforts. In a
quickly-scaling organization, the chairs are uniquely placed as a consistent,
visible leadership presence for all group participants. By equipping chairs with
skills to lead more inclusive session discussions that give space to the
knowledge of the many participants, RDA can better leverage the Plenary meetings
to connect groups. A second goal of the project is to increase the
intelligibility and discoverability of RDA outputs, to prepare for broader
adoption of the RDA work. RDA's current process of documenting and tracking
approved and supported RDA outputs makes it difficult to capture the full array
of work associated with RDA, including publications, posters, lectures,
webinars, white-papers, and adoption stories. Developing a strategy to better
track output development and adoption would enhance the capability to support
all group work and to monitor, measure, and disseminate the impact of RDA group
outputs within the wider scientific community. In addition, enhancing the
documentation of organizational outputs would improve the ability of group
collaboration and cross-fertilization of ideas, as outputs are reused and
adapted to additional purposes, methods, and
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.