* 1934955
* GCR: Collaborative Research: Disentangling Environmental Change and Social Factors as Drivers of Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* Sonali McDermid, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 413,350.00

The objectives of this Growing Convergence Research project are to develop a
comprehensive analysis of large-scale human migrations and improve our ability
to predict them. The challenges that drive and are created by large-scale
migrations motivate this research into how regional and international migrant
flows will change in the future and how sensitive these flows are to changing
social and environmental conditions. The research team aims to achieve
convergence across geography, economics, political science, environmental
science, and crop sciences to better understand the causes of migration and
predict future mass-migrations. Such understanding will allow society to better
anticipate, adapt to, and manage such migrations to maximize human wellbeing in
both source and destination countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed
work, a team of researchers who are individually experts in the multiple subject
areas relevant to migration will work together to transcend their disciplinary
boundaries and develop a common language and methodology for understanding,
analyzing, modeling and predicting migration within social, economic, and
environmental contexts and their impacts on food production, security, and
household livelihoods. The team will engage in intentional convergence
activities where all team members together with stakeholders will work with
social, economic and environmental data and models to analyze the complexity of
the migration issues. This analysis will be translated into predictive models
that will be calibrated and verified against historical data. The modeling
effort will couple climate, crop, and global food trade models with models of
household livelihoods. These will drive agent-based models of migration
decisions that account for perceptions of opportunity and risk, migrant and
family networks, resources, and standard economic utility maximizing models. The
integrated modeling will be developed and modified as needed with input from the
stakeholder community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.