* 1934488
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 IEEE Computer Society International Symposium on VLSI (IEEE ISVLSI)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Saraju Mohanty, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2022
* USD 10,000.00

This award is to assist US-based graduate students to attend the 2019 IEEE
Computer Society International Symposium on Very Large Scale Integration (IEEE
ISVLSI) in Miami, Florida. Participation in IEEE ISVLSI and similar conferences
are valuable and important activities of the graduate school experience. It
provides students with the opportunity to interact with more senior researchers,
and exposes students to leading work and practical industry practices in this
important area of research. The long-term merits of this program's impact on
very large scale integration within computing research are well established.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will be held in Miami, Florida, July 15-17,
2019, will span three days and will consist of technical paper presentations,
panels, posters, and a student research forum. It will also feature keynote
speeches from leading researchers and practitioners in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student travel to conferences is an important activity.
Funds will be dispersed with preference given to students who would not
otherwise be able to attend the conference and students who are not already
scheduled to present a paper, paying particular attention to diversity and
relevance of the student's research interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.