* 1934151
* STEM+C: Integrating AI Ethics into Robotics Learning Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Stacey Forsyth, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 880,916.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) systems, tools, and techniques are being rapidly
adopted and used in devices and products that youth interact with on a daily
basis at home and in schools. Educators are starting to recognize the need to
teach K-12 students about AI and are developing novel programs, such as
robotics, to address this need. However, AI ethics, despite its critical
importance in youth's future personal, civic, and work lives, has been largely
neglected. This project develops and integrates AI ethics teaching modules into
existing robotics youth programs. As students learn about robotics, they will
also learn about emerging ethical issues in AI in the design of robots at the
same time, including fairness, transparency, autonomy, respect, accountability,
privacy, and security. The project aims to promote responsibility for AI ethics
and skills among students through two types of innovative interventions by
engaging learners in (1) stories based on AI ethics issues that are likely to be
meaningful to young adolescents, such as surveillance of their physical
activities, and (2) empathy driven hands-on activities with an embedded ethical
dilemma in which students will experience the process of committing an ethical
error, identifying the error, and fixing the error, potentially developing a
stronger sense of ownership of ethical issues and agency to address them. The
research will contribute to the understanding of the effects of integrating AI
ethics into STEM programs such as robotics for students, particularly regarding
their engagement in, awareness of, knowledge about, and sense of responsibility
for a range of emerging ethical issues underlying the use of AI in STEM and CS
fields. It will provide a new model for teaching AI to students integrated with
STEM concepts in a contextualized and relevant manner, by elevating ethics as a
primary concern, as opposed to as a side issue. This project is funded by the
STEM + Computing (STEM+C) program that supports research and development to
understand the integration of computing and computational thinking in STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions driving this project are:
(1) How does integrating AI ethics into a robotics program help develop
students' ethical thinking, while deepening their learning in STEM and CS? (2)
How do empathy-driven hands-on activities with embedded ethical dilemma help
cultivate students' sense of AI ethics responsibility; and (3) How do teachers
in various contexts integrate AI ethics modules into their own robotics
programs? Over the course of three years, AI ethics modules will be formatively
designed and studied to assess their effects on students' AI ethics reasoning
along with STEM and CS skills. Researchers will also study how educators in
different formal and informal contexts integrate these AI ethics modules into
their robotics programs. 72 middle school students will participate in a
between-subject research study while attending a 5-day robotics camp program in
three camp program conditions: camp program without AI ethics, camp program with
an AI ethics module separated from robotics program, and camp program with
robotics integrated with AI ethics. Researchers will also conduct a mixed
methods study of 50 robotics educators who have agreed to participate in an
online community, studying how teachers integrate AI ethics modules into their
own robotic programs. The resulting AI ethics modules will be disseminated
widely through partnerships with organizations and schools, as well as through
the project website. Given AI's far-reaching implications for our society, this
project aims to help students develop responsibility for AI to complement their
skill and knowledge about AI, so that more will be prepared and able to handle
ethical issues in their future professional practices in order to guide the
inevitable societal transformation driven by AI in a safer, fairer, and freer
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.