* 1934702
* Learning Engineering Ethics Through High-Impact Collaborative and Competitive Scenarios
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Scott Streiner, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 181,640.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving college
engineering students' knowledge about ethics and their ability to use ethics in
decision making. Across disciplines, engineering solutions often have major,
long-lasting impacts on society. As a result, engineers are frequently
confronted with social and ethical dilemmas in their professional lives. The
project aims improve the ability of future engineers to consider social impacts
and ethical issues in making decisions. Specifically the project aims to: 1)
understand how first year engineering students reason through ethical dilemmas
in an engineering context; 2) determine if interactive collaborative and
competitive scenarios are effective for teaching engineering ethics; and 3)
determine if these new approaches are more effective than traditional methods of
ethics instruction. Given the significant societal impacts of engineering
technical decisions, this project aims to understand and positively influence
how engineering students develop these crucial skills as part of their
professional development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use both the
Defining Issues Test 2 and the Engineering Ethical Reasoning Instrument to
quantitatively assess students’ ethical reasoning in the first year of
engineering programs at the University of Connecticut, Rowan University, and the
University of Pittsburgh. Additionally, qualitative assessments of student
ethical reasoning will be accomplished through think-aloud protocols followed by
coding of the results. Three different collaboratively developed interactive
scenarios for ethics education will be used in first year classes to determine
the impact of these interventions on students’ ethical reasoning. These results
will be compared to outcomes from traditional instructional techniques using a
split cohort model. As part of this project, the project team will use
previously developed instruments to assess students’ ethical reasoning and
develop and test several interactive scenarios for teaching ethical reasoning in
an engineering context. This project is supported by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.