* 1934962
* HDR TRIPODS: Collaborative Research: Foundations of Greater Data Science
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Alex Iosevich, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 814,165.00

The University of Rochester and Cornell University jointly establish the Greater
Data Science Cooperative Institute (GDSC). The GDSC is based on two founding
tenets. The first is that enduring advances in data science require combining
techniques and viewpoints across electrical engineering, mathematics,
statistics, and theoretical computer science. The investigators' goal is to
forge a consensus perspective on data science that transcends any individual
field. The second is that data-science research must be grounded in an
application domain. This helps to ensure that assumptions about the availability
and quality of data are realistic, and it allows methodological results to be
tested experimentally as well as theoretically. As such, the GDSC aims to
consider applications in medicine and healthcare, an important application
domain and one for which advances in data science can have a direct, positive
impact on society. The GDSC aims to tackle foundational questions that are
motivated by problems in healthcare, obtain solutions that fuse domain expertise
with application-agnostic methodologies, and ultimately yield scientific
advances that impact the way healthcare is provided. The GDSC aims to leverage
the physical proximity of the two institutions, and the unique strengths in each
of the core disciplines above and in medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GDSC's
cross-disciplinary research directions include: (i) Topological Data Analysis.
The challenges that high-dimensional, incomplete, and noisy data present are
great, but in many applications, exploiting the topological nature of the
problem is possible. GDSC aims to develop new fundamental methods and theory to
rigorously explore the promise of this unique approach. (ii) Data
Representation. Data compression, embeddings, and dimension reduction play a
fundamental role in data science. Inspired by new core challenges in biomedical
imaging, genomics, and neural-spike training data, GDSC aims to develop novel
source models and distortion measures, and ultimately seek a unifying
theoretical framework across domains and disciplines. (iii) Network &amp; Graph
Learning. Many of the fundamental challenges in applying data science to non-
homogeneous populations are best explored through a network or graph structure.
GDSC aims to develop new techniques for parameter-dependent eigenvalue problems
in spectral community detection, density-estimation methods on networks, and a
theoretical framework for time-varying graphical models to study dynamic
variable relations in time-evolving networks. (iv) Decisions, Control &amp;
Dynamic Learning. Sequential decisions are high-stakes in medicine. GDSC aims to
utilize systems and control-engineering methods to improve health and disease
management and develop new foundational theories and methods for label-efficient
active learning and dynamic treatment regimes. (v) Diverse &amp; Complex
Modalities. Big data is complex data, and major new innovations are needed. GDSC
aims to develop theoretical frameworks for inference under computational and
privacy constraints and for high-dimensional data without parametric model
assumptions. Text, image, and audio data present further challenges. To address
such challenges, GDSC aims to explore transition systems for graph parsing of
natural language and new fusion approaches for fully multimodal analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science Foundation's
Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.