* 1934703
* Nucleoid structure and function in plastids
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Andrzej Wierzbicki, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,193,128.00

This project will answer important questions about how genes in plant
chloroplasts are organized and how that organization impacts function. Because
chloroplasts are essential for the process of photosynthesis, which is necessary
for life on Earth, this work will have widespread impact. This research will
provide high-level training opportunities for undergraduate students, graduate
students and postdocs. In addition, the project will support an extensive
outreach program at the University of Michigan Museum of Natural History to
provide middle school students and the general public with an opportunity to
learn about genes, their functions, and the importance of genes for life on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Not all genes within a eukaryotic cell such as a
plant or animal cell are present in the nucleus. Mitochondria and plastids (like
chloroplasts) are cellular organelles that contain their own DNA. The genomes of
these organelles are remnants of ancient bacteria that once lived symbiotically
within their host eukaryotic cells. This incorporation led to the modification
of organellar genomes that subsequently impacted their structural organization
and function. Whereas nuclear genome organization is the subject of intensive
research, important structural aspects of the organellar genomes and their
functions remain much less understood. This project will apply genomic
approaches that have been traditionally used for nuclear genomes to determine
how plastid DNA is structurally organized and packaged. Additional goals will be
to investigate what role DNA packaging plays in controlling how plastid genes
work. The results will improve our understanding of plastid biology and
photosynthesis. More broadly, it will reveal general rules governing the
structure and function of genomes and may provide clues about how genome
function could be enhanced by engineering DNA
packaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was jointly funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by
the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, both in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.