* 1934515
* Experimental tests of the role genetic architecture, resource competition, and gene flow play during speciation
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Justin Meyer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 776,946.00

One of the first lessons students receive in biology class is that life is
organized into species; clusters of organisms that look alike and share similar
DNA. The pattern of species is so ubiquitous that the question of why this
pattern occurs is often overlooked. Why has life not evolved into a single
superorganism rather an array of species, or why has it evolved into discrete
clusters rather than a continuum? Researchers who study the process called
speciation aim to answer these fundamental questions. This project is one of the
first of its kind to extend the research of speciation to viruses. Until
recently, it was thought that viral diversity was arrayed along a continuum and
did not coalesce into distinct species. New information on viral genetics has
revealed that viruses do indeed form into distinct clusters. The researchers
will use laboratory experiments and state of the art biotechnologies to
determine how different biological variables affect viral speciation. This
research will add to a general understanding of speciation, as well as to
improve our understanding of the drivers of viral evolution. The researchers
will design teaching modules for undergraduate students to learn about virus
classification and speciation, while also contributing to virology
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In 2016, the researchers published a landmark
paper in the journal Science where they reported observing a virus called
bacteriophage lambda evolve into two new species. This was a unique observation
because speciation was thought to take too long to observe during the course of
a laboratory experiment and because at the time, it was debatable whether or not
viruses formed into species. The research group is building on this previous
result by determining how three biological variables – genetic architecture,
resource competition, and gene flow – affect lambda’s speciation. To accomplish
this, the researchers will employ synthetic biology technologies to measure the
fitness landscape of lambda, computer programs to simulate and predict lambda
evolution, and evolution experiments to test the predictions. In addition, an
education module will be created to teach students in a course called Phage
Hunters about viral speciation and species concepts. Phage Hunters is taught at
universities worldwide and provides training through authentic research
experiences. One of the goals of the module will be to have students perform
research by discovering new viral species through bioinformatic
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.