* 1934230
* GOALI: Additive Manufacturing of Multi-material Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Amit Bandyopadhyay, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 538,700.00

Multi-material structures with varying functionality can offer unique solutions
to engineering problems compared to single-material, multi-part structures.
However, traditional approaches to manufacture multi-material structures involve
separate processes for each part, followed by joining operation/s. Such
approaches are cost intensive and failure prone. In many cases, incompatible
materials cannot be processed using such approaches. This Grant Opportunities
for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award will enable fundamental
research to understand the influence of computer-aided microstructural designs
and compositional variations at multi-material interfaces by measuring physical,
mechanical, thermal and biological properties to solve long-standing multi-
material manufacturing challenges for structures used in aerospace and
biomedical applications. Multi-material additive manufacturing structures can be
designed and manufactured with performance improvements in user-defined
locations, with variations in properties like hardness, corrosion resistance,
and environmental adaptation selected exactly where needed. Such an approach can
allow users, designers and manufacturers to create innovative component designs
with multi-functionality. and can help the US to lead in the next generation
manufacturing of a variety of multifunctional multi-material structures. The
multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in research and training to positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Multi-material additive manufacturing offers a
new paradigm in materials processing. However, there are no manufacturing
guidelines for design, processing and characterization of multi-material
additive manufacturing. This research will address critical scientific
challenges and fill the knowledge gaps related to multi-material additive
manufacturing using a directed energy deposition-based additive manufacturing
system. The research team will understand mechanisms for minimizing diffusion of
incompatible ions to prevent metallurgical failures at interfaces through
evaluation of physical, mechanical, thermal and biological properties. The
research team will also do preliminary finite element analysis to understand how
thermal stress accumulation influences microstructure during additive
manufacturing. Direct input from experts in the additive manufacturing equipment
manufacturing industry will be a valuable tool towards preparing students to
face real world engineering challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.