* 1934998
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: When Two Worlds Collide: Examining the Influence of Academic Entrepreneurship on the Professional Obligations of Academics
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* John Levin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 19,424.00

Academic entrepreneurship is the means by which faculty and students at
universities engage in the commercialization of research and innovative ideas.
By encouraging members of the academic community to participate in
entrepreneurship, the university benefits in the forms of new technologies and
inventions. Economic benefits are realized both for the institution and for
society. While these immediate economic contributions are important, the
university has an amplifying effect in education. By training students in
innovation, the university can create a more innovative scientific workforce,
both within and outside the walls of academe. However, this may come at a cost
to the other roles that faculty play--in teaching, research, and service.
Therefore, this doctoral dissertation research improvement project investigates
the relationship between entrepreneurship and these other professional roles.
The project examines three public universities with (respectively) low, medium,
and high levels of entrepreneurship. These differing institutional contexts
allows for an investigation of the role of institutional environment on
entrepreneurship and education. By examining faculty perceptions of their
professional commitment to their students, this project sheds light on how
faculty entrepreneurial experience shapes their classroom instruction and their
educational goals aimed at their students. Furthermore, the project addresses
the importance of federal funding and federal programs in legitimizing and
reinforcing faculty efforts to integrate their entrepreneurial experience into
their teaching and mentoring of students. This project will inform the creation
of better institutional policies and practices on academic entrepreneurship that
best engage faculty and students in innovative activities without compromising
the core education and research missions of institutions. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project follows a qualitative research design with
a phenomenological approach to interviews. The project is conducted at a public
university system in California. All participating campuses follow the same
institutional policies but have different institutional environments and
approaches to innovation. Participating campuses are characterized by their
levels of engagement in entrepreneurship, which is measured by the number of
spin-off firms and the total income generated by patenting and licensing.
Faculty are recruited for the project because of (1) their participation in
spin-off firms, (2) their conduct of research in a STEM field, and (3) their
teaching of undergraduate and graduate students. Three methods are used to
collect data. First, institutional policies on faculty participation in
entrepreneurial activities and policies for tenure and promotion, as well as
mission statements of the university and their entrepreneurship centers, are
reviewed and examined to contextualize faculty perceptions and entrepreneurial
motivations in their institutional settings. Second, interviews are conducted
with faculty and students to explore their experiences in entrepreneurship and
their entrepreneurial motivations. Third, interviews with directors and staff at
the entrepreneurship centers in each university are conducted to contextualize
and triangulate faculty interviews. Although faculty interviews constitute the
primary data set, conventional content analysis is performed in all student,
faculty, and staff interviews. In doing so, this project aims to connect faculty
entrepreneurial experience with their instructional roles and shed light on how
faculty entrepreneurial engagement shapes and influences an entrepreneurship
education agenda of the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.