* 1934241
* The 16th US-Korea Forum on Nanotechnology: Nanomedicine Focusing on Single Cell Level and Sensors Related to Human Cognition and Brain Research
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Myung Jhon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2020
* USD 46,605.00

Since 2003, the Forum on Nanotechnology Forum between U.S. and Korea has been
held at alternating countries. The forum focuses on enhancing research
collaboration in the field of nanotechnology conversion among scientists and
engineers from both countries. Specifically, a joint forum facilitates
networking between the research communities and agencies of both countries,
enabling each side to exchange information and explore opportunities for
research collaboration. This year the topics are nanomedicine focusing on
single-cell level and sensors related to human cognition and brain research. The
forum includes 8 senior presenters and 7 early-career presenters from U.S. and
roughly equal number of Korean presenters will also participate. Organizing
committee of this forum strives to place emphasis on diversity. This forum
actively encourages partnerships in nanotechnology for breakthroughs in various
topics, in addition to strengthening achievements and assessing the progress on
recommendation made during the previous forums. All of the forum proceedings and
findings are available on Carnegie Mellon's website for broad audiences. The
contribution of this proposed forum is its ability to bring together a bi-
national community of expert researchers and innovators who are working on the
leading edge of nanomedicine focusing on single cell level and sensors related
to human cognition. This forum will stimulate efforts to promote the above two
areas by fully utilizing nanotechnology convergence to bio-information-cognitive
technology. The outcome of this forum will lead to milestone and vigorous
research collaboration of both countries where nanotechnology convergence will
generate a great impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As we enter the 4th industrial
revolution, which is characterized by a fusion of technologies that is blurring
the lines between the physical, digital, and biological spheres, the rapid
increase in the enormous amount of data processed and stored led us to a need
for an emerging field of technologies including human cognition and
nanomedicine. To fully explore these technologies, nanotechnology convergence
with bio-information-cognitive methods play a critical role. The following two
topics will be scrutinized during this 16th Forum. (a) Nanomedicine focusing on
single cell level: Current challenges in nanomedicine area involve i) long-term
fate for newly developed materials (distribution in space and time) and how to
integrate already-developed nano-materials into application synergistically, ii)
the niche of nanomaterials, iii)changing the general paradigm of medical
practice, iv) precisely monitoring patients for preventive medicine, v)
personalized medicine, vi) batch-to-batch consistency validation, vii) need for
safer biomaterial, and viii) ability to target moving parts. Due to the
importance of single-cell nanomedicine, this topic will be examined during the
consecutive forums. (B) Sensors related to human cognition and brain research:
Key technical components of human performance modification (HPM) are the
nanosensors. Novel nanosensors that are capable of new functions allowing an era
in HPM will be investigated. This technology includes an image processing unit
and an artificial intelligence unit to name a few. With added sensory inputs and
augmented sensors, ultimately HPM can drastically enhance human performance on a
daily basis. The convergence of nanotechnology is likely to result in the
development of novel sensor technologies that can advance in HPM including
vision, audition, gustation, olfaction, and
somatosensation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.