* 1934826
* 2019 Gordon Research Conference on Nanoporous Materials and Their Applications: Porous Materials from Invention to Emerging Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Jeffrey Rimer, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2019
* USD 18,000.00

The award will provide funding in support of participation by U.S. graduate
students, post-doctoral scholars, and early-career researchers at the 2019
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Nanoporous Materials and Their Applications:
Porous Materials from Invention to Emerging Applications. The GRC and related
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will be held at Proctor Academy (Andover, New
Hampshire) from August 3-9, 2019. The combined GRC/GRS will provide partial
support for approximately 33 student attendees from U.S. institutions to focus
on new developments in the field of nanoporous materials, including novel
materials and their potential application to a wide range of commercial
technologies in areas as diverse as chemical manufacturing, petroleum and
natural gas refining, electronic materials, and medical applications. The
students will also benefit from interactions with senior leaders in the field
and related networking activities designed to highlight career opportunities
related to nanoporous material technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nanoporous
Materials and Their Applications GRS/GRC will focus on new developments in the
field of nanoporous materials. Such materials (zeolites, porous metal oxides,
metal-organic frameworks, porous carbon, porous cages and liquids and similar
materials) are amongst today's most dynamic and diversified research fields. The
program addresses important new findings related to the invention of novel
materials, characterization of their unique properties, and the use of these
materials in emerging applications involving catalysis, separations, gas
storage, and other processes of commercial and environmental importance. The
program addresses these topics through invited lectures, poster presentations,
and general discussion focused on linking fundamental understanding to potential
applications. Emphasis will be placed on intermingling different classes of
nanoporous materials, such as zeolites and metal-organic frameworks. The program
also balances theoretical and experimental approaches to addressing questions
related to structure and applicability. Beyond the technological aspects, the
conference seeks to gather leading and emerging scientists in this field and
bring them together to share ideas and foster new collaborations. With respect
to this larger goal, the GRC seeks to provide a common language for our diverse
student body; to raise the comfort-level of our student/postdoc participants;
and, through these efforts, to develop a tightly-woven community held together
by a common interest in nanoporous materials. The accompanying Gordon Research
Seminar that is dedicated to and organized by graduate students and post-
doctoral researchers will aid in the active participation of this new generation
of scientists. The collegial, retreat-like atmosphere of the conference, with
exciting invited lectures, which are complemented by lively poster sessions, as
well as communal dinners, opportunities for informal gatherings, and mentoring
panels, provides a venue for scientists from different disciplines to brainstorm
together and promotes cross-disciplinary collaborations in the various research
areas represented. Additional efforts have been made by the organizers to
encourage the participation of underrepresented minorities and women. At this
meeting, 25% of the invited speakers and discussion leaders are women. In
addition, an informal power hour focusing on the career development of women in
science will be included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.