* 1934711
* I-Corps: Technical Framework for Testing, Simulating, and Designing Stable Assets
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Andreea Minca, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is enhanced
ability to design stable assets and currencies, particularly in the
cryptocurrency `stablecoin' space. This project develops testing and design
technology that allows a scientific approach to designing new stablecoins and
provides tools for agents in decentralized finance to make informed decisions
about risk and investment. Both serve to enhance the long-term stability of
stablecoins, which could form the basis for a robust decentralized financial
system and facilitate economic adoption of cryptocurrencies. The testing and
design technology can be used by stablecoin companies and investors in these
markets (such as hedge funds). For the former, the technology is useful to
perform validation and to make informed design choices. In the latter, the
technology can be used to provide trading and value indicators and to measure
the risks in different positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
develops a framework for understanding stable assets that provides the testing,
simulation, and design capabilities missing in the decentralized finance space.
This requires new financial models involving various algorithmic contracts
between anonymous agents in a multi-period system that requires recurring
actions without a central bank. Aside from these models, which explain actual
stablecoin movements, no existing models apply to this setting. This framework
involves substantial market design based on these models. Market design is a new
field at the intersection of economics and computer science; it studies how
markets can be designed to work well. The complexity of stablecoin protocols
presents a substantial computer science component to the research. The models
enable market simulation and understanding of market dynamics arising from
different protocol design, which allows improved learning in how to design
better stablecoins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.