* 1934836
* GCR: Biomolecular Systems Engineering - Unlocking the Potential of Biological Programming
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* Matthew Realff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,822,852.00

This Growing Convergence Research project aims at development of the emerging
field of Biomolecular Systems Engineering. To accomplish this goal the team
incorporates expertise from synthetic biology, protein engineering, process
design, control theory and circuit design. The convergence of these disciplines
will facilitate a radically new approach toward biological programming and the
tools to accomplish these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed
work is to overcome reproducibility issues currently associated with the field
of biological engineering by systemic organization and development of: i)
engineering workflows, ii) process design tools, iii) curation and validation of
standardized parts and iv), undergraduate and graduate pedagogy to advance the
field of biological engineering. Successful completion of the proposed work will
result in the creation of systematic workflows for the production and reporting
of standardized biological unit operations and a new biological design software
framework that will enable the production of scalable transcriptional programs,
memory structures, and control systems for a variety of biological
chassis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.