* 1934513
* Effect of heterogeneous particles and surfactants on the stability and rheology of fluid interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,966.00

Fluid-fluid interfaces, such as air-water interface in a soap bubble, are
commonplace in a variety of products such as in household cleaning, cosmetics,
and pharmaceuticals. Oftentimes, very small particles and some specific
molecules (called surfactants) are used to stabilize such interfaces (to prevent
them from popping). Therefore, the stability and strength of these interfaces is
dictated by the type and strength of interactions between the small particles
and surfactants. The goal of this project is to investigate the combined effect
of particles and surfactants on the stability and flow behavior of interfaces.
State-of-the-art laboratory experiments and computer simulations at the
molecular level will be used in this research. This will lead to scientific
advances in a wide range of technological applications from targeted delivery of
drugs to recovery of oil trapped in underground reservoirs. The advanced
experimental and computational techniques described in this project will also
generate new knowledge to be used in educating students at both undergraduate
and graduate level through the elective courses that will be offered by the
investigators. The project will also support K-12 outreach activities that will
be organized to demonstrate interfacial properties in soft materials to pre-
college students in order to attract them to STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will generate new
fundamental knowledge on the interaction of heterogeneous colloidal particles
and surfactant molecules in presence of interfaces. Tuning the assembly process
using heterogeneous colloidal building blocks can advance the design of
innovative materials and responsive structures. Additionally, the open nature of
fluid interfaces makes them a promising platform for applications in which
dynamic transport is crucial, such as bi-phasic catalytic reactions. Therefore,
a critical knowledge gap exists in complex interfacial systems comprised of both
heterogenous colloidal particles and surfactant molecules, especially in
elucidating the rich physical mechanisms that affect the synergism of
heterogeneous particles and surfactants at interfaces. Furthermore, fluid
interfaces are not static and they are constantly subject to external
disturbances; thus, there is a need to study the stability of these interfacial
systems in response to applied stresses in order to develop a better
understanding of their dynamic behavior and rheology in conditions relevant to
real applications. Micro- and nanoparticles with several types of
heterogeneities ? particularly shape and surface chemical heterogeneity ? will
be fabricated and experimental analysis of particle-laden interfaces will be
conducted in the absence of surfactants. Computations using coarse-grained
techniques will be employed to understand the molecular interactions driving the
experiments. The synergy between the experimental and computational tools will
then be employed in more complex systems that involve both heterogeneous
particles and surfactant molecules in order to address phenomena across multiple
length and times scales (molecular scale interactions between micro- and
nanoparticles and multifluid systems). The anticipated outcomes, rooted in
fundamental understanding, include design rules for heterogeneous colloidal
particles/surfactant systems with tailored interfacial behavior and rheology at
fluid/fluid interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.