* 1934383
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic and Thermodynamic Mechanisms of Heat Extremes in the Northern Hemisphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Deepti Singh, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2024
* USD 278,386.00

We commonly think of heat waves as merely unpleasant or inconvenient, but they
can also be deadly. For instance a 1995 heat wave resulted in over 600 deaths in
Chicago, and the European heat wave of 2003 claimed more than 50,000 lives. Heat
waves also cause indirect harm by contributing to crop failures, wildfires,
droughts, and poor air quality. Heat wave frequency has increased dramatically
over the past decades, accompanying the rise of global mean temperature, and
further increases are expected as temperature continues to rise. Warmer
temperatures also lead to more "concurrent heat waves", meaning simultaneous
heat waves that cover a substantial fraction of the summer hemisphere land
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weather patterns leading to heat waves are easy to
identify, commonly involving stagnant high-pressure systems accompanied by clear
skies and subsiding air. But more perceptive analysis is required to understand
why those weather patterns form, how long they remain in place, and the extent
to which maximum temperatures within them are affected by the dryness of the
surface or other local effects. A further consideration is that heat waves are
typically identified as prolonged periods of extremely hot weather, but high
humidity can matter as much as high temperature for human health effects.
Compared to traditional heat waves the meteorology of humid heat waves is
relatively unexplored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted here considers
the contributions of dynamic and thermodynamic processes to heat waves
considering both dry and humid events. A key consideration is the extent to
which heat waves are prolonged and intensified by dry soil, which prevents
evaporative cooling of the land surface. Another is the extent to which distinct
physical mechanisms lead to dry and humid events, where humid events are defined
as extremes of the wet bulb temperature (WBT). WBT is the lowest temperature
that can be achieved through evaporative cooling given ambient temperature and
moisture. It is a good indicator of human heat stress as we rely on evaporation
of perspiration to avoid heat stress at high
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One analysis tool is causal effect networks
(CENs), a graphical technique borrowed from information theory and machine
learning in which causality is established through lagged regression.
Preliminary work using CENs suggests that an early summer heat wave can lead to
reduced precipitation, which dries the soil and promotes additional heat waves.
The work is performed using a combination of observations and output from
climate model simulations of present-day and projected future climate, and model
simulations are devised to further test and examine physical
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of practical as well as scientific
interest given the severe consequences of heat waves as noted above. Outreach to
stakeholders concerned with heat wave impacts is performed through the
Consortium for Climate Risk in the Urban Northeast (CCRUN), where one of the
researchers has a leadership role. Interactions with students interested in
climate impacts is enabled through the lead researcher's role as Director of the
Masters degree granting Climate and Society program at Columbia University. The
project also involves a Primarily Undergraduate Institution (PUI), and results
are incorporated into undergraduate classroom teaching. In addition, two
graduate students are supported through this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.