* 1934745
* The Learner Data Institute: Harnessing The Data Revolution To Make The Learning Ecosystem More Effective, Efficient, and Engaging
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Vasile Rus, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,584,309.00

The project will lay the foundation for a Learner Data Institute, to further
understanding of how people learn, how to improve adaptive instructional
systems, and how to create learning systems that are more effective, efficient,
engaging, and affordable. An interdisciplinary team of people from academia,
industry, and government will work together to improve the effectiveness of the
learning ecosystem for the benefit of its hundreds of thousands of students,
prepare teachers for the future learning ecosystem, and contribute to
accelerating discovery and transforming the education ecosystem through the use
of big data and cloud computing. The project will impact a number of communities
including learning sciences, data science, artificial intelligence in education,
assessment, educational data mining, and machine learning. The outcomes will be
widely disseminated through training materials, workshops, tutorials, and a
course for researchers and practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-year
conceptualization phase of the Learner Data Institute will focus on building a
strong community of researchers, define research priorities, and develop
interdisciplinary prototype solutions that address critical student learning,
cyber-learning, and learning engineering challenges. Based on modern theories of
learning and recent advances in educational technologies, artificial
intelligence, sensing technologies, signal processing, and data science, the
team will explore new frontiers in multi-faceted (cognitive, motivational,
emotional, etc.) learner data collection, analysis, and visualization in order
to understand and possibly transform how learners learn with technology. The
multi-disciplinary team will address core research questions such as: (1) how to
transform a widely distributed group of interdisciplinary researchers,
developers, and practitioners into a community of practice that can fully
exploit the data revolution for the benefit of the learners and educational
stakeholders; (2) how adaptive instructional systems (AISs) and data science can
be used as a research vehicle to further understanding of how learners learn;
(3) how the human-technology partnership with data and data science can be used
to improve learners? and teachers? ability to employ technology in ways that
facilitate learning and improve the effectiveness, scalability, and
affordability of AISs in order to maximize the potential of learning ecologies
of the future; and (5) more generally, how to extend the frontiers of data
science to include: new methods of data collection and design; more
interpretable, knowledge-rich machine learning methods (e.g., by combining Deep
Learning with Markov Logic); scalable new inference and learning algorithms
symmetries and joint dependencies in the data; and methods for identifying
causal mechanisms from unstructured, semi-structured, and structured data. While
the project will address core educational tasks in the context of online and
blended learning environments, the proposed data science methods and models are
generally applicable to other instructional contexts as well as other science
and engineering areas. All models, software, processes, and data used in the
project will be documented and disseminated for everyone to use and build on the
outcomes of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the
National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution Big Idea activity.
The effort is jointly funded by the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.