* 1934879
* Physics of Living Systems at StatPhys27
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Marcelo Magnasco, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2020
* USD 9,996.00

This award will support the participation of researchers working on the Physics
of Living Systems (PoLS) at the 27th International Conference on Statistical
Physics, StatPhys27, which will be held in Buenos Aires, Argentina in July 2019.
It is expected that StatPhys27 will bring together about 700 participants from
all over the world, including senior and young researchers and graduate
students. Statistical Physics is largely interdisciplinary, so that the
participation of researchers with diverse scientific backgrounds is expected.
StatPhys27 will last for five days. Associated to StatPhys27 there will be an
outreach activity with three talks for the general public at the National
Science Museum. Two of the talks will be in the field of PoLS. There will also
be sessions on human rights and on inclusion and diversity in physics and an
outreach activity for the general public. Taking active part in StatPhys27 will
allow the researchers working in the field of PoLS to reach out to new
communities of students and researchers. The plenary talks of StatPhys27 will be
videotaped and made available at the conference website. The possibility of
streaming them live over the Internet is under consideration. The International
Centre for Theoretical Physics of Trieste (ICTP) has offered to set up a special
conference room at its premises where people could watch the video-streaming.
Thus, StatPhys27 is expected to have a huge impact in various places.
Furthermore, the outreach activity that is planned to take place at the Science
Museum in Buenos Aires will allow the general public to learn about the subjects
of statistical physics and the physics of living
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;StatPhys is the largest and most prestigious
conference on the nowadays broadly interdisciplinary area of statistical
physics. Held triennially in different parts of the world, it attracts most of
the community that does research on the subject. Ten renowned scientists will
give plenary talks and another 30 will do so at one of the four planned parallel
sessions of StatPhys27. The conference will also host the Boltzmann Medal and
Young Scientist in Statistical Physics ceremonies. The recipient of the
prestigious Boltzmann Medal will give a plenary talk. StatPhys27 will embrace a
variety of subjects including Physics of Living Systems, Complex and
Interdisciplinary Systems, Soft Matter, Out-of-equilibrium phenomena and
Nonlinear Physics, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.