* 1934887
* GCR: Life Cycle Management of Materials: Sustainable Biomass to Designer Polymer Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* Delphis Levia, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,882,069.00

This Growing Convergence Research proposal describes fundamental, high-impact
studies that can enhance understanding of, and provide solutions to, the major
challenges associated with the use of biomass toward generating designer polymer
systems. The proposed efforts are unique as they address the physical science,
engineering, geoscience, and toxicology impacts of advanced materials life cycle
management through the convergence of multiple disciplines, including:
ecohydrology, catalytic science (experimental - synthetic and biological, and
computational), polymer chemistry, macromolecular science, biomolecular
engineering, and animal and food science, to spawn a new overarching discipline
around Materials Life Cycle Management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable the
development of viable routes to sustainable biobased materials generation, the
team will explore the following basic science topics: (i) synthetic (catalytic)
approaches to the deconstruction of biomass; (ii) enzymatic routes to the
selective and 'programmable' incorporation of functional groups to polymer
precursors; (iii) structure/property relationships in soft materials, linking
feedstock and depolymerization routes to polymer properties; (iv) processing
protocols to generate multi-component interpenetrating networks (IPNs); (v)
assays to determine structure/activity relationships that predict
[macro]molecular toxicity applicable to biobased materials; and, (vi) routes to
non-invasively assess lignin composition in trees/plants through dissolved
organic carbon chemistry and stemflow analysis. By working on these topics, the
research team plans to establish a fundamental and translatable roadmap that
links environmental factors and biodiversity -to- catalysis -to- macromolecular
materials chemistry and polymer design/characterization/processing -to-
molecular toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Growing Convergence Research program , the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.