* 1934578
* The Stanford Data Science Collaboratory
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Fiorenza Micheli, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

Data-driven inquiry is key to all aspects of science and discovery, and data-
based decisions are becoming integral to society. The challenges and the
importance of meeting them are especially critical when the goal is to obtain
relevant, valid, reproducible scientific insights. The Stanford Data Science
Collaboratory will confront these challenges by creating a community of faculty,
postdoctoral scholars, students, and research fellows that leverage data science
methods and domain knowledge to tackle pressing problems. In the Collaboratory,
data scientists will work closely with scholars from other fields who rely on
large, accurate, dependable datasets and data science techniques. The
Collaboratory will foster the work of researchers who study the ethical issues
related to data collection and use, and will use data to solve societal and
scientific problems. A hallmark will be thorough validation of data and a
careful statistical calibration of the evidence to avoid misinterpretations that
could have adverse consequences. A second major goal of the Collaboratory is the
growth of a citizenry literate in data science: universities have an obligation
to ensure the next generation understands how to interpret and learn from data,
and how to collect and manage it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Collaboratory
identifies a set of five high-profile, high-impact projects that domain
scientists deem important, and where they believe they are unable to make
progress without a paradigm shift in the way they approach data sets. The first
two concern a sustainable relation between humans and the environment, namely,
(1) the problem of managing coral reefs in a changing climate and (2) reducing
illegal fishing and forced labor in tuna supply chains. To make progress, the
project will leverage new data sources: satellite remote sensing, ground
monitoring stations based on soundscape, and genomic measurements that track
biodiversity and evolution. The other three projects are about fractures in
society and steps towards a sustainable one: (3) How to understand the
determinants of poverty in the U.S.; (4) How to detect and track political
framing in digital media; and (5) How to develop data science tools that support
equitable treatment between individuals. Public data streams (e.g., social media
apps, Wikipedia and Wikidata and moderate-resolution satellite imagery) as well
as private-sector data (e.g., cell phone records, Facebook activity, internet
search queries, drone imagery and fine-resolution satellite data) will inform
understanding of the mechanisms causing poverty. To meet the research goals, the
Collaboratory will incentivize faculty, students and postdocs to come together
to find new data science solutions by supporting collaborative research teams
and brainstorming working groups. The Collaboratory will also engage the
undergraduate community by providing hands-on guided scientific research
experience. To enlarge collaboration beyond Stanford, the Collaboratory will
host outside visitors and invite scientists to campus for an annual
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.