* 1934725
* DELTA: Descriptors of Energy Landscape by Topological Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Henry Adams, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,600,000.00

Twenty years ago, machine learning (ML) began a trajectory of
theoretical/algorithmic improvements that have led to advanced materials for
energy efficiency and molecular machines that synthesize molecules in ways
unfathomable by the human hand. Those key advances were based upon a foundation
of statistical methods that now mirror the field of topological data analysis
(TDA) - which combines algebraic topology with computational methods to extract
new knowledge by characterizing the global shape of data. Professor Clark at
Washington State University, Professor Adam at Colorado State, Professor Pflaum
at University Colorado Boulder, Professor Sundararaman at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, and Professor Zhang at University of Illinois Urbana Champagne are
developing the Institute for Data-Intensive Research in Science and Engineering
- Frameworks entitled "Descriptors of Energy Landscapes Using Topological Data
Analysis" (DELTA). They are working on advancing TDA for the study of intensive
and complex data sets found in Chemistry by focusing upon the development of
methods and software tools that characterize the function that describes energy
flow during chemical transformations, known as the energy landscape. Scalable
and extensible TDA tools are used to extract new information from the energy
landscape, understanding how it changes under different applied conditions and
supporting a new paradigm in Chemistry, including the long-standing challenge of
real-time optimization and control of chemical systems. At the intersection of
Math, Data Science, and Chemistry, students trained under DELTA and its
collaborative partners develop the skills and the foundation for a new community
of practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemists generally do not know how the
underlying energy landscape of transformation changes as a function of system
conditions, nor are there quantifiable relationships between intra- and
intermolecular interactions and its topological features. Topological data
analysis (TDA) is uniquely poised to extract new information from the energy
landscape (EL), as it combines algebraic topology with computational methods to
characterize its global shape of data. The Descriptors of Energy Landscapes
Using Topological Data Analysis (DELTA) Institute Frameworks adapts TDA for
chemistry applications, invoking persistent homology, Morse theory, catastrophe
theory, and other topological descriptors and creating new software tools that
are accessible by domain experts. Tackling the 3N-dimensional energy surface
necessitates scalable and extensible tools that first reduce its dimensionality
(Objective 1), then yield geometric and topological descriptors that quantify
the way in which the EL is perturbed under different chemical conditions
(Objective 2). This provides the basis for new predictive methods that
accelerate sampling of large regions of the EL and have have learned how to
optimize landscape topology to control the fate of reacting molecules and phase
behavior (Objective 3). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the
National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution Big Idea activity.
The effort is jointly funded by the Division of Chemistry within the NSF
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.