* 1934438
* Simulation-Based Design of Polymer Nanocomposites for Structural Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/26/2018,07/31/2021
* Sez Atamturktur Russcher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2021
* USD 276,680.00

In conventional engineered materials, an engineering designer often selects a
material from tabulated databases of products and completes an iterative process
of checking the adequacy of the conceptual design for meeting performance
requirements. The final engineering design is thus handicapped by the initial
material selection. A material designer, on the other hand, works with a library
of material compositions and processing methodologies with a goal to discover
how new properties emerge from microstructure control, for example. The focus of
material design is thus limited to achieving specific property enhancements
without considering the end application of the material. There is a need to
unify the material and engineering design processes so that new materials can be
intentionally designed with the specific goal of incorporation into a useful
product, and the engineering design can be freed from the upfront material-based
constraints. This project will establish a concurrent design process combining
top-down goal-oriented decision-making to optimize engineering system
performance with bottom-up constraint-aware algorithms to efficiently search the
domain of feasible material designs for polymer nanocomposites. This research
project will provide innovation in design methodologies, enabling a competitive
advantage to our nation's manufacturing industries as well as energy and defense
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental research for
the development of a new design paradigm termed Concurrent, Unified, State-aware
Tailoring of Materials (CUSToM). The PIs will take a Bayesian approach to
searching over the design domain, facilitating explicit consideration of the
uncertainties in every aspect of the process. In the CUSToM framework, computer
simulation (either empirical or first-principles based) is an integral part of
the search process capturing the material scientist's domain knowledge. The
hypothesis underlying this project is that the top-down search processes
engrained in the CUSToM framework will yield products with superior performance
compared to those obtained with conventional materials design. This hypothesis
will be tested on the design of polymer nanocomposites with precisely determined
material microstructure, composition, and processing methods for applications in
wind energy; specifically high-strength, light-weight composites for next
generation wind turbine blades. The broader impacts of this work will go beyond
providing a new design paradigm for engineered materials to include the training
of undergraduate and graduate researchers, exposure of undergraduate and
graduate students to the world of entrepreneurship, and outreach to K-12
students in order to motivate them towards careers in STEM related fields.