* 1934388
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Comparative developmental dynamics: single-cell analysis of maize meristem trajectories
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2024
* Dennis Shasha, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 10/31/2024
* USD 4,356,988.00

Maize is one of the most important crops in the United States and plays a major
role in the country's food production and its economy. The ability of maize to
produce and grow robustly is dependent on growth centers within the plant known
as meristems. This study examines two meristem types in detail -- the
inflorescence meristem, which ultimately produces all the edible grain, and the
root meristem, which forages nutrients and water from the soil. While these
meristems are located at opposite ends of the plant, they express many of the
same genes and share functional properties. This project takes advantage of new
techniques, developed in medical research, called single-cell RNA-sequencing
that can dissect an entire organ, like a meristem, one cell at a time, to find
which genes are active in a given cell. After such cell-by-cell analysis in root
and shoot meristems, the project will use computational techniques to
reconstruct each meristem from individual cells, like assembling a tile mosaic.
The project will use another set of computational techniques to identify common
aspects of gene regulation among cells of the different meristems, analogous to
finding common patterns across mosaics. In biological terms, these common
patterns represent a core, conserved set of functions that control important
traits such as growth. Knowledge of such core gene regulators could be used by
breeders to improve traits like grain yield in the shoot and drought resistance
in the root. The project will also train junior researchers in these emerging
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Root and shoot meristems are traditionally
studied separately, but aspects of their organization are in fact similar. In
both root and shoot meristems, pluripotent stem cells signal back and forth with
'organizer' cells (the quiescent center in the root and the organizing center in
the shoot) within the stem cell niche. In addition, they share a number of
common or paralogous gene regulators. The premise of the project is that a
detailed dissection of shoot and root meristems will identify key shared
components that control meristem organization and maintenance. In addition,
while forward genetics has uncovered many key regulators, genetic redundancy has
been a barrier to a more comprehensive understanding of meristems. The project
takes advantage of advances in single-cell RNA-seq that now permit a cell-by-
cell reconstruction of several different types of shoot and root meristems. A
computational analysis will be employed to map equivalent cells among the
meristems using the MetaNeighbor approach, accounting for potentially paralogous
genes with homologous function across meristems. Machine learning approaches
will be used to generate models of the genetic circuitry shared across many or a
subset of meristems. The goal is to identify common circuits (and their
potentially redundant components) across meristems that could represent a core
circuitry needed for the maintenance of meristems. CRISPR knockouts will then be
used to test the models of core meristem circuitry, addressing redundancy with
guideRNA constructs that target multiple paralogs at
once.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.