* 1934322
* Autonomous Control of Indoor Climate for Commercial Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Warren Dixon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2023
* USD 536,000.00

Buildings account for 45 percent of the total energy consumption in the United
States (U.S.), and maintaining indoor climate, which includes heating, cooling,
and ventilation, accounts for approximately half of that energy consumption. A
low-cost option for reducing building energy usage is intelligent climate
control, moving away from the prevalent "design for steady-state conditions"
philosophy into one that exploits the constantly changing conditions a building
operates in due to its occupants and the weather. The potential for intelligent
climate control has been recognized for many years, especially for commercial
buildings that have the requisite sensors and actuators. In particular, control
algorithms that make decisions using real-time optimization have been shown to
be highly promising. In spite of its promise, such "model-optimization" based
control technologies have not been widely adopted by industry. The reason for
this lack of translation to practice is the lack of autonomy of existing
algorithms. Not only do they require expert human involvement in model creation,
which have to be tuned for each building manually, they do not provide
guarantees about the quality of real-time decisions. Addressing these weaknesses
will lead to the wider adoption of intelligent building climate control
technologies, which will contribute to the technological edge U.S. industries
enjoy, and reduce the nation's energy usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project seeks to make model+optimization based control of commercial buildings
autonomous, thereby aiding wider adoption of such advanced technologies. The
approach is to engineer both the modeling and optimization phases specifically
for autonomy. The modeling approach is purely data driven so that it can be
easily applied to any building. By using recently developed machine learning
methods that guarantee certain beneficial model properties (e.g., stability),
models can be updated over time purely from data without ever requiring a human
expert to check the quality or suitability of the models. Similarly, the
optimization problem is made convex by a choice of linear models so that real-
time decision making can occur reliably without the optimizer getting stuck in a
local minima or failing to converge. The reduction in accuracy due to the
restriction to linear models is ameliorated by re-learning models over time,
which is made possible by the autonomous data-driven nature of the model fitting
algorithms. Finally, special care is taken to ensure that humidity and latent
heat considerations, which are critical to hot humid climates, are taken into
account both in the modeling and real-time optimization
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.