* 1934522
* RAPID: Risk perception and health-related knowledge and practice
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Kimberley Shoaf, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2020
* USD 21,579.00

Humanitarian responders have a high risk of contracting travel-related illnesses
which can be carried back to the US and pose a threat to the health of the
population. Knowledge, attitudes and practices (KAP) are important factors
relating to risk of travel-related illness, yet little is known about how risk
perception impacts behavior among humanitarian responders. The research team
developed a conceptual framework that integrates the Tripartite Model of Risk
Perception (TRIRISK) Model into a KAP framework to assess whether KAPs on
travel-related health risks influence TRIRISK perceptions and whether those
perceptions, in turn, influence protective health behaviors and ultimately
health outcomes. Research using this model has focused on behavioral intentions
as the outcome. This study extends the TRIRISK Model by validating its use in
acute diseases and provides the first look at the role knowledge has in forming
TRIRISK perceptions and the association between the TRIRISK perceptions and
health behaviors. This research improves our understanding of how knowledge and
risk perception impact the decisions, behaviors and health outcomes for
humanitarian workers responding to disasters and enables the development of more
targeted and effective guidance materials for agencies and healthcare providers
to share with travelers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research
project is to identify the knowledge and risk perception of humanitarian aid
workers in relation to the health behaviors they engage in during a deployment
to a foreign disaster zone and how those behaviors relate to their risk of
becoming ill. This project adapts the Tripartite Model of Risk Perception
(TRIRISK) by including knowledge, attitudes, and practices to it and exploring
both health behaviors and health outcomes. The research uses a purposive sample
of 100 humanitarian aid workers who are responding to the two tropical cyclones.
These humanitarian aid workers are from US government agencies (primarily
USAID), UN and WHO agencies, and non-governmental organizations. The research
team administers a questionnaire assessing Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices
related to protecting their health while traveling, as well as assessing risk
perceptions in relation to travel-related illness. Additionally, the
participants maintain a daily log of their eating, drinking, and hygiene
behaviors as well as any illness episodes during their deployment. Multi-variate
modeling of the data follows the adapted theoretical model analyzing the impact
of KAP and risk perception on health behaviors and ultimately health
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.