* 1934752
* A Framework for Data Intensive Discovery in Multimessenger Astrophysics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Chad Hanna, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,800,000.00

This is the conceptualization phase for a Scalable Cyberinfrastructure Institute
for Multi-Messenger Astrophysics (SCIMMA). SCIMMA is a collaboration between
data scientists, computer scientists, astronomers, astro-particle physicists,
and gravitational wave physicists. It leverages NSF investments in astronomical
and multi-messenger facilities, and in advanced cyberinfrastructure. Along with
achieving key scientific goals and consulting with relevant collaborations and
stakeholders, the conceptualization of SCIMMA includes developing algorithms,
databases, and computing and networking cyberinfrastructure, to support both
observations and their interpretation. This phase includes prototyping a SCIMMA
education and outreach center, and presenting accessible digests of the goals
and achievements of the institute. The team will be preparing novel curricula at
the undergraduate and graduate levels, and the group will support graduate
student fellowships for short duration projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-
messenger astrophysics (MMA) is a data-intensive science in its infancy, but
already providing revolutionary insights. At the current tipping point, timely
investments in cyberinfrastructure for key MMA facilities will enable a torrent
of new discoveries. A key goal for SCIMMA is the efficient, rapid, and routine
discovery of electromagnetic emission via coordinated follow-up of gravitational
wave events. This real-time science needs co-analysis of disparate datasets and
the autonomous coordination of diverse follow-up in a seamless fashion. SCIMMA
balances rapid prototyping, novel algorithm development, and software
sustainability. The rapid-prototype team, tasked to use existing resources to
meet immediate goals, is closely integrated with the cyberfoundations team,
which will architect new algorithms and deploy new technologies. Software
sustainability is a foundational element of the design process, since the
institute and its supporting cyberinfrastructure will persist for a decade or
more, and both teams will adopt this principle. SCIMMA in full operation will
provide the community with consulting services and bring both existing and new
MMA activities to maximal interoperability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
part of the National Science Foundation's Big Idea activities in Harnessing the
Data Revolution (HDR) and Windows on the Universe - The Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics (WoU-MMA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.