* 1934087
* Cultivating Creativity to Integrate Computation and Science Problem Solving in Informal Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* H Chad Lane, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 635,553.00

Future challenges that we face as a nation such as the growing need to optimize
agricultural output and management of extreme weather conditions will demand
armies of imaginative scientists and engineers, equipped with a robust
understanding of the ways in which scientific and computational knowledge
converge to enhance problem solving. Many of these future scientists and
engineers are currently children. The goal of this project is to investigate
best ways to prepare the youth to confront future science and engineering
problems. A team of educational researchers, science teachers, and scientists
will investigate the design of educational digital environments to promote
engagement, interest, and learning in computation and science. Middle school
aged learners will be presented with science problems inspired by real-world
challenges that are hard to solve and particularly suited to computational
solutions with creative thinking skills. Learners will be immersed in a
"sandbox" virtual environment that encourages experimentation, creativity, and
collaboration. By challenging learners in novel ways, the project seeks to
provide learners a glimpse of the complexities of the natural world and the
opportunities that lie ahead for creativity in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Math (STEM). This project is funded by the STEM + Computing (STEM+C) program
that supports research and development to understand the integration of
computing and computational thinking in STEM teaching and learning to prepare
the current and future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of two
years, researchers will investigate the design of virtual scenarios and their
efficacy for (1) enabling and promoting the simultaneous learning of science and
computational thinking, (2) triggering interest in STEM, and (3) encouraging
innovation and creativity in solving relevant and futuristic problems. Research
will be conducted in afterschool and summer camp settings at three principle
locations: the Champaign-Urbana Fab Lab, College of Education at the University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, and Western Center Academy (WCA), an innovative
STEM school serving children in 6th-12th grade in Hemet, CA. Scenarios will draw
from a range of different areas of STEM, including biology, ecology,
agriculture, and civil engineering. Each scenario will first undergo two
iterations with small groups of learners, followed by a larger scale evaluation
at the end of the project focusing on the entire set of scenarios and
interconnections between them. Science and computer science teachers at WCA as
well as project scientific advisors will provide guidance and input at all
stages focusing on key aspects of the scenarios, including fidelity of the
underlying simulation models and fine-tuning the right level of difficulty. To
assess computational thinking skills, relevant scientific knowledge, and
interest, a mixed methods approach will be adopted. Specifically, learners will
complete short surveys, knowledge assessments, and be interviewed during and
after the intervention. Log file data from the simulation will allow researchers
to investigate relevant learner behaviors such as what revisions learners make
to their solutions and how often they experiment with different techniques. To
assess creativity, researchers will identify novel aspects of solutions and
scientific advisors on the project will rate different solutions for innovative
potential. Participants will be invited to create showcases and capture video of
their solutions for sharing with friends, family, and the public. By measuring
changes in knowledge, interest, and use of a wide range of techniques throughout
the experiences, research will reveal whether and to what extent the scenarios
engage learners and pinpoint specific scenario properties and features that are
most influential. These outcomes will lead to advancement in knowledge in best
practices for informal learning. They will also inform future designs of
educational simulations that foster STEM learning and better prepare learners to
address critical challenges that lie ahead for the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.