* 1934288
* NeuroNex Technology Hub: Nemonic: Next generation multiphoton neuroimaging consortium
* BIO,DBI
* 09/30/2018,09/30/2023
* Spencer Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2023
* USD 7,380,018.00

Multiphoton neuroimaging is a powerful approach for measuring neural activity in
the brain, offering subcellular resolution of thousands or more neurons at time.
However, current technology has technical limitations that restrict what
experiments are possible. Therefore, this project will create new technology
through a NeuroNex neurotechnology hub, called Nemonic (NExt generation
Multiphoton NeuroImaging Consortium). The Nemonic project has three parts.
First, the development component will create new systems in a series of Case
Studies to enable currently impossible neuroscience experiments. Second, the
dissemination component will spread this technology broadly to other
neuroscience labs through open source resources, workshops, and industry
partnerships. Third, the advancement component will push the fundamental
technology of multiphoton neuroimaging into the next frontier. Two specific
technologies will be developed: miniaturized photonic systems for multiphoton
neuroimaging; and super-resolution imaging to image submicron structures. Also,
a series of meetings will foster novel collaborations to more rapidly advance
engineering technologies that are relevant to multiphoton neuroimaging in the
future. Technology developed in the Nemonic project will also be relevant to
manufacturing, 3D printing, and photonics. This work will also increase
partnerships between academia and industry, enhance STEM training, and recruit
and support the scientific training and careers of women and URM
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Case Studies will develop new
instrumentation for large field-of-view two- photon and three-photon imaging,
scalable temporal multiplexing, and integrated behavior. This technology will be
developed for compatibility with an array of model systems. The focus will be on
calcium and glutamate imaging, in cell bodies and processes, and other
fluorescent indicators can be employed. The workshops will cover optical design,
fabrication, assembly, and use, for an audience of neuroscientists and
engineers. One advancement project will develop high peak power ultrafast lasers
with transform limited pulses, with integrated, beam conditioning, beam
steering, focusing, and detection systems. The other advancement project will
develop super-resolution multiphoton imaging using spatial frequency modulation,
adaptive optics, and novel pulse conditioning. Together, this work will advance
multiphoton neuroimaging and a suite of related technology, through research,
enhanced training, and industry partnerships. This NeuroTechnology Hub award is
co-funded by the Division of Emerging Frontiers within the Directorate for
Biological Sciences as part of the BRAIN Initiative and NSF's Understanding the
Brain activities.