* 1934553
* HDR TRIPODS: Building the Foundation for a Data-Intensive Studies Center-
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Lenore Cowen, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,520,000.00

Tufts University is launching the T-TRIPODS institute, that will focus an
interdisciplinary effort across multiple departments and campuses to advance the
understanding of foundations of data science. The project seeks to support the
first three years of the operation of the institute, and will support a culture
of interdisciplinary research and learning in data sciences across multiple
departments, fostering collaboration between mathematicians, computer
scientists, and electrical engineers, as well as with scientists and scholars in
a wide range of application domains. The model is built around overlapping
three-year focused research topics, with an offset timeline, so that each year,
the oldest research topic sunsets while a new research topic is added. For each
focused research topic, the project will convene interdisciplinary teams of
mathematicians, computer scientists, statisticians and electrical engineers to
address timely questions and solve important problems on the frontiers of data
science. Complementing and completing the research effort are teaching and
curriculum development efforts for data science at the undergraduate, graduate
and professional levels. Furthermore, the structure of T-TRIPODS will foster
specific and deep connections with application domain experts in several areas,
leading to translational research. T-TRIPODS is strongly committed to Data
Science for All, and will partner closely with the Tufts Center for STEM
Diversity to broaden participation in undergraduate research opportunities in
data science at Tufts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T-TRIPODS will address three
research thrusts. Research Focus I (Graphs and Tensor Representations of Data)
in the first year, which will be joined by Focus II (Collecting, Modeling, and
Learning from Data with a Spatial or Temporal Dimension) in the second year, and
Focus III (Data Guarantees: Analysis of Data with Assurances of Quality,
Transparency, Fairness, Privacy, and Trust) in year three, which will bring the
institute up to full capacity with three research foci running simultaneously.
All research foci will include cross-disciplinary training of graduate students;
workshops that bring together experts and early career scientists from math,
computer science, and electrical engineering; training modules in application-
specific concerns around ethical safeguards for data usage and analysis; and an
Ideas Lab activity to connect researchers from the core research topics to
domain experts in four identified broad application areas: 1) Biological and
Biomedical data, 2) Education and Cognitive Science, 3) Smart Cities,
Development, and Design and 4) Computational Arts and Humanities (including
Language and Music). T-TRIPODS will be integrated within Tufts' new Data
Intensive Science Center (DISC) and will synergize with and enhance existing
Tufts University degree programs in Data Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data
Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.