* 1934387
* EAGER: Uncovering the role of altered cryptic interactions in driving the demographic success of a range-expanding species
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kirsten Prior, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 12/31/2023
* USD 207,317.00

Ecological communities are composed of closely interacting species. As species
that make up these communities are unlikely to be synchronous in their responses
to changing environments, species moving into new areas may leave interacting
species behind or may pick up new associations along the way. Understanding the
outcomes of these changing relationships is important because species are
shifting their distributions at unprecedented rates, and because these changes
may impact ecosystems and human well-being. This study uses oak wasps that are
expanding their ranges to examine how these changes influence their interactions
with competitors, predators and their host plants. Understanding these changing
relationships may explain recent outbreaks of these wasps. Information from this
project will contribute to understanding the outcomes of range expansions and
how to effectively manage outbreaking species. This project will also provide
educational and outreach opportunities to students and the public regarding the
importance of insects to ecosystems and society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
examine the community dynamics of short-distance range expansions, this project
leverages a uniquely tractable study system of an oak gall-forming wasp that
recently expanded its range northward in western oak savanna ecosystems. This
species reaches higher densities on oaks in its expanded range compared to its
native range. These population outbreaks are likely due to changes in its
interactions with the ecological community in its expanded range, including a
different population of its host plants and different suites of enemies
(parasitoid wasps) and competitors (co-occurring oak gall-forming wasps). This
project tests several hypotheses of how altered interactions facilitate
outbreaks, including the importance of differences in the susceptibility of host
plant populations, and interactions with competitors and shared parasitoid
enemies. The most powerful way to test how altered interactions facilitate
outbreaks in response to range expansions is to compare the strength of
interactions in the native and expanded range. Conducting experiments at this
biogeographical scale is challenging and risky, especially in a new study
system, but this recent expansion provides an early opportunity to understanding
the immediate consequences of range expansions. A common garden experiment will
test for differences in host plant resistance across both ranges. In addition,
eDNA (environmental DNA) techniques will be used to compare adaptive mismatches
in parasitoid-gall former interactions in both regions. This research will
result in novel insights into the community dynamics of short-distance range
expansions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.