* 1934113
* Collaborative Research: Science Modeling through Physical Computing: Contextualized Computational and Scientific Learning in the Grade 5-6 Classroom
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Sharon Lynn Chu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 12/31/2023
* USD 516,187.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). In this
STEM+C project students will build science models to learn both science and
computing in grades 5 and 6. Students will engage with computation to imbue
physical models with functionality that represent various state, static,
dynamic, and semantic scientific phenomena. A double-scaffolding strategy will
be employed to simultaneously support scientific and computing learning in
formal classrooms. First, learning will be scaffolded through students'
construction of computational physical models (CMPs) to support understanding of
formal science topics and develop model-based thinking. Second, the program will
support a learning progression in computing to build the CMPs that is practice-
oriented, with new concepts added to complete each set of successive models. The
representational nature of science models will make abstract concepts concrete,
and the use of multiple models for each concept will give students greater
flexibility in understanding the concept in different representations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be carried out longitudinally over two
years in two public intermediate schools that serve predominantly
underrepresented populations. Teachers will receive professional development
using multiple science models and language and pedagogy that highlight the
representational power of models. To support teaching computational content, the
project will develop a Mentor Corps of college STEM students to work in
collaboration with teachers in the classroom. Computational modeling activities
will be integrated into the regular science classes, matching the models that
the students build with the existing curriculum. The project research will
examine the impact of the program on 1) learning science concepts through
modeling, 2) learning computational constructs and developing computation as a
habit of mind, and 3) the development of both science and computation
identities. An array of data sources will be gathered from both treatment and
control classrooms in each school, including knowledge assessments and surveys,
semi-structured interviews, and video-taped observations of students' model
construction. Both qualitative and quantitative analyses will be conducted to
address the research questions and identify differences between groups. Findings
will be broadly disseminated to research and practitioner audiences, and
instructional materials and resources will be freely
accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.