* 1934641
* HDR IDEAS^2 Institute: Data-Driven Frameworks for Materials Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Tresa Pollock, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

The discovery and development of new materials with unique properties and
functionalities has revolutionized entire industries, including aviation, space,
communication, biomedical, and automotive. Materials design has been
traditionally experimentally and computationally intensive. However, advances in
data-driven approaches, computational power, and experimental capabilities have
created a tipping point for targeted and efficient materials design. This
Harnessing the Data Revolution Institutes for Data-Intensive Research in Science
and Engineering (HDR-I-DIRSE) Frameworks award supports conceptualization of an
Institute to advance data-intensive research in Materials Science and
Engineering. The IDEAS^2 (Integrated Data Environment for Accelerated Stochastic
Science) Institute for Materials Discovery will provide a platform for the
development of experimental and computational frameworks for materials
advancement, that encourages collaboration and the sharing of data-driven
approaches among research communities. The Data Science methods are
intrinsically interoperable, and this program will engage diverse research
communities in the collaborative development of large data frameworks that are
applicable across a wide range of disciplines. The IDEAS^2 Institute will be
structured to lower the barrier for domain scientists to work with data
scientists through a variety of mechanisms including biannual "Teach the
Teacher" workshops, an annual IDEAS^2 Symposium, visiting faculty positions at
UCSB, and a range of other community engagement activities. Students working on
this program will gain valuable multidisciplinary research and educational
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First-principle calculations of
thermodynamic and kinetic properties and information from microstructurally-
based, high throughput models will be integrated into the design of data
structures and the analyses of the developed techniques. The developed
frameworks will be grounded in machine learning approaches that are
fundamentally-based, computationally and statistically tractable, and
incorporate domain knowledge and simulation results. The frameworks and data
developed in the Institute - such as those to predict processing advancements
from first principles, model these advancements in a high-throughput fashion,
enable high-throughput experimentation, align the resulting experimental data
(chemical, microstructure, deformation, etc.), and efficiently mine the
resultant high-dimensional datasets - will be integrated with an open-source
platform (BisQue) to facilitate both internal and external collaboration on
their development for a broad range of materials applications. The computational
infrastructure and parallelization of calculations through the BisQue platform
enables the screening of very large datasets, with a hierarchical workflow
requiring minimal software requirements (only a web browser is needed) and
minimal domain knowledge of the user in modeling of materials. The focus of this
program is on a research area with major and broad implications on numerous
scientific and technological fields, and it also represents a unique training
opportunity with acquired skills that will propel its graduates to the forefront
of the emerging, critical field of data-driven science, as well as its many
application areas within various scientific disciplines and high-tech industry
sectors. This project is part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing
the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity and is co-funded by the Division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.