* 1934749
* EAGER: Constructal Theory for Evolutionary Design of Twisted Paths in Heat Transfer Network
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Pezhman Mardanpour, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,940.00

The goal of the present project is to derive a new theory for the design of heat
transfer systems with twisted paths, a theory capable to analyze and predict the
architecture of the heat transfer system with reduced thermal resistance,
reduced pumping energy requirements, lower conductive material consumption, and
consequently lower cost. The design methodology considers two geometric degrees
of freedom: (1) hierarchy of components, that is, few large &amp; many small,
and (2) geometrical twist of the main energy paths. These aim to reduce the
global thermal resistance to energy flow. If successful, the project can impact
the cost of many energy systems by reducing their thermal resistance, pumping
energy requirements, and conductive material consumption. The design methodology
presented in this project has the potential to accelerate heat transfer
technology evolution ranging from aerospace to biomedical systems. This project
involves a postdoctoral scholar and one undergraduate student is to be supported
through the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) supplement program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to the design of thermal
management systems by creatively integrating theoretical and numerical
approaches with the rigorous design principle of Constructal Law. The considered
design system is a slender heat transfer component (fin, channel, etc.) and its
unique geometrical form of twisted shape. This project advances the state-of-
the-art of current constructal theories in thermal design by introducing the
twisted geometry as a new degree of freedom in constructal design. This new
transformative consideration can allow the design to morph and evolve more
easily, yielding a high-risk/high-payoff condition if
successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.