* 1934650
* Understanding and Enhancing Proprioception via Model-Based Human-Robot Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Jennifer Semrau, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 11/30/2023
* USD 748,231.00

Proprioception is the sense of body position and movement that comes from
specialized sensors in the joints and muscles of the body. Proprioception is
impaired on one side of the body in about half of stroke survivors. The research
objective of this project is to develop personalized robotic interventions
targeting upper extremity rehabilitation for people with proprioceptive
impairments after neurological injury such as stroke. The project will conduct
human subject experiments, develop novel computational models, and use machine
learning methods to enhance the design of personalized, subject-adaptive robotic
interventions that are optimized for each individual's specific profile of
impairment. This project will promote the progress of science and advance
national health by developing new robotic therapies that have the potential to
improve quality of life for a large number of people with sensorimotor
impairments after stroke. Additionally, the work may increase national
prosperity by reducing the healthcare cost burden of stroke through optimization
of neurorehabilitative techniques and their robotic delivery. Broader impacts of
the project include efforts to expose a diverse group of high school students to
biomechanics through activities associated with National Biomechanics Day and a
workshop to be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine how
humans combine visual and proprioceptive information to estimate upper limb
position, and then use these data to guide the development and testing of robot-
aided rehabilitation in stroke survivors. The project will conduct three sets of
activities: 1) human subject experiments exploiting human-robotic interactions
to characterize stroke-related deficits of multisensory integration during the
assessment of limb posture and movement; 2) the development of novel extensions
to Bayesian models of multi-sensory integration and evaluation of their ability
to describe impaired multisensory cue combination post-stroke; and 3) the design
and implementation of individualized, robot-assisted, subject-adaptive training
algorithms to rehabilitate multisensory function in upper limb impairment after
stroke. This project advances the M3X program vision because it exploits human-
robot interactions not only to interrogate the sensorimotor state of individuals
after stroke, but to also drive improvement in sensorimotor function using an
individualized robotic training approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.