* 1934112
* Computational Sciences Pathway Option for Massachusetts High School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Joyce Malyn-Smith, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,778,858.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program addresses an urgent need for real-world,
interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of students from the early
grades through high school (preK-12). The Education Development Center in
partnership with the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary
Education will develop and test a series of computational science high school
courses. The approach to embed computational thinking and computational skills
development within required core science courses is consistent with the
modernization of science to use computational tools and methods that advance
scientific understanding, accelerate discovery, and prepare students for future
endeavors in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields.
The new courses will reflect the traditional science pathway that will be
integrated with topics that align with digital literacy and computer science
state standards. The design of curricular materials will be guided by
computational scientists and experts in computational science integration to
ensure relevance to modern computational practices in STEM fields. 75 high
school teachers will participate in a specialized professional development
program that will enhance teachers' ability to decode and explain mechanisms
that embed scientific ideas with computer models. The instructional materials,
which includes lessons and assessments, will be tested and revised. The courses
and related instructional materials will be endorsed by the Massachusetts
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education and will be available to all
406 Massachusetts public high schools. During the last year of the project, the
impact of the computational science courses on students' computational thinking
skills and science knowledge will be measured. By the end of the project, the
computational science courses will be embedded in the Massachusetts educational
infrastructure with major statewide impact on STEM+C teaching and learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and test three science high
school courses in Biology, Chemistry, and Physics which integrates Massachusetts
standards for Digital Literacy and Computer Science. For each course, the
project will develop and test 10 curriculum units, mid- and end-of-year unit
assessments, and professional development learning units. Education Development
Center will partner with the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education for the development and implementation. Research questions
address whether the students enrolled in the developed courses demonstrate
higher levels of computational thinking skills and science knowledge than
students who are enrolled in the same course without computational integration.
To answer the questions, the project will use a quasi-experiment research design
involving 60 intervention teachers (20 teachers per course) and 60 comparison
teachers. Assessment of knowledge surveys will be administered to approximately
2,400 students enrolled in courses of interest who are taught by the 120
teachers participating in the study. In addition to the traditional
dissemination methods of journal and conference publications and presentations,
these units and the associated assessments will immediately become part of
Massachusetts high school curriculum and will be available at no cost from the
State of Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.