* 1934296
* I-Corps: Minimally-Invasive Gastrointestinal Nutrient Delivery Device
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2021
* Elizabeth Demetriades, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
new approach to managing excess weight, one of the major health crises of our
time. Obesity now affects nearly 40% of the US population. It is the main
contributor to chronic disease, including type 2 diabetes and coronary artery
disease. Current weight loss medications and devices are expensive and only
moderately effective, with significant concern for adverse events. One of the
most effective therapies, bariatric surgery, is available to or acceptable to
less than 1% of the medically eligible US population. This project develeops a
medical device that can be placed and removed as needed in an outpatient setting
without the need for advanced technical skills or equipment. The initial
commercialization efforts will be with pre-operative patients who are being
denied surgery due to excess weight and, after demonstration of clinical benefit
in this group, expand to other customer segments. The device has the potential
to be widely used for weight loss by individuals with limited therapeutic weight
loss options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is aimed at developing a
minimally-invasive, fully-reversible medical device that delivers nutrient to
the upper intestine in a manner that simulates nutrient delivery following the
highly effective weight-loss surgery, gastric bypass. No surgery or drugs are
used, rather the underlying strategy is to use nutrient in a novel manner to
control appetite. Following gastric bypass surgery, nutrient floods the upper
intestine after eating and this signals to the body that it has been overfed,
despite significant caloric restriction. This response is distinct from the
fasting response induced by simple dieting. The device uses a modified slim
enteral feeding tube to direct a select nutrient formulation to the desired site
in the small intestine. This project is based on clinical research that
demonstrates that appetite can be rapidly suppressed, and food intake reduced by
a single dose of nutrient delivered rapidly to the upper intestine by an enteral
feeding tube. A prototype device has been developed and tested in a pilot
clinical study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.