* 1934482
* GOALI: An Experimental Study of Electric Field Driven Non-Fourier Thermal Transport in High Power Electronic Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Sukwon Choi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 11/30/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Featuring broadband operation and high efficiency, gallium nitride-based radio
frequency power amplifiers are key components to realize reliable, energy
efficient, and ubiquitous wireless 5G networks that billions of devices use for
data collection and computation. However, full implementation of gallium nitride
microelectronics for 5G wireless networks requires overcoming concerns about
overheating. This project will investigate and identify the thermal transport
mechanisms leading to the discrepancies between theoretical predictions and
experimental observations, to allow design of effective thermal management for
reliable performance. Moreover, this project will encompass educational tasks
designed to bridge the gap between thermal sciences and electronic device
physics and to lower the entry barrier for undergraduate students to study
nanoscale heat transfer principles. The educational activities will also expose
underrepresented students to industry-driven academic research and inspire K-12
students to pursue STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal
of this project is to experimentally identify and probe nanoscopic, non-Fourier
thermal transport mechanisms that are responsible for the amplified heating
within gallium nitride transistors simultaneously subjected to extreme electric
field and heat flux conditions. It is hypothesized that the observed amplified
heating is a combined result of nanoscale heat source size effects, electric
field induced deformation of the gallium nitride crystal, and thermal non-
equilibrium among energy carriers, all of which are caused by a nanoscale
electric field spike. A deep ultraviolet thermal imaging capability which offers
the highest spatial resolution among commercial thermal imaging systems will be
developed in order to test this hypothesis and to study the fundamental physics
in gallium nitride transistors. The developed deep ultraviolet thermal imaging
technique will be used together with Raman spectroscopy, photoluminescence, and
a novel multi-scale electro-thermal modeling scheme to study the physical
origins of the amplified heating in high voltage-biased gallium nitride
transistors. Research outcomes will facilitate electro-thermal co-design and
improve industry standard methods for lifetime assessment of gallium nitride
power amplifiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.