* 1934597
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Black-Box Flaw Discovery in Web Authentication and Authorization Mechanisms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jason Polakis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Technical advancements in modern smartphones and the widespread availability of
Internet on-the-go have resulted in the world wide web becoming an inextricable
part of everyday lives, pervading professional, social and personal activities.
At the core of all this lies the ability to identify (i.e., authenticate) users
and devices and allowing (i.e., authorizing) them to access accounts and
sensitive resources. Flaws in existing authentication and authorization
mechanisms allow cybercriminals as well as nation-state adversaries to gain
illegal access, which can critically affect citizens, corporations, and
government organizations alike. This project aims to better secure the world
wide web through the analysis of prevalent and emerging authentication systems.
The subsequent design of robust mechanisms that prevent illicit access from
malicious entities will secure popular and critical web applications against
current and unforeseen threats. The underlying research necessitates the
development of novel techniques for analyzing web applications, and the
proactive demonstration of novel attacks for guiding a data-driven design of
more effective authentication mechanisms. The main research problems that the
project seeks to study will form the basis for the training of both
undergraduate and graduate students. The investigator is committed to working
with minorities and underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity
of modern web applications and the intricacies of security mechanisms often
result in flaws that expose users to significant security and privacy threats.
This is exacerbated by the continuous evolution of the web ecosystem and new
authentication and authorization mechanisms being deployed without prior
analysis by the security community. This project aims to explore existing and
emerging authentication and authorization systems and practices in the modern
web ecosystem, and develop modular application-agnostic and protocol-independent
techniques and frameworks that advance current capabilities for auditing modern
web applications along these dimensions. This includes the development of
multiple components that employ differential testing techniques, each designed
to explore a different dimension of authentication and authorization by
leveraging a unique attack vector, thus, enabling the automated black-box
detection of flaws at an Internet-wide scale. These techniques and systems
provide a holistic evaluation and treatment of the current web authentication
landscape, enable the forecasting and prevention of future threats, and can
facilitate research across multiple disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.