* 1934448
* Collaborative Proposal: Workshop to stimulate research on microbial eukaryotic diversity; August, 2019, Rome, Italy; November, 2019, Washington, D.C.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Gillian Gile, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 84,346.00

Microbial eukaryotes harbor the greatest diversity within the eukaryotic tree of
life yet remain understudied. These protist lineages can have large impacts on
the health of ecosystems as primary producers or predators and on other species
as symbionts or pathogens. Moreover, recent research has demonstrated a
disparity between the relatively low number of formally described microbial
eukaryote species and the much higher number of undescribed species inferred
using DNA sequence data from environmental samples. Despite the clear need for
more effort dedicated to characterizing these understudied lineages, the
community of researchers in the United States who are trained for this work is
dwindling and scattered among a variety of scientific fields. This workshop
award will bring together scientists who focus on the systematic biology of
microbial eukaryote lineages with those who specialize in the ecology and
pathology of these organisms. The proposed activities will identify strategies
that will accelerate species discovery and description and uncover new avenues
for collaborative investigation. Invited speakers and participants will be drawn
from diverse communities and career stages, and workshop activities will include
a significant online component to broaden participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two workshop meetings will be held in August 2019 and
November 2019 to engage the diverse community of US and international
protistologists. Each in-person meeting will be preceded by a series of four
topic-based, interactive webinars that will be advertised widely to maximize
community participation and the efficient exchange of ideas. The first in-person
meeting will be held for one day directly following the joint meeting of
International Society of Protistology and European Congress of Protistology. It
will address community-driven resources that can streamline the integration of
systematics and other fields of microbial eukaryotic research. The second in-
person meeting will be held for two days at the University of Maryland. It will
explore clade-based community priorities and opportunities for the sustained
integration of research efforts to illuminate dark areas in the microbial
eukaryotic tree of life. Outcomes of the two workshops' online and in-person
components will be disseminated as a white paper within the Journal of
Eukaryotic Microbiology and as an oral presentation to the International Society
of Protistology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.