* 1934253
* EAGER: Next-Generation Riverscape Monitoring and Mapping
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Mark Fonstad, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project will test a novel approach to riverscape monitoring and mapping by
using new boat-based drone technology to measure river geometry, sediment type,
river habitats, and riverbank erosion patterns. Recent scientific advances have
demonstrated that river dynamics and habitats vary in the downstream direction
not only in smooth, gradual ways, but also in non-smooth, complex ways at a
variety of spatial and temporal scales. This mosaic-like "riverscape" is a
challenge for existing research methods monitoring how rivers change through
space and time, where habitats for specific organisms are or are not connected
with one another, and how rivers could be managed. One of the data collection
devices to be tested is a small automated mapping boat that can be used by
volunteer watershed managers and recreational river runners creating crowd-
sourced (citizen science) data to monitor and map riverscapes. The data that
will be produced using these new methods are likely to be useful to watershed
managers in diverse agencies, watershed groups, and other river-related
entities. By engaging with stakeholders during the design and testing phase of
the automated-boat data collection phase, the investigators aim to ensure that
the results will be relevant to the many people involved in making river
management decisions. Additionally, the technical methods developed for this
project will be designed so that they can easily be recreated and reproduced by
others wishing to do similar monitoring and mapping work. The plans, software,
documentation, and data will be made available via the internet using an open-
source licensing framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The monitoring and mapping of
river environments is a task usually completed by governmental agencies, private
firms, scientists, and private individuals. River monitoring achieves a variety
of objectives, such as examining where and at what rate rivers are eroding
adjacent property and structures, for characterizing river habitat for
restoration purposes, or for evaluating water volumes and water quality. To-date
these measurements are mostly done manually, one station at a time, creating a
very limited spatial picture of river environments and conditions. Management of
rivers is thus conducted with very little detailed knowledge of these rivers.
The project's research objectives are to: (1) Develop and test a new, small,
drone-boat platform capable of collecting basic longitudinal river data with
minimal user interactions; (2) Compare and validate the drone boat data with
expertly-collected data using a fully-outfitted research marine craft; and (3)
Evaluate if it is feasible to employ a citizen science approach to monitoring
and mapping of longitudinal riverscapes by deploying the drone boat within
several regional test watersheds. Although this research project will focus on
rivers in the Pacific Northwest, the methods will be applicable to a wide array
of rivers in the U.S and worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.