* 1934465
* I-Corps: High-temperature 3D Printer for High-Performance Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Christopher Williams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
widespread adoption of 3D-printing of high-performance, high-temperature
polymers via a desktop-scale, low-cost printing platform. Existing 3D printers
capable of processing performance polymers have special power requirements,
large footprint, and are cost prohibitive due to their required high-temperature
printing environments. This project's novel printer design enables printing
these performance polymers at a desktop-scale and price, therefore bridging the
gap between scale, cost, and material performance. The mechanical properties of
parts printed with the developed machine are equivalent to those printed with
commercial industrial-scale systems. Example use cases include the deployment of
printers where a large printer may be infeasible and in providing redundancy in
manufacturing for faster, more agile production of parts. This printer will be
able to fabricate stronger products than existing desktop scale 3D printers and
allows these parts to be designed for applications in new
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a
desktop-scale 3D-printer designed to print high-performance plastics.
Performance plastics offer higher strength parts that are functional in high-
temperature or and/or corrosive environments. However, the fabrication of
performance plastics via fused filament fabrication (FFF) 3D-printing requires
processing in a high-temperature environment to prevent deformation of printed
parts and to improve parts' mechanical properties. This project develops a FFF
embodiment that features an inverted architecture, in conjunction with a special
heating chamber, to maintain a sufficiently high-temperature environment for
processing high-performance plastics. Since the design exploits natural
convection currents to selectively achieve high temperatures in the build area,
this FFF embodiment does not require large heaters or cooling units for the
mechatronic elements, thus reducing the cost and power requirements when
compared to current solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.