* 1934410
* Collaborative Research: Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN) Operations, Research and Community Support
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2020,04/30/2021
* William Bristow, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 04/30/2021
* USD 1,242,721.00

Space weather is the result of the coupling of energy from the solar wind into
geospace and the myriad interactions between electric fields and charged
particles with the geomagnetic field and neutral atmosphere. The resulting
variability and disturbed conditions leads to harmful impacts on technological
systems and even to risk to humans. Scientific imperatives and practical
concerns converge in making space weather a rising priority for society and
national planners. This collaborative project provides support for a consortium
of four U.S. universities to continue the operations of a suite of High
Frequency coherent-backscatter radars within the NSF Division of Atmospheric and
Geospace Sciences (AGS). This extension will enable a broad range of research
across the space science community. The U.S. consortium functions as part of the
international Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN) which encompasses
more than 35 radars distributed from mid through high to polar latitudes in both
the northern and southern hemispheres. The leveraged benefits of the activities
include student participation in the engineering and scientific tasks required
to operate the network and to achieve the desired data
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SuperDARN is well known for producing maps of the
large-scale circulation of ionospheric plasma that can be compared in terms of
scientific significance and practical utility to maps of winds and pressure
systems in tropospheric weather. The radars observe a wide range of effects in
the coupled magnetosphere-ionosphere thermosphere system that bear directly on
understanding and modeling space weather events. The award will continue a
program of continued observations while also achieving significant refurbishment
of eleven U.S. radars located in North America and add the operations of two new
radars in Iceland that are being built on separate support. It will also enable,
with partial funding and by virtue of the availability of data, a broad range of
research by the U.S. SuperDARN scientists on such new themes as convection in
the inner magnetosphere, subauroral ionospheric convection, and solar flare
impacts on the ionosphere. As a consequence of this award, the U.S. research
community will be supplied with data from the entire set of SuperDARN radars and
assisted in the application of SuperDARN data and data products. The award will
provide new data products to the community include mapping of ionospheric plasma
convection at much improved spatial resolution and techniques for applying
machine learning to geospace datasets. In coordination with international
collaborators simplified methods for data access will be developed that meet the
emerging requirements by agencies and journals to make data discoverable and
interoperable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.