* 1934263
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2019 International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Douglas Densmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

The 11th International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA) 2019 takes
place in Cambridge UK July 8th to July 12th and will bring together researchers
from electronic design automation (the practice of using computer software to
build complex electronics) and synthetic biology (the forward design of novel
biological systems using engineering principles). The goal of IWBDA is to make
biology more easily, robustly, reliably, and predictably engineered and
therefore, tackle challenges in biology and medicine, leading to advances in
disease diagnosis, treatment and prevention. This award provides travel
assistance for ten undergraduate and graduate students to attend this workshop
to present research, participate in a computer programming competition, and
network with a large community of industrial and academic researchers. These
participants will go on to form the foundation of the field in the future.
Specifically these students will join a wide variety of researchers (120+) from
electronic design automation and synthetic biology in a unique context which
does not exist elsewhere. They will have access to between twelve and fifteen
technical talks, two invited lectures, ten to twenty posters, multiple group
discussion sessions, and a featured student programming competition (BDAthlon).
This award covers the registration for the workshop as well as partial support
for travel and housing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.