* 1934628
* Molecular Regulation of Epigenetic Inheritance
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Fei Li, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2023
* USD 663,353.00

In eukaryotes, DNA and histone proteins are packed into a complex structure
called chromatin. Chemical modifications of histones play a crucial role in the
regulation of chromatin structure and gene expression. These modifications can
serve as "epigenetic marks," which are faithfully transmitted through many
generations, but the mechanism of inheritance remains poorly understood. The
goal of this project is to understand the fundamental principles underlying the
inheritance of epigenetic marks. Defects in the regulation of epigenetic marks
often result in genomic instability and developmental disorders. Therefore, the
study has important implications for several fields, such as agriculture,
ecology and medicine. This project will train post-doctoral researchers,
graduate students, and undergraduates in genetics and biochemistry. The PI will
recruit underrepresented minority and women students to participate in the
research. This project will also serve as a teaching resource for courses that
the PI teaches at New York University, and for an outreach program aimed at
encouraging K-12 students to consider careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe,
histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methylation is enriched in heterochromatin and is
stably inherited from generation to generation. The RNA interference machinery
(RNAi) also plays a pivotal role in heterochromatin assembly since small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) promote H3K9 methylation. Central to this process is
the RITS (RNA-induced transcriptional silencing) complex, which associates with
heterochromatin to mediate siRNA generation and heterochromatin silencing.
However, how the RITS complex promotes heterochromatin formation behind the
replication fork remains unknown. Following up a novel finding that the Dpb4
subunit of DNA polymerase epsilon interacts with Daf2 to promote heterochromatin
silencing, the project will (1) determine how Daf2 interacts with
heterochromatin transcripts to mediate heterochromatin silencing, (2) determine
functional and physical relationship between Dpb4 and Daf2, and (3) determine
the role of Daf2 in the recruitment of the RITS complex during DNA replication
of peri-centromeric sequences. This study will provide insights into how the
RITS complex is recruited on chromatin during DNA replication, which is
important for understanding the mechanisms behind epigenetic inheritance of
heterochromatin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.