* 1934744
* A deep and wide-area census of infrared-luminous galaxies in the high-redshift Universe
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Duncan Farrah, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,429.00

Understanding how galaxies assemble their stars and central black holes is a
crucial part of understanding our own cosmic origins - how our Milky Way, our
solar system, and ultimately us, came to be. Moreover, a thorough understanding
of how galaxies are built up allows us to use galaxies themselves as sensitive
probes of the mysterious dark matter and dark energy that dominate the evolution
of the universe. After intensive work by scientists using NSF facilities, we now
know that some of the most important phases of galaxy assembly occur during the
first half of the history of the universe, in moderately luminous galaxies that
have, until recently, been difficult to detect as they appear faint on the sky.
This project will use cutting-edge NSF and NASA facilities to investigate the
nature of these moderately luminous, distant galaxies, and determine how their
properties can be used to understand how galaxies like our own Milky Way formed.
This project will also enable important work by other astronomers, by producing
data that can be used for a wide range of investigations. Educational
visualizations and lesson plans, made in collaboration with K-12 teachers, will
contribute to STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Obscured AGN and star
formation are fundamental to galaxy assembly across the history of the Universe.
Of particular importance are the moderately luminous systems - those with log
LIR(Lsun) ~ 10-12 - as this is where the majority of black hole mass assembly
takes place, and where the main sequence of star formation lies. There remain
however critical open questions about obscured systems at z&gt;0.5 - what
triggers them, what quenches them, and how their role depends on environment.
This project will advance our understanding of how moderately luminous systems
contribute to galaxy assembly at z&gt;1 by creating new, extremely deep
ultraviolet through far-infrared catalogs across the 38 deg2 of the four
DES/LSST Deep Drilling fields (DDFs), and then using these catalogs to study the
evolution of high-redshift infrared-luminous galaxies in unprecedented detail.
The science goals are: (1) quantify the evolution of the infrared galaxy
luminosity function, simultaneously as functions of redshift, power source and
environment, over 1 &lt; z &lt; 3 and log LIR(Lsun) ~ 9 - 12.2 (2) perform the
first direct measurement of the bright end of the obscured AGN LF at z &gt; 2,
without extrapolation from optically selected populations, and (3) measure the
number density of massive quiescent galaxies at z&lt;4, to constrain AGN host
evolution and stellar mass buildup at this epoch. The full catalogs across all
of the DDFs will also be released to the community. This project will also
develop interactive, 3D visualizations for use with both undergraduate and high
school students. In conjunction with the Virginia Tech 'PhysTEC' program, the
investigators will work directly with K-12 teachers to construct lesson plans
and tutorials, which will be freely available to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.