* 1934350
* Multi-Scale Multi-Material Printing of 3D Bead Arrays via Self-Focused Electrohydrodynamic Jets
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Kornel Ehmann, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 01/31/2024
* USD 444,694.00

The two most common ways for enhancing the functional properties of a surface
are through micro-scale texturing and chemical coatings. Since current methods
are limited in their ability to apply both of these methods simultaneously, a
novel manufacturing technique is required so that surface modifications can be
done in a single process. One potential candidate is a Self-Focused
Electrohydrodynamic Micro-Texturing (SF-EMT) process. It uses electric force to
manipulate an ink jet for printing structures in a droplet-by-droplet fashion to
produce multilayer textures by utilizing the attraction between the previously
deposited droplets and the printing jet. A variety of inks can be used to embed
different chemistries on the printed structure. The potential of SF-EMT will be
demonstrated by printing large-scale dew-collectors and micro-capacitor arrays.
SF-EMT will open doors to high-performance surfaces, surface modifications and
micro-structures at reduced manufacturing costs. Its simplicity and versatility
will allow for rapid prototyping of surface textures and patterns with varying
chemistries. Multidisciplinary research opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students will be made available through this project. Existing
institutional mechanisms and programs will be leveraged to inform and attract
underrepresented minorities to these advanced manufacturing research positions,
and to further increase interest in STEM related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The realization of SF-EMT requires the
understanding of a newly discovered self-focusing mechanism by which the jet is
attracted to previously deposited features. A combination of experiments and
numerical modeling to understand the dynamic, complex charge and mass transfer
mechanisms at the different stages of the printing process will be investigated.
Emphasis will be on understanding the deposition of beads on a surface and on
top of other beads, the evaporation of the solvent throughout the process, and
the dissipation of electrical charges. The realization of the process also
requires the formulation of new polymeric inks. Tuning of ink composition for
the specific applications will be expedited by leveraging the numerical models
to significantly reduce the potential design space and the number of inks to be
tested. Inks for dew-collection will be modified with nano-additives and
surfactants to create nano-wrinkles and texture on the deposited beads resulting
in multi-scale textures. For micro-capacitor arrays, conductive and dielectric
inks will be formulated. A state-of-the-art testbed with machine vision for jet
position control, in-situ metrology of bead size and solvent evaporation,
controlled humidity, and precise computer control of the process parameters will
be built for validation of the numerical models and for process
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.