* 1934792
* Investigation of User-Interface and Human-Robot Performance for Supernumerary Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sanjay Joshi, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2023
* USD 874,493.00

Supernumerary robots are assistive devices that may attach to the human body and
be controlled to perform coordinated actions with a person's natural limbs.
Supernumerary robots have potential to reduce risk and increase human capability
in physically-demanding and/or dangerous workplace activities, including
construction, agricultural applications, search-and-rescue, and outer space
exploration. The research objective of this project is to advance a fundamental
understanding of human-machine interaction within the context of real-time
dexterous control of a "third arm" supernumerary robot. The project will develop
a novel human-machine interface that will allow a human to use electromyographic
activity (EMG) to command the robot in a closed-loop manner using multimodal
sensory feedback derived from visual and supplemental vibrotactile information.
The project team will use the new system in two sets of human subject
experiments designed to explore the bi-directional adaptation that occurs within
the human-robot dyad as the human learns to control the machine in a novel
three-handed manipulation task, even as the robotic controller adapts to the
changing signal properties of muscle EMGs as the human user fatigues. The
project advances the National Science Foundation's mission to promote the
progress of science, to advance national health, prosperity, and welfare, by
advancing a fundamental understanding of co-adaptive human-machine partnerships.
Broader impacts of this project include establishing a summer program for
elementary and middle school female students to introduce principles of
robotics, sensors, neuroscience, and human performance. The summer program is
directly aligned with the National Science Foundation's goal to support
activities designed to increase the participation of women and other
underrepresented groups in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores human-machine cooperation within the context of a "third arm"
supernumerary robot. Two sets of human subject experiments are planned. The
first establishes the feasibility of a novel, adaptive, EMG-based methodology
for haptic-guided closed-loop control of a supernumerary robotic arm's end-
effector. Several biosignals sensitive to cognitive state will be recorded,
including pupillometry, galvanic skin response, heart rate variability, and
electroencephalography (EEG). Subjects will perform a point-to-point trajectory
task and a 3D version of the Fitts's Law task to assess control efficiency with
and without vibrotactile performance feedback applied to the user's foot. The
second explores the coupled dynamics of short-term human learning of a three-
handed manipulation task that requires the user to coordinate motions of their
two hands with those of the supernumerary robot to manipulate a novel three-
element object to recreate specific desired poses. At the same time, online
computational learning adaptations of the robot's grip force will be driven by
perturbations of object kinematics and kinetics caused by the user's natural
arms. The work will advance a fundamental understanding of (1) human interface
performance in physical workspaces where cognition is embodied in both the human
and supernumerary robot; (2) cognitive load and neuroplasticity using EEG and
other physiological measurements; and (3) improvements in tri-manual
coordination and manipulation capability arising from short-term
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.