* 1934039
* Decoding Urban Ecosystems: Computational Thinking Integration in Middle School STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Irene Lee, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,911,187.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program addresses an urgent need for real-world,
interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of students from the early
grades through high school (preK-12). The American Museum of Natural History
(AMNH), in collaboration with Project GUTS (Growing Up Thinking Scientifically),
will undertake a three-year research project to design, implement, and evaluate
a youth-centered program that engages New York City (NYC) middle school students
in a new computational thinking (CT)-integrated science curriculum. In this
curriculum, students will simultaneously engage with ecosystem dynamics and use
CT practices in the context of computer modeling and simulations, including
abstraction, automation (including algorithmic thinking, debugging, and
iteration) analysis, and generalization through computer modeling and
simulation. The project research aims to deepen understanding of student
learning and active engagement with authentic science practices when students
are given supports to make connections between CT in coding and decoding of
computer models and scientific processes. In addition, the curriculum design
will explicitly connect STEM content to the professional practices of the field,
thereby contributing to existing literature on effective approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, 125 students will participate in a
new, CT-integrated ecosystems curriculum. These participants will be recruited
from schools that predominantly serve low-income families who are representative
of the socioeconomic, ethnic, and gender diversity of NYC. The project will also
engage four NYC teachers as co-researchers. Data to be collected include
modified versions of existing knowledge assessment and survey instruments,
artifact-based interviews conducted with students, and recorded observations of
instruction. Pre-post analysis will be conducted to identify learning gains, and
a modified interaction analysis within and between data sources will be
conducted to illuminate relationships between students' analysis of
computational models and development of mechanistic understandings of
ecosystems. Findings will be broadly disseminated and will inform the design of
a professional learning program for NYC middle school teachers. The tested
curriculum will be available on Project GUTS' open professional development
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.