* 1934054
* Determining the Characteristics of Equitable Mathematics Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2023
* David Grant, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to understand how to develop equitable mathematics courses in
which all students can develop a sense of belonging in mathematics and identify
as a person who can do mathematics. Many college mathematics courses now use
active learning and inquiry-based learning approaches. However, some students in
these courses do not perceive their experiences in positive ways. For example,
evidence suggests that many women and students of color find their experience in
such courses to be marginalizing. They may consider the course to be less
positive and less inclusive than their white male peers. To understand this
difference, the project will identify four university mathematics departments
within which instructional change efforts have improved the experiences and
persistence of students who are members of groups that are underrepresented in
the mathematics fields. The project will examine what is happening in these
departments, a process that will include an in-depth look at one successful
instructor in each department. Results of this research have the potential to
provide important new knowledge about how to deliver equitable undergraduate
mathematics instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a case study approach, the
project will study structures and community characteristics in four departments,
which will include the University of Maryland and the University of Texas Rio
Grande Valley. The project will identify characteristics of these departments to
capture the context in which meaningful change is taking place. The project will
also identify conditions and experiences that support students to persist in
mathematics because of, not in spite of, their experiences in these mathematics
communities. Instructors' beliefs and instructional practices that support
equitable mathematics instruction will be investigated through interviews and
observations. Results from this two-year study will be disseminated widely at
national meetings that emphasize undergraduate mathematics education and in
peer-reviewed scholarly publications. This project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources,
which supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of
STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.