* 1934497
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Indigenous Contributions to Arctic Biodiversity Conservation Efforts
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Kristiina Vogt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2022
* USD 49,999.00

This dissertation project examines how Indigenous researchers, science
professionals, and local communities shape the discussions around conservation
of lands and species across the Arctic. Arctic Peoples have been engaged in
biodiversity conservation efforts though many challenges remain to meaningful
participation. This research involves four approaches that examine (1) the
contributions of Indigenous communities to Arctic biodiversity research in data
collection, planning, implementation, evaluation, and reporting; (2) the ways in
which Indigenous Knowledge and science partner to provide data for use in
conservation planning; (3) the perceptions of the barriers to diverse
participation in conservation efforts, and; (4) the facilitation of
participatory processes of current Arctic conservation projects and initiatives.
This research studies the human dimensions of conservation, improving scientific
methodologies by identifying tools and approaches for meaningfully engaging
Indigenous Peoples and other stakeholders, documenting diverse approaches to
addressing biodiversity efforts, improving the management and conservation of
Arctic landscapes, and partnering Indigenous knowledge and science for
conservation science. While this research focuses on the Arctic, the findings
will have application for better understanding the intersection of conservation
efforts and participatory designs across the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research identifies thirty proposed study locations for intensive field study as
information on these research topics is often limited, only partially recorded,
recorded in a language other than English, or captured in the living memories of
professionals and community members engaged in conservation efforts. Data
collection and analyses for the four studies include, (1) gathering published
literature on Arctic biodiversity research for content analysis (n=100), (2)
case study development, comparative case study analysis, and focused comparison
of conservation projects engaged in knowledge co-production (n=10), (3)
30-minute semi-structured interviews of Indigenous and conservation
professionals analyzed via transcription, qualitative data analysis software,
and thematic coding (n=50), and (4) comparative case study analysis of
Indigenous use of, and engagement in, Arctic protected areas via process
tracing, focused comparison, content analysis, and principal component analysis
(n=35). Results from this research will clarify how Indigenous participation
contributes to conservation science and goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.