* 1934269
* SaTc: EDU: Collaborative: An Assessment Driven Approach to Self-Directed Learning in Secure Programming (SecTutor)
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ida Ngambeki, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 238,127.00

The field of software development needs developers to write secure code, as well
as to continuously respond to evolving threats and adapt system designs to meet
new security needs. This requires developers to gain a deep understanding of
foundational concepts in secure programming, and continuously learn and practice
defensive, secure, and robust coding. Given the current lack of consistent and
comprehensive secure programming training in most computing programs, and the
need for any training to evolve to meet new requirements, it is essential to
have mechanisms that make secure programming training adaptive and intelligent.
The goal for this project is to develop one such mechanism, named SecTutor,
which is a dual-purpose adaptive testing and intelligent tutoring system. Using
SecTutor, learners will be able to identify their current missing knowledge and
areas of misunderstanding in secure programming, and access content to improve
learning at their own pace. SecTutor will provide immediate feedback and
learning analytics to motivate and guide learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will take an assessment-driven approach for personalized, self-directed
learning: a rigorous assessment tests the learner's level of knowledge and skill
so that the intelligent tutoring system can calibrate the instruction directly
to the learner. Specifically, the first step of the project will be to construct
an adaptive test to diagnose learners' current level of foundational
understanding in secure programming. This adaptive test will be based on a
rigorously constructed secure programming concept inventory. This test will also
diagnose what topics the learner is finding difficult or is fundamentally not
understanding. The next step of the project will be to build an intelligent
tutorial system that will provide both content and guidance for the learner to
master secure programming concepts and skills. The third step will be to
incorporate learning analytics into the system that will not only provide
feedback to individual learners, but also provide mechanisms for instructors to
gather information about their learners, compare them to other demographics,
analyze secure programming questions, and adapt their curriculum to address
specific challenges or customized requirements. SecTutor will eventually be
integrated into other existing secure programming resources and will be adopted
broadly for secure programming training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.