* 1934199
* NSF-BSF: From microscopic propulsion to macroscale dynamics: Active particle transport in complex environments
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* David Saintillan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 10/31/2023
* USD 303,287.00

Suspensions of self-propelled microparticles, or "microswimmers," whether
biological or synthetic, have generated considerable interest over the last
decade in a wide variety of disciplines, from biophysics to materials science to
engineering. From a biological standpoint, understanding locomotion strategies
of microswimmers is relevant to reproduction, the spread of disease and
contamination processes in the environment. In engineering, active
microparticles have been designed to transport material on small scales and to
actuate gears and other devices. Nevertheless, the widespread use of
microswimmers in practical applications is limited by an incomplete
understanding of their propulsion strategies, interactions with their
environment, and macroscale transport properties. This project, which is a
collaboration between University of California - San Diego and the Technion,
will use mathematical modeling and numerical simulations to enhance fundamental
understanding of active particle transport in complex environments and
geometries and the relationships between microscale propulsion and macroscale
transport and hydrodynamics. This project will also support educational and
outreach activities by engaging graduate and undergraduate students in the
research, by incorporating the research in courses at UCSD and the Technion, and
by presenting a summer introductory course on fluid mechanics for high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply a combination of
mathematical modeling and high-fidelity numerical simulations to address
outstanding problems related to propulsion mechanisms, effective transport, and
large-scale dynamics of microswimmers and their suspensions. The project will
examine propulsion modalities of autophoretic colloids and will improve on
existing models of self-diffusiophoretic propulsion by elucidating the effects
of solute convection and relaxation, particle shape and interactions with rigid
or soft boundaries. The team will also develop statistical models of
microswimmer transport by using macrotransport theory and mean-field modeling to
investigate long-time transport properties of self-propelled swimmers in
channels as well as periodic porous media in both dilute and semi-dilute
systems. Finally, the project will connect its themes by developing statistical
descriptions of phoretic swimmers for problems where the phoretic mechanism and
statistics of transport are coupled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.