* 1934986
* HDR TRIPODS: Illinois Institute for Data Science and Dynamical Systems (iDS2)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rayadurgam Srikant, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project establishes the Illinois Institute for Data Science and Dynamical
Systems (iDS2) at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign (UIUC) that
combines research in data science with dynamical systems. iDS2 is composed of
researchers in electrical engineering, computer science, statistics and
mathematics. Data science already exerts considerable influence over daily life.
As the age of autonomous vehicles, smart cities, personalized medicine, and
artificial intelligence continues to emerge, both data-driven algorithms and
dynamical feedback loops will permeate every aspect of human existence. It is
becoming increasingly clear that the study of dynamical systems is at the heart
of fundamental challenges arising in data science. Indeed, system dynamics occur
in every facet of data science, from data generation, modeling, and inference,
all the way to learning and automation. Since the study of dynamical systems
cuts across the disciplines of engineering, mathematics, statistics, and
computer science, a synthesis of data science and dynamical systems will be a
powerful catalyst for further advances in all of these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to initiate this
synthesis through iDS2, which will leverage the multidisciplinary expertise and
strengths at UIUC in these two fields. The overall vision of iDS2 is to create
and foster a transdisciplinary program that breaks the boundaries between the
fields of data science and dynamical systems by developing new foundational
principles for both fields and by broadening their applicability. The Phase I
activities of the institute will focus on four interrelated research themes: (1)
data modeling and dynamical systems; (2) sampling, inference, and dynamical
systems; (3) algorithm design and dynamical systems; (4) decision-making and
dynamical systems. The institute will foster synergies with existing research
and education entities at UIUC in order to catalyze and scale up interactions
between the TRIPODS communities of electrical engineering, mathematics,
statistics, and theoretical computer science, both at UIUC and in the
Midwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.