* 1934221
* Upgrade of Spinner Magnetometer for Continuing and New Paleomagnetic Research Objectives at Tufts University
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* John Ridge, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 52,488.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program award
supports acquisition of an Agico JR-6 Dual Speed Spinner Magnetometer to measure
magnetism in oriented geological samples at Tufts University. The instrument
would replace a 32-year old and no longer functional magnetometer. The
magnetometer measures: polarity, which varies between a normal polarity, like
the present Earth’s field, and a reversed field in which magnetic directions are
flipped 180 degrees from today’s field; magnetic declination, which is a
measurement of how the field direction differs from true north; and magnetic
inclination, which is the dip away from horizontal of Earth’s magnetic field
direction at any given place. Time varying magnetic signature of rocks and
sediments are used for correlation and age dating. Student training in
paleomagnetic methods and research applications will be advanced with the
acquisition and the investigator plans local outreach through guided field trips
and production of educational materials targeted at K-12 teachers and students
to advance awareness of the Earth’s magnetic field and its time varying dynamic
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects that will immediately benefit
from the new magnetometer include study of: the chronology and spatial
distribution of glacial varve deposition in New England and by inference the
history and mechanisms of Quaternary glacial activity in the region; the
tectonic and paleogeographic history of Neoproterozoic rocks of the Avalon
terrane; the pre-Wisconsinan glacial history of New England based on
determination of the chronology of subglacial till and intra-till lake
deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.