* 1934925
* GCR: Collaborative Research: The Future of Quantitative Research in Social Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2026
* Lisa Singh, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,086,954.00

This Growing Convergence Research project aims to develop algorithms and tools
to better use social media data and other new forms of publicly available text
data to advance understanding of human behavior and society. The research team
will integrate across the social, behavioral, and computer sciences to create
and adapt computer algorithms and data mining methods in ways that adhere to the
design structures, measurement rigor and ethical protections of social science.
While much research is emerging in this space, no established best practices
exist for designing proper micro- and macro-level studies involving social media
and other open-source text data. The research team, representing the breadth of
behavioral/social science and computer science, will develop and test
methodologies for sampling, validating, and analyzing social media data so that
social scientists can easily interpret and generalize from
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will (1) develop a
detailed, hybrid methodology (Iterative Method for Social Media Research -
IMSMR) that integrates relevant components of existing social science
methodologies with relevant components of the knowledge discovery process to
enhance research practices in both social and computer science fields; (2) use
IMSMR to establish guidelines for using an array of different social media data
to answer questions across different social and data science disciplines; (3)
test and refine the methodology and guidelines on different research exemplars
that spans multiple social, behavioral, and economic disciplines; and (4)
develop a shared text analytic research portal that enables social scientists to
generate structured variables using state of the art natural language processing
and data mining that adhere to the validity and reliability standards of social
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.