* 1934301
* I-Corps: Light patternable mesoporous material
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Tobias Hanrath, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
significant commercial opportunities in the area of small molecule separation.
To capture this opportunity, the potential of this I-Corps project focuses on
unprecedented demand of the purification market. Although the emergence of new
biomarkers, drug development and point-of-care testing can improve outcomes, the
purification step is hindered by requiring lab-scale equipment to separate the
impurities and cannot be easily integrated into functional device architectures.
Thus, processable mesoporous material potentially has significant need and may
have direct impact on wide range of industries including healthcare, biomedical,
waste and pollution. These techniques provide a universal route to integrate
purification within devices and also provide a platform for multi-detection or
diagnosis which is not available yet in the market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project further develops a technology to process mesoporous materials as
an enabling platform for a broad range of applications including purification,
sensing and bioreactors. Despite the early advances in synthesis of mesoporous
materials, technological applications have fallen far behind expectation due, in
large part, to the fact that mesoporous materials are formed as powders. This
technology addresses this key challenge by fabricating the mesopores in-situ by
leveraging unique photo programmable precursor chemistry. The technology enables
fabrication of hierarchical mesoporous structures in which the internal
micropore structure and macroscopic structure of the materials can be precisely
defined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.