* 1934477
* Collaborative Research: GreenDrill: The response of the northern Greenland Ice Sheet to Arctic Warmth - Direct constrains from sub-ice bedrock
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Robert DeConto, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 449,265.00

The GreenDrill project is motivated by a need to understand past and future
change in the extent of the Greenland Ice Sheet. The Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS)
holds about 24 feet (7.4 m) of sea level equivalent, yet it remains difficult to
predict the rate of melt and possible tipping points in the stability of the ice
sheet. In GreenDrill, the team of investigators will sample bedrock from under
ice at sites in northern Greenland, analyzing cosmogenic nuclides to determine
past periods of ice free conditions. These data will provide better
understanding of how this region of the GrIS has responded to warm periods in
the past. The team will also use these data in computer models to place results
in the context of the entire ice sheet to explore mechanisms and climate forcing
driving past periods of ice sheet disintegration, which in turn will inform
projections of future ice sheet behavior and sea level rise. In addition to the
high relevance of this research to society, the GreenDrill project includes
broader impacts such as development of a new television episode called
Adventures in Science, educational programs for middle and high school students
via the Scientists are Superheroes program, and training for early career
postdoctoral scientists, graduate students, and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators propose
to gather new data to test the sensitivity of the northern Greenland Ice Sheet
(GrIS) and its potential to contribute to sea level rise in the future.
Specifically, data from the GreenDrill project will better constrain the
response of the GrIS to past periods of warmth and address the hypothesis that
the northern GrIS is more sensitive to Arctic warming than the southern GrIS.
The team will drill through the ice at sites in northern Greenland, sample
bedrock obtained from those cores, and analyze a suite of cosmogenic nuclides
(Beryllium-10, Aluminum-26, Chlorine-36, Carbon-14, and Neon-21) that can act as
signatures of changes to the GrIS margin. These data will deliver direct
observations of periods when the GrIS was substantially smaller than today and
ice sheet margins retreated inland. Results will be incorporated into a
numerical ice sheet model with a built-in cosmogenic nuclide module to identify
plausible ice sheet histories. The modeling experiments will help understand the
mechanisms and climate forcing underlying past periods of ice sheet retreat and
help inform predictions of the future. Based on the melting scenarios, a first-
order map of sea level rise fingerprints and inundation scenarios for major port
cities will be produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.