* 1934121
* Controlling secondary flows by the use of non-wetting surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Kamran Alba, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 386,241.00

Turbulent secondary flows are naturally or artificially induced flows
perpendicular to the main direction of primary flow. Many important industrial
processes have curved-pipe systems and rotating machinery designed to enhance
and optimize mixing of chemicals and other fluids. These systems may also
produce turbulent secondary flows. Depending on how the secondary flow is
generated, it may be ordered and stationary in space creating stagnant regions,
which inhibits mixing even if the flow has significant turbulence. This research
will provide a better understanding of the physics behind the generation of
secondary flows and how to control them. Computations and experiments will be
used to investigate using non-wetting (hydrophobic) surfaces to impact and
control these flow features. Every summer, a camp will be held for more than 30
underrepresented minority K-12 students to encourage
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate the use of
non-wetting surfaces to induce, affect, and control secondary flows through
selectively patterning the solid boundaries. By using a combination of direct
numerical simulations and laboratory experiments, questions on which types and
patterns of treatments are most effective the secondary flows. The effectiveness
of different kinds of surface treatments, both in the direction of the flow, and
perpendicular to the flow, will be evaluated by measuring frictional losses and
flow homogeneity. Investigations will be based on a canonical system where
pinned secondary flows are known to exist, namely Taylor-Couette turbulence,
i.e. the flow between two concentric cylinders. Simulations will be carried out
to test a wide variety of surface patterns to determine the most efficient
arrangements by using boundary conditions that resemble both ideal and real
treatments. Experiments will measure the real-world efficacy of these treatments
with great precision. Finally, by studying aging surfaces, the lifetime of the
treatment effectiveness can be estimated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.