* 1934884
* HDR TRIPODS: D4 (Dependable Data-Driven Discovery) Institute
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Pavan Aduri, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,531,995.00

Data-driven discoveries are permeating critical fabrics of society. Unreliable
discoveries lead to decisions that can have far-reaching and catastrophic
consequences on society, defense, and the individual. Thus, the dependability of
data-science lifecycles that produce discoveries and decisions is a critical
issue that requires a new holistic view and formal foundations. This project
will establish the Dependable Data Driven Discovery (D4) Institute at Iowa State
University that will advance foundational research on ensuring that data-driven
discoveries are of high quality. The activities of the D4 Institute will have a
transformative impact on the dependability of data-science lifecycles. First,
the problem definition itself will have a significant impact by helping future
innovations beyond academia. While the notion of dependability is well-studied
in the computer-systems literature, challenges in data science push the boundary
of existing knowledge into the unknown. This institute's work will define D4,
and increase data science's benefit to society by providing a transformative
theory of D4. The second impact will come from the process of shared vocabulary
development facilitated by this institute, and its result that would encourage
experts across TRIPODS disciplines and domain experts to collaborate on common
goals and challenges. Third, the institute will set research directions for D4
by providing funding for foundational research, which will have a separate set
of impacts. Fourth, the institute will facilitate transdisciplinary training of
a diverse cadre of data scientists through activities such as the Midwest Big
Data Summer School and the D4 workshop.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance the theoretical foundations of data science by fostering foundational
research to enable understanding of the risks to the dependability of data-
science lifecycles, to formalize the rigorous mathematical basis of the measures
of dependability for data science lifecycles, and to identify mechanisms to
create dependable data-science lifecycles. The project defines a risk to be a
cause that can lead to failures in data-driven discovery, and the processes that
plan for, acquire, manage, analyze, and infer from data collectively as the
data-science lifecycle. For instance, an inference procedure that is
significantly expensive can deliver late information to a human operator facing
a deadline (complexity as a risk); if the data-science lifecycle provides a
recommendation without an uncertainty measure for the recommendation, a human
operator has no means to determine whether to trust the recommendation
(uncertainty as a risk). Compared to recent works that have focused on fairness,
accountability, and trustworthiness issues for machine learning algorithms, this
project will take a holistic perspective and consider the entire data-science
lifecycle. In phase I of the project the investigators will focus on four
measures: complexity, resource constraints, uncertainty, and data freshness. In
developing a framework to study these measures, this work will prepare the
investigators to scale up their activities to other measures in phase II as well
as to address larger portions of the data-science lifecycle. The study of each
measure brings about foundational challenges that will require expertise from
multiple TRIPODS disciplines to address.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by HDR TRIPODS and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.