* 1934384
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Uncovering the role of transposons in maize variation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Ross-Ibarra, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,132,236.00

It is critical to continue developing varieties of crops that are highly
productive while minimizing environmental impact. To accomplish this, plant
breeding relies upon the genetic variation within a species to find new priorty
traits. Most efforts are focused on characterizing the variations that occur as
changes to a single nucleotide of the genome. However, there is evidence that
transposable elements are a major source of variability among the genomes of
different varieties of the same species. Transposable elements, originally
called "jumping genes," are small pieces of DNA that can make additional copies
and move to new genomic locations. Transposable elements, first discovered in
corn (maize) by Barbara McClintock, account for approximately 85% of the corn
genome. It is known that transposable elements can influence nearby DNA and
cause phenotypes by changing when and how genes are expressed. An intriguing
ongoing question is how this vast majority of the genome composed of
transposable elements actually functions and contributes to traits. This project
addresses this question by documenting the variation of transposable elements in
different varieties of corn, and then examines how transposable elements create
phenotypic variation in corn. The knowledge from this project can reveal all new
breeding potential for corn and can help shape future crop improvement based on
transposable elements. In the process, undergraduate and graduate students will
be trained in computational and quantitative analysis of genomes through hands-
on workshops and training. All resources will be available through public
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transposable elements (TEs) account for the
majority of genome sequence in maize and other crops. Locus-specific and
cytogenetic studies suggest that TEs can be highly variable within plant species
and account for agronomically important QTL. However, knowledge of the role of
TEs in contributing to genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic and phenotypic
diversity in crop plants is lacking, in part due to the highly repetitive nature
of these sequences, which has, to date, made them recalcitrant given available
technologies. The activities will develop annotation and diversity resources to
enable the study of TEs in maize. Within this project these resources will be
utilized to study the role of TEs in contributing to phenotypic variation
through the use of quantitative genetics and population genetics approaches.
These efforts will elucidate the potential to utilize knowledge of TE variation
to understand genotype by environment interactions and to improve genotype-
phenotype predictions in crop species. The project will monitor how TEs
contribute to a dynamic maize genome and identify TEs that are moving in modern
maize varieties. The research will monitor the mechanisms through which TE
variation can influence phenotype through the analysis of TE influences on
chromatin and gene expression. These experiments will shed light upon the role
of TE polymorphisms in contributing to variation in the maize epigenome,
transcriptome and phenome. This project will provide foundational knowledge of
the role of TEs that can be used to enhance maize improvement and responses to
abiotic stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.