* 1934568
* HDR TRIPODS: UC Davis TETRAPODS Institute of Data Science
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Annamaria Amenta, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

The project at UC Davis will establish the UC Davis TETRAPODS Institute of Data
Science (UCD4IDS), which will be composed of thirty-five researchers (four PIs
and thirty-one senior personnel) coming from four departments (Computer Science,
Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering, Mathematics, and Statistics) and will
break interdepartmental barriers and promote interdisciplinary research
collaborations among faculty members, postdocs, and graduate students. The
project will encourage innovative and robust research, and provide education and
mentoring of graduate students and postdocs in data science. Students and
postdocs engaged in this project will be trained to be the next generation of
interdisciplinary data scientists: they will gain deep knowledge of some focused
areas, and at the same time, broaden their perspectives in other diverse fields.
The UCD4IDS will bring in the insights gained by the experience of the faculty
members in the four primary departments as well as application fields such as
neuroscience, medical and health sciences, and veterinary medicine. The UCD4IDS
will organize: a) round-table discussions and breakout sessions after weekly
seminars related to data science; b) quarterly colloquia on data science; and c)
annual three-day workshops. The project will also coordinate and develop diverse
courses at UC Davis, with graduate students involved in the project taking at
least one course in each of the four departments. The PI team will also leverage
local programs to recruit, support, and retain graduate students, postdocs, and
new faculty members from underrepresented groups by matching them to appropriate
mentors. For the dissemination of the research and educational results, the PI
team plans to: 1) make colloquia and workshop talk slides, lecture notes, and
codes available online, which will reach out to our current and future
collaborators and the general public; and 2) organize mini-symposia and
workshops on foundations of data science at targeted
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research at the UCD4IDS will focus on three
broad themes: 1) Fundamentals of machine learning directed toward biological and
medical applications; 2) Optimization theory and algorithms for machine learning
including numerical solvers for large-scale nontrivial learning problems; and 3)
High-dimensional data analysis on graphs and networks. The algorithms and
software tools to be developed will make a positive impact in solving practical
data-analysis and machine-learning problems in diverse fields, e.g., computer
science (analyzing friendship relations in social networks); electrical
engineering (monitoring and controlling sensor networks); civil engineering
(monitoring traffic flow on a road network); and in particular, biology and
medicine (analyzing data measured on real neural networks, detecting changes in
the brain structures due to diseases, imaging live biological cells for
analyzing their growth, etc.). The technical goals of this project are: 1)
geometric understanding of high-dimensional data, which may allow efficient
(re)sampling from manifolds representing certain phenomena of interest and
classifying subtle yet critical differences that often appear in biological and
medical applications; 2) providing theoretical guarantees and efficient
numerical algorithms for non-convex optimization, which is crucial to machine
learning; and 3) deepening understanding of how local interactions between
individual entities (e.g., neurons) lead to global coordination and decision
making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.