* 1934824
* GCR: Collaborative Research: Convergence Around the Circular Economy
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* Eric Beckman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2025
* USD 836,878.00

The objectives of this Growing Convergence Research project are to advance
understanding of circular economies and to explore boundary-spanning solutions
to the complex resource and waste challenges facing society today. The
consumption of disposable consumer products drives many environmental
challenges, including waste and pollution streams with global impact. A circular
economy aims to decouple economic growth from resource consumption and waste by
cycling products and materials back into production. A convergence team of
engineers, economists, anthropologists, and environmental assessment experts
will work to develop the knowledge needed to achieve circular economies by
closing and slowing resource loops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address closing
resource loops, the research team will examine the technical and scientific
challenges of how to formulate, produce, and use material resources to reduce
consumption and environmental impact while also creating new ways to sustainably
cycle these resources back into use at end-of-life. Plastic products serve as a
key case study, with an emphasis on molecularly-designed products for
disassembly and reuse. The project includes research on a recyclable thermoset
composite system which can be "uncured," separated, and collected for reuse. A
general equilibrium behavioral-economic model that incorporates insights from
psychology and anthropology and considers non-optimizing, highly-socialized
behaviors will be used to consider associated economic, business, and
environmental factors. To address slowing resource loops, the researchers will
focus on design standardization and new business models to extend product value.
They will also explore the integration and development of blockchain for asset
and material tracking. The creation of knowledge with stakeholder input will
inform innovative technical and science-based advances, engagement approaches,
and novel business models. Using Complexity Leadership Theory and network
analysis, members of the project will study convergence research in action and
design interventions to strengthen connections within the research
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.