* 1934865
* Expanding the maize domestication gene network: from phenotype to gene
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* John Doebley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 982,073.00

Like other crop plants, corn or maize was domesticated from a wild plant
species. Corn was domesticated approximately 10,000 years ago in southern
Mexico. Domestication profoundly transformed the structure and appearance of the
corn plant, converting an unproductive wild species into the most highly
productive crop grown in the US today. The research will elucidate the genetic
basis for some of these changes in plant structure. Specifically, the research
will identify two of the genes that converted pollen bearing tassels into seed
bearing ears during domestication. This conversion of tassels into ears is
central to the mechanism that made corn a highly productive crop grown
throughout the world today. Once the two new genes are identified, the research
will also dissect how these genes work in concert with other known genes to form
a “gene network” controlling the structure of the maize plant. Each gene in the
network is like an individual gear in a complex machine of many gears that work
together. Understanding this gene network will facilitate the efforts of plant
breeders to improve maize even more. To reach beyond the maize genetics’
community, this project will engage the broader society in four ways: (1)
Develop public outreach and education displays on crop domestication, (2)
establish an annual workshop for US and Mexican plant scientists, (3) train
undergraduate students from disadvantaged backgrounds, and (4) train graduate
students in effective communication of scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will better define the
gene network that was modified to produce domesticated maize from its wild
progenitor, teosinte. Previously, several genes contributing to the
transformation of teosinte into maize have been identified: teosinte branched 1
(tb1) that regulates plant and inflorescence structure; teosinte glume
architecture 1 (tga1) that regulates ear structure; grassy tillers 1 (gt1) that
regulated plant architecture; and enhancer of tb1 (etb1.2) that affects ear
structure. These four genes are members of a maize gene network that controls
plant and inflorescence architecture. The project will focus on the conversion
of the staminate inflorescences (tassels) at the tips of primary branches in
teosinte into the pistillate inflorescences (ears) in maize. The aims of the
project are: (1) fine-map a quantitative trait locus (QTL) called stam2.1 to its
underlying gene, (2) fine-map a second QTL called stam1.1 to its underlying
gene, and (3) characterize the interactions of stam1.1 and stam2.1 with tb1 at
the phenotypic and gene expression levels. The research will add to the
understanding of domestication and the genetic control of plant development. To
engage the broader community, four activities will be undertaken. (1) An annual
workshop for plant scientists in the US and Mexico will be organized. (2) One
undergraduate student from a disadvantaged background will be trained each year.
(3) UW Graduate students will develop and present “exploration stations” on crop
domestication for public outreach. (4) A graduate level course on giving
effective lectures to large audiences will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.