* 1934345
* Collaborative Research: A Halogen Oxidant Flow Reactor: Development and Use in Laboratory and Field Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2023
* USD 196,601.00

This project is a collaborative effort among three institutions to develop a
technique for studying chemical reactions in the atmosphere that involve
halogens, such as chlorine and bromine. Recently, the lead scientist on this
project developed a similar technique, using an oxidation flow reactor (OFR),
for the study of atmospheric reactions involving the hydroxyl radical, the most
active oxidizing species in the atmosphere. The development of the OFR has
advanced significantly the ability of scientists to study and understand
atmospheric reaction processes in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goals of this research are to develop methods to generate chlorine (Cl)
and bromine (Br) in OFRs, deploy a prototype halogen OFR along with state-of-
the-art mass spectrometry techniques in source regions with potential Cl/Br
influence, and conduct OFR and environmental chamber (EC) intercomparison
studies of the chemical composition and yields of products generated from Cl
oxidation of biogenic and anthropogenic precursors. These studies will evaluate
the ability of OFRs to conduct laboratory and field studies investigating Cl/Br-
initiated oxidative aging processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort is based on
investigating the following questions: (1) What is the oxygenated volatile
organic compound (OVOC) and secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation potential
of ambient air exposed to halogen atoms in an OFR? How does it change as a
function of halogen type, integrated oxidant exposure and source regions? (2) Is
the yield and chemical composition of laboratory SOA generated by VOC + Cl
reactions independent of the method used to generate it (OFR or EC)? (3) How
does the chemical composition and yield of laboratory and ambient OVOC/SOA
compare when initiated by Cl/Br versus hydroxyl radical oxidation? Does the
multi-oxidant-OFR approach provide additional constraints on OVOC/SOA
precursors?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes laboratory training for
undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral research
fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.