* 1934314
* The Search for Noble Multifunctional-Nanocrystal Architectures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kyung-Suk Kim, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 561,699.00

It has recently been recognized that a new class of advanced materials can be
created by designing and fabricating nanocrystal architectures that contain more
than one type of functional nanoscale components. This award supports
fundamental research to elucidate the principles of folding atomically layered
2D materials, which can control the assembly of unique multifunctional
nanocrystal architectures. Understanding design and fabrication principles for
ordered nanocrystal architectures controlled by 2D-material folds will promote
discovery and invention of novel multifunctional materials for a broader range
of applications. The testbed material system for the research is a high-
performance optoelectronic device composed of metallic gold nanocrystals and
semiconductor nanoparticles. Broader impacts of the research include advances in
the fundamental science of nanostructured materials, with applications ranging
from high-resolution bio-imaging to efficient solar-energy harvesting. Thus, the
research will not only move forward science, but also build up technology for
national health, prosperity, and welfare. The multi-disciplinary research in
science and engineering will train a diverse group of students for the
development of next-generation STEM workforces critically needed to compete
globally in nanotechnology. To this end, this award will also support the
inclusion of undergraduate students in research, integration of research and
education through collaboration with global industries and institutions,
recruitment of underrepresented students, and interactions with K-12 students
through outreach programs at Brown University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scalable
assembly of programmable multifunctional nanostructures has long been elusive.
This research aims to elucidate principles of multiscale nano-structural
assembly to create distinctive material properties for a broad range of
applications through the novel architecture of multifunctional nanostructures.
The multiscale-assembly strategy relies on physical chemistry and the mechanics
of self-organization on three levels: 1) synthesis and characterization of
nanocrystals; 2) density functional theory of quantum-flexoelectric crinkles in
2D-materials; and 3) variational analysis of interactions among the nanocrystals
and the crinkles. The test material system is a hybrid architecture of gold
nanocrystals and CdSe-CdS core-shell quantum dots for plasmon-exciton coupling,
aligned by crinkles in multilayer graphene and/or hexagonal boron nitride. This
interdisciplinary effort will offer some new insights in the mechanics and
physics of materials at the nanoscale, as well as methods of creating novel
multifunctional materials. This new fundamental knowledge will serve as a guide
to elucidate the distinct roles of nano and micromechanics of materials in
developing novel advanced materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.