* 1934360
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Science with Accelerated Machine Learning
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Scott Hauck, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 600,001.00

In the next generation of big science experiments, the demands for computing
resources are expected to outstrip the capabilities of existing computing
infrastructure. In light of this, a radical rethinking of the
cyberinfrastructure is needed to contend with these developments. With the onset
of deep learning, parallelized processing architectures have emerged as a
solution. Combined with deep learning algorithms, parallelized processing
architectures, in particular, Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) have been
shown to give large speedups in computing when compared with conventional CPUs.
This project aims to bring machine learning based accelerated computing with
FPGAs into the scientific community by targeting two big-data physics
experiments: the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO). This project will push the frontiers of
deep learning at scale, demonstrating the versatility and scalability of these
methods to accelerate and enable new physics in the big data era. This project
serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, by promoting the
progress of science. The PIs and their collaborators will build upon their
recent work to design and exploit state-of-the-art neural network models for
real-time data analytics, reducing overall computing latency. This new computing
paradigm aims to significantly increase the processing capability at the LHC and
LIGO, leading to an increased scientific output of these devices and,
potentially, foundational discoveries. The students to be mentored and trained
in this research will interact closely with industry partners, creating new
career opportunities, and strengthening synergies between academia and industry.
In addition to sharing algorithms with the community through open source
repositories, the team will continue to educate the community regarding credit
and citation of scientific software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
PIs will build upon their recent work developing high quality deep learning
algorithms for real-time data analytics of time-series and image datasets using
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) to accelerate low-latency inference of
machine learning algorithms. The team will develop machine learning based
acceleration tools focusing on FPGAs to be used within LIGO and the LHC
experiments. The team's immediate goal is to take benchmark examples of LHC high
level trigger processing and LIGO gravitational wave processing and construct
demonstrators in each scenario. For this benchmark, they aim to design and
implement an FPGA based accelerator that can perform low latency gravitational
wave identification and LHC event reconstruction. Additionally, the PIs aim to
add the capability of graph based neural network accelerators for FPGAs. The
open source tools to be developed as part of these activities will be readily
shared with LIGO, LHC, and LSST. The project will create an advisory group,
including members of large and small projects, members of the neutrino physics,
multi-messenger astronomy community, industry partners, computer scientists, and
computational biologists. This project aims to bring together representatives of
the different communities that will benefit from and can contribute to this
work. The PIs will organize deep learning workshops and boot camps to train
students and researchers on how to use and contribute to the framework, creating
a wide network of contributors and developers across key science missions. This
project is part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data
Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of
the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution Big Idea
activity. The effort is jointly funded by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.