* 1934066
* Characterization of Upward Leaders and the Attachment Process in Downward Cloud-to-Ground Lightning
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Hamid Rassoul, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 604,016.00

The energy delivered during and following lightning attachment to objects on the
ground can start fires, damage/destroy equipment, injure/kill people and
animals, cause explosions, and disrupt manufacturing processes. These risks have
serious impacts on electric power transmission and distribution,
telecommunications, gas pipelines, public safety and protection, management of
outdoor activities, forestry, space launches, and public/private homes and
infrastructure. However, the underlying 'attachment process' is sufficiently
complex and variable that it has not been possible to gain more than a
relatively crude understanding of it. Therefore, the broad scientific motivation
of this project is to address the question of lightning attachment, recently
expressed as one of the top ten open questions in lightning research: "What is
the physical mechanism via which lightning attaches to elevated objects on the
ground and to the flat ground?" Specifically, the researchers will measure and
examine correlated electric currents, electromagnetic fields, and high-speed
videos associated with the lightning attachment processes. The goal is to
characterize in detail the physical processes associated with the different
stages of lightning attachment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will provide
direct measurements of the upward current from the ground and structures on the
ground just prior to lightning attachment, which is thought to be a primary
source of lightning injury. Further, the findings will directly impact lightning
striking distance calculation and leader models that are essential for
designing/augmenting lightning protection techniques. Also, in this project the
researchers will utilize, augment, and maintain a unique (at least in the United
States) existing current measurement facility. Beyond the direct importance
noted above, this infrastructure is needed for future basic-science spectral-
analyses studies of optical emissions from upward leaders and during early
stages of lightning attachment that will help understand the time-evolution of
the temperature profile in lightning channels. Finally, this project will be
accompanied by an education program focused on science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) to have a broad impact on students with diverse
backgrounds and to train the next generation of researchers in the areas of
electromagnetism, geosciences, and atmospheric electricity. Undergraduate
students and a graduate student (including minorities in STEM) will be trained
in theory and observations as a part of this project and will have opportunities
to participate in a research program involving collaborators with diverse
backgrounds and expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
researchers will address some key scientific questions related to lightning
attachment to objects on the ground including those regarding the
characteristics of (unconnected and connecting) upward leaders at the time of
their inception and before their attachment to downward leaders, the broadband
electromagnetic field characteristics of the lightning attachment process, how
the slow front and fast transition signatures are related to the breakthrough
phase of lightning attachment, and how natural-lightning return stroke
characteristics such as peak current and time evolution of charge transfer are
related to upward leader characteristics such as speed, duration, brightness,
and vertical extent. The electric current measurements will be performed at an
existing lightning-current measurement facility on top of a 91.5-m tall tower at
the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in one of the highest lightning-incidence regions
in the United States. This is presently the only natural-lightning electric
current measurement facility operating in the United States. In conjunction with
the current measurements, the researchers will deploy and perform as part of
this study, electromagnetic field and extremely high-speed video camera
measurements at distances of about 1.5 km and 700 m from the tower,
respectively. The existing direct current measurement system allows the
researchers to record currents associated with upward leaders with time and
amplitude resolutions of 40 ns and about 1 A, respectively, saturating at 200
kA. The newly-purchased high-speed video camera measurement system will provide
optical records of lightning attachment with temporal and spatial resolutions of
a few microseconds and about 1 meter, respectively. Additionally, broadband
electric field derivative and narrowband VHF emissions at 300 MHz from upward
leaders in downward natural lightning will be measured at about 200 m from the
tower. All measurements will be GPS-time-stamped allowing their time-
correlation. Research findings from this project are expected to be of intense
interest to the scientific community and will be distributed via conference and
peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.