* 1934183
* Reducing the Environmental Impact of Hydraulic Fracturing by Improved Effectiveness of Pumped Fluid and Proppant
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2019,10/31/2019
* Peter Smeallie, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 49,105.00

Unconventional, low and ultra-low permeability oil/gas formations require well
stimulation to allow practical and economical production. This process of well
stimulation has become known as "hydraulic fracturing" or "fracking." The
recovery factor, as the percent of the oil or gas in place that is being
recovered, is relatively low. Most of the oil or gas in place is left
unrecovered and thus requiring larger and larger operations and creating larger
environmental impact of the large-scale operations. Although industry desires to
improve the recovery factor for both economic and environmental reasons, this
has not been possible. This Workshop is intended to develop a vision for major
breakthrough. A major breakthrough would reduce the wasted hydraulic fracturing
effort and reduce the associated environmental impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing more directly on reducing the wasted hydraulic
fracturing effort to increase the recovery factor and reduce the environmental
impact requires visionary innovative thinking. The current operating mode of
near-term cost reductions for producers and improving margins for services
companies may not facilitate visionary, innovative thought. This Workshop is to
be a rallying of university, industry, and National Laboratories engineers and
scientists to define what understandings are adequate and what unknowns require
further research, engineering, and field testing. The potential eventual impacts
could result in very significant reduction of environmental consequences of
fracking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.