* 1934915
* HDR TRIPODS: UIC Foundations of Data Science Institute
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Tanya Berger-Wolf, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

The project creates a collaborative research institute combining aspects of
mathematics, statistics, computer science, and engineering to study the
foundations of data science at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC). The
institute will be a collaboration between three departments: Computer Science
(CS), Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science (MSCS), and Electrical and
Computer Engineering (ECE). The institute will leverage the wide range of
expertise among the investigators on this project in the three departments to
bring the theoretical foundations of data science closer to the practice of data
science. This involves studying idealized models of data, understanding inherent
computational limits associated to these idealized models, and then developing
models and methods that are robust to realistic models of uncertainty. The
institute will also focus on training the next generation of researchers and
will leverage the diversity of UIC, a large urban public research-intensive
university with one of the most diverse student bodies in the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to push the boundaries of the
theory of data science by both gaining deeper understanding of idealized models
and by building a theory around realistic models of data and computation. The
themes pursued by this institute will include 1) the representation and
structure of data; 2) machine learning and complexity; and 3) robustness and
privacy. These themes will serve to link the theory and application of data
science and to provide opportunities for the investigators to pool their
expertise across the three disciplines of theoretical computer science,
mathematical sciences, and electrical engineering. The specific activities of
the research institute will include hosting themed research workshops,
developing the UIC data science curriculum across the three departments, and
fostering regional and industrial collaborations through partnerships with the
Midwest Big Data Hub and the Discovery Partners Institute. Broader impacts of
the institute will include applications of the proposed research to practical
data science problems, the development of interdisciplinary data science courses
spanning multiple departments, and increasing participation, especially of
underrepresented groups, by broadly recruiting students from UIC's diverse
community to study data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of
the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.