* 1934509
* Collaborative Research: MODULUS: Modeling and Experimental Investigation of Protein Crowding on Lipid Bilayers
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jeanne Stachowiak, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 421,948.00

Cellular membranes separate the contents of the cell from the environment. In
addition to demarcating cellular boundaries, these membranes perform critical
functions such as the uptake of nutrients and drugs into the cell and ejection
of material out of the cell. Membranes perform these functions by interacting
with many different proteins. Therefore, understanding how membrane-protein
interactions take place is critical for gaining insight not just into how cells
function but also for understanding how viruses can hijack cells or how better
drug delivery systems can be designed. The work proposed here will result in new
computational algorithms and experimental tools to understand how cellular
membranes interact with proteins to regulate these fundamental functions. The
insights generated from our effort will fill major gaps in current understanding
about how the cell membrane can change its shape to affect its function. These
insights have the potential to benefit society in multiple ways including (i)
improving understanding of the mechanisms that pathogens use to invade cells,
suggesting new therapeutic strategies; (ii) inspiring the design of better
systems for drug and gene delivery, and; (iii) revealing fundamental mechanisms
that structure and organize soft matter, potentially leading to improvements in
technologies that rely on such materials including surfactants, cosmetics,
fuels, and foods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane curvature plays a role in
nearly every cellular function, in both health and disease. The curvature of the
membrane is mediated by many proteins that interact with lipids. In this
proposal, we will develop new theoretical and computational models of membrane-
protein interactions with a focus on understanding how protein crowding can lead
to membrane curvature generation. This effort combines multiscale modeling of
membrane bending with quantitative detailed experimental measurements of
membrane surface coverage, steric pressure, and curvature. The multiscale
modeling efforts include coarse-grained models of lipid bilayer-protein
interactions that will inform the continuum models of membrane curvature
generation. The team of investigators includes an experimental biophysicist, a
theoretical biophysicist, and mathematicians. The insights generated from our
efforts will fill major gaps in current understanding of how membrane curvature
is generated and stabilized. We also anticipate these applications driving
additional development of the theory and numerical treatment of nonlinear
geometric partial differential equations posed on surfaces with constraints.
Additionally, the team of investigators will participate in outreach and
educational activities, including programs for high school students,
undergraduate research opportunities, and new course development. This award was
co-funded by Systems and Synthetic Biology in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and the Mathematical Biology Program of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.