* 1934271
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Operation of Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kamil Ekinci, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 429,948.00

This project will address open scientific questions in nanotechnology leading to
improved nano-scale sensors. The project will promote the progress of science
and advance the national health, prosperity and security by enabling ultra-
sensitive and robust nanoelectromechanical devices. Nanoelectromechanical
sensors can easily detect single atoms and molecules, and are expected to
provide powerful new approaches to medical diagnostics and environmental
monitoring potentially with single-molecule sensitivity. This research project
will vastly expand the operational parameters of nanoelectromechanical sensors
and enable them to operate robustly in the nonlinear regime. The machinery and
methods developed in this project will allow for widespread use of these
microscopic machines and facilitate rapid progress toward the various sensing
applications. The project will also contribute to U.S. workforce development by
significantly enhancing undergraduate education at Gordon College, a small
liberal arts institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this
project are to resolve scientific questions pertinent to nonlinear operation of
nanoelectromechanical resonators and to develop a toolkit for operating them. So
far, nanoelectromechanical resonators have mostly been operated in the linear
regime. In the linear regime, the widely-used resonance tracking techniques work
by locking onto the rapidly-changing but smooth phase or amplitude response of a
resonator around its mechanical resonance. However, such feedback techniques do
not work in the nonlinear regime, because physical observables have
discontinuous jumps due to bifurcations. Instead of focusing on complex control
algorithms and controllers, this project will systematically investigate the
possibility of finding novel physical observables, which may allow for
controlling nonlinear resonators using standard controllers. In order to
validate this project's approach, the team will develop a host of novel
experimental techniques and instruments by combining nanoelectromechanical
resonators with Field Programmable Gated Array (FPGA)
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.