* 1934240
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2019)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Oshani Seneviratne, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 07/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This National Science Foundation award will fund 15 US students attending the
18th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2019), held in Auckland, New
Zealand from October 26 to 30, 2019. ISWC is the premier international forum for
state-of-the-art research on all aspects of the Semantic Web - the next
generation World Wide Web. Student Fellowships will help cover the travel costs
for US students, making it possible for them to attend the conference and
discuss and disseminate their work. They will also provide an opportunity for
them to interact with future national and international scientific
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Semantic Web Conference,
which is now in its seventeenth year, is an interdisciplinary conference that
includes work on Data Management, Natural Language Processing, Knowledge
Representation, and Reasoning, Ontologies and Ontology Languages, Semantic Web
Engineering, Linked Data, User Interfaces, and Applications. It regularly has
several hundred attendees. In addition to the main technical tracks, the
conference includes a variety of events that provide opportunities for more in-
depth interaction amongst researchers at different institutions who are at
various stages of their research careers, and researchers who are interested in
many different aspects of Semantic Web Research. Students benefit from the
Doctoral Consortium - a full day event where students can get critical, but
encouraging, feedback on their work from senior members of the community. They
also benefit from the career mentoring lunch, where experienced members of the
community from both academia and industry answer questions in an informal
setting. For further information see the conference web site at:
http://iswc2019.semanticweb.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.