* 1934577
* Representations of Lie and Jordan Algebras, Their Representations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Vera Serganova, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 10/31/2021
* USD 17,000.00

The international conference "Representations of Lie and Jordan Algebras, Their
Representations and Applications" will be held in Chengdu, China, from January 6
to January 11, 2020. This conference is an annual international event that
brings together mathematicians from all over the world. This award will provide
support of US-based participants with priority given to participants from under-
represented groups and junior researchers. The exposition of the lectures will
be in a colloquium style in order to make the material accessible to post-
doctoral scholars and graduate students. There will be a short communication
session consisting of 30-minute talks delivered by early-carrier mathematicians.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The representation theory of Lie and Jordan algebras is a
comprehensive and mainstream research area in mathematics with numerous
applications within mathematics and theoretical physics. In particular, new
categorical and geometric constructions have taken the lead not only within Lie
theory but also in other areas of mathematics and physics such as combinatorics,
group theory, number theory, integrable systems, partial differential equations,
topology and conformal field theory. Recent developments in representation
theory using D-modules, Koszul duality, and higher category are strengthening
these interactions further. The conference will cover a wide range of these
developments and their applications. The aim of the conference is to bring
together leading specialists to discuss the major achievements of the last
decade in algebras and representation theory, as well as problems and
fundamental conjectures that continue to abound the area. Further details can be
found at the conference website&lt;br/&gt;http://tianyuan.scu.edu.cn/portal/arti
cle/index/id/241.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.