* 1934227
* Paper-Based Cascade Isotachophoretic Technology: Rapid Multiplex Assay to Differentiate Bacterial and Viral Infections
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Wen-Ji Dong, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

There are about 250 million episodes of acute infectious disease annually in the
U.S., leading to 40 million patients being admitted to emergency rooms. A major
challenge to treating infected patients effectively is the clinical difficulty
in distinguishing between diseases caused by bacterial infection and those
caused by viral infection, because they often present with similar clinical
symptoms. This uncertainty directly leads to antibiotic misuse which, in turn,
contributes to the development of antibiotic resistant microbes. Therefore, it
is important to help physicians make evidence-based antibiotic treatment
decisions during the time of a patient visit by providing rapid, accurate
diagnostic tools that can distinguish between the bacterial and viral
infections. Currently, there is no such technology that can meet the need. This
research project aims to develop a novel technology that can quickly and
accurately detect biomarkers useful for distinguishing between bacterial and
viral infections. The method involves a paper-based device for separating and
concentrating protein components and a mobile phone-based detection unit. The
outcomes of this research could lead to a cost-effective diagnostic tool that
will help to improve patient outcomes, lower healthcare costs, and reduce the
over administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics and, therefore, antibiotic
resistance. The research project serves as a training ground for graduate and
undergraduate students to perform cutting edge research. The results of this
research will be disseminated widely by making the technology accessible to
other institutions across the nation, publishing outcomes in peer-reviewed
journals, and presenting results to the science and engineering community at
national meetings and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Routine diagnostic tests
in central laboratories for pathogen detection can assist physicians in the
etiological determination of an underlying infectious process. However, such
tests can take days to return results, can be expensive, and usually require
special instruments and well-trained personnel. Recently, a host-based
diagnostic protein panel, including both the bacteria-induced proteins
procalcitonin and C-reactive protein (CRP) and the virus-induced tumor necrosis
factor related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and interferon-induced
protein-10 (IP-10), has been established to discriminate between bacterial and
viral infection with remarkable sensitivity and specificity. However, detecting
this protein panel is difficult and slow because of the ultra-low concentrations
of the proteins in circulation and the interference caused by abundant plasma
proteins. Therefore, the panel test must be run by a diagnostic laboratory and
not at the point-of-care. This research project aims to develop an integrated
paper-based cascade isotachophoresis (ITP) platform on which the panel proteins
in blood will be 1) separated from the abundant plasma contaminant proteins by
cationic ITP in the presence of specific target immune-bindings, 2) continuously
enriched through cascade ITP focusing, 3) immune-captured at an elevated
concentration by a unique single test line with graded target binding, and 4)
multiplex-detected with a miniaturized smartphone-based point-of-care
optosensing module. By combining the unique on-board purification and enrichment
power of ITP stacking, paper-based lateral flow, and smartphone-based detection,
this approach can create an integrated, point-of-care technology capable of the
multiplex detection of circulating disease markers that are present either at an
ultralow level or within a broad dynamic concentration
range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.