* 1934420
* Interdisciplinary Workshop on 'Arctic Climate And Weather Extremes: Detection, Attribution, And Future Projection'
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* John Katzenberger, Aspen Global Change Institute
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,334.00

The Aspen Global Change Institute (AGCI) will host a week-long interdisciplinary
scientific workshop in Spring 2020 entitled "Arctic Climate and Weather
Extremes: Detection, Attribution, and Future Projection". Participants will be
tasked with the scientific objectives of a) providing improved insight into the
fundamental processes of each climate system component involved in extreme
events, b) synthesizing results to improve understanding of feedback processes
across the climate system components, c) identifying existing key questions and
knowledge gaps, and d) suggesting a way forward to improve our ability to
predict and model extremes in the Arctic. To achieve these objectives, The PIs
will employ AGCI's established workshop model to convene thirty data analysts,
dynamicists, and modelers from the atmosphere, ocean, and sea ice communities.
Participants will include early career scientists, and individuals from diverse
and underrepresented backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The trajectory of Arctic
climate system change has exhibited highly nonlinear behavior, as manifested by
the increased frequency of occurrence of extreme events superimposed on a long-
term trend towards a warmer mean state. The most recent, striking extreme events
include occurrences of record minima of sea ice extent in the summers of 2007,
2012, and 2016, and record maxima of surface air temperatures in the winters of
2015/2016 and 2017/2018. However, Arctic climate change studies have
predominantly focused on the long-term changes or trends using monthly,
seasonal, or annual mean data. But extreme events generally occur intermittently
for periods from days to several months as outliers of the long-term trends.
Even for the extreme events that occur across longer time periods, monthly or
seasonal mean data may not be able to resolve the underlying physics supporting
their rapid development. It therefore still remains unclear why these extreme
events occur, what their multi-scale driving mechanisms are, and where the
source of their predictability exists. This workshop seeks to address these
critical knowledge gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.