* 1934284
* Design and in situ biomanufacturing of targeted peptide inhibitors via engineered probiotic yeast.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 674,993.00

Many biological processes such as cancer cell proliferation, inflammation, and
infection occur in the human gut. Biologic therapies, or treatments using
substances made from living organisms, are particularly useful in treating these
diseases and infections. The biological molecules used in biologic therapy
tightly bind to specific molecules or organisms within the gut to modulate their
behavior. Unfortunately, production and distribution of biologic therapies is
incredibly complex and expensive, limiting availability to the public. A
possible alternative approach is to make the biologic drugs directly in the
patient's gut using unused dietary material and engineered microbes. Since the
human gut is much more complex than an industrial bioreactor used to produce
conventional biologics, there is still much to learn about how to accomplish
this feat. This project will investigate strategies for biomanufacturing short
chains of amino acids (peptides) directly in the large intestine using
engineered probiotic yeast. The peptides will be optimized to bind with the
toxins produced by Clostridioides difficile, the hospital-acquired
gastrointestinal infection commonly referred to as C. diff. A yeast strain
related to baker's yeast, Saccharomyces boulardii, will be engineered to produce
the peptides under the harsh conditions of the human gut. The effectiveness of
this approach will be examined in model organs, or 'miniguts.' This process of
delivering drug molecules directly to the gut using engineered microbes promises
to substantially reduce the cost of biologic therapeutics and, subsequently,
improve human health. The investigators will also engage in research-related
education and outreach, including developing a weekend symposium for high school
teachers on microbiome engineering. Activities toward broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM will include mentoring and
active recruitment efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In situ biomanufacturing,
wherein therapeutic molecules are synthesized directly in the human gut by
engineered microbes, is an attractive alternative to the complex manufacturing
and oral delivery of biologic therapies. However, the human gut is unlike any
industrial bioreactor, and many outstanding questions remain before in situ
biomanufacturing becomes reality. The investigators posit that manufacturing
peptide-based drugs in the probiotic yeast Saccharomyces boulardii to target
Clostridioides difficile infection will serve as an ideal platform and model
system by which to develop design strategies enabling efficient production of
biologic molecules directly in the gut. Two complementary objectives will be
pursued toward testing the engineering strains and peptides. First, peptides
that specifically bind to C. difficile toxin A and to its surface layer protein
(SlpA) will be designed. The peptides will be designed by combining solid phase
library screening and computational peptide design/optimization approaches. The
efficiency of thousands of peptides will be tested using in vitro gut models.
Second, the physiological state of S. boulardii in gut models will be
characterized by determining which genes are expressed and which proteins are
secreted while residing in the gut. This knowledge will be applied to develop
engineered S. boulardii strains that can effectively secrete and display the
peptides designed in the first objective. The ability of the engineered strains
to counteract C. difficile pathogenesis in 3D organoids will also be determined.
The project will advance understanding of in situ biomanufacturing and reveal
best practices for ensuring peptide efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.