* 1934122
* Interphase and Penetration Dynamics for Stable Alkali Metal Anodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Peng Bai, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 397,214.00

A prosperous society with a sustainable energy future relies on advanced energy
storage technologies. While lithium (Li)-ion batteries have changed lives
through electronic devices, portable power tools and electric cars, further
increasing the state of the art for energy storage has been difficult. One
approach is to replace the bulky graphite anode with an ultrathin film of Li
metal anode to nearly double the energy density of the battery. However, this
type of battery material is subjected to formation of finger-like dendritic
growths of lithium metal on the anode. These can grow into the electrolyte and
separator components and cause an electrical short circuit that can destroy the
battery and present a safety hazard. Suppressing this root cause of electrical
short circuits is an urgent need, especially at higher current densities when
fast recharge is required for high-capacity next-generation batteries. This
fundamental research project addresses the study of formation of the component
flaws (e.g. the dendrites and electrode coatings) that cause a potential short
circuit and also loss in energy capacity. This project will generate new
understanding that will enable superior designs of electrodes that will lead to
safer, high energy density batteries. The project will also benefit the
education of graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students. A summer program will be
establish that will target underrepresented high school age students and high
school teachers using engineering concepts of metal-based
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on the interphase and metal
penetration dynamics of lithium, sodium, and potassium metal anodes,
investigating (1) how the dynamics of the macroscopic electrode-separator
instability will naturally select just a few disparate pores for metal
penetration, at low current densities and areal capacities, regardless of the
uniformity of deposition; (2) the actual metal growth mechanisms in the selected
pores; and (3) the in situ formation dynamics of the SEI microstructures and the
impact on the macroscopic and microscopic dynamics in (1) and (2). It is
intended to be the first study to establish a quantitative understanding of
pore-selection and in-pore growth dynamics during alkali metal penetration
through porous separators. Unique transparent capillary cells will be monitored
operando under optical microscope. Advanced characterization and imaging
technologies at atomic and nanoscales, such as cryo-transmission electron
microscopy, will be used to confirm the characteristic lengths of SEI
microstructures in the lateral direction. Through the intimately combined
experimental and theoretical investigation, a new theoretical framework that can
seamlessly connect the domain experiments will be developed to guide the
holistic design of stable alkali metal anodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.