* 1934126
* Making Sense of Models: Investigating Mechanistic Reasoning as a Bridge for Connecting 6th Grade Mathematics and Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Eric Klopfer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,721,592.00

This project addresses the following problem of practice: Middle school science
teachers find that they have to reteach mathematics concepts to prepare their
students to use and analyze computer models of scientific phenomena in their
science classes, which takes some significant time away from instruction. Some
of them find that students do not know why mathematics is useful and how it can
be applied in science contexts. Modeling has also become an increasingly
emphasized component of both the Common Core State Standards in Mathematics and
the Next Generation Science Standards. This project will address these concerns
by focusing on mechanistic reasoning in an agent-based modeling environment
appropriate for 6th grade mathematics and science classes. Mechanistic reasoning
involves creating entities and understanding interactions that produce an end
state or change of state and explain how and why something works or generates a
phenomenon. The research component of the project will fill a gap in
computational thinking (CT) integration literature by investigating how
programing solutions to mathematical problems can simultaneously reinforce
mathematical concepts and prepare students for scientific modeling. Furthermore,
the project will: support the participation of underrepresented groups in
mathematics, computer science, and scientific modeling; contribute to breaking
down of siloed disciplines within middle school; enhance infrastructure for
research and education through the co-design of multidisciplinary curriculum
spanning math and science classrooms; and develop a curriculum that prepares
students for future endeavors in STEM and CT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop and implement a multidisciplinary CT program that uses computer
modeling activities to form a bridge that connects regular school day
mathematics and science learning. Sixth grade students and their teachers in
three districts will learn to use CT and mechanistic reasoning in mathematics
classes and then apply those skills in decoding and modifying scientific models
in science classes. The research objectives of the project are as follows: (1)
Conduct design-based research cycles to develop a math and science CT curriculum
for 6th grade students; (2) Develop, test and refine a year-long teacher
professional development program that supports teacher learning and
implementation of the integrated curriculum; and (3) Conduct a mixed-methods
study on the impact of the integrated curriculum on student learning, teacher
and student perception of math and CT, and the role of mechanistic reasoning in
CT. The project will employ a design collaborative between teachers and the
project team, which will provide support for the workshops, teacher professional
development, and the development of a teacher facilitation model. A quasi-
experimental study and case studies will be used to test the hypothesis that
mechanistic reasoning is a necessary skill that enables students to link
abstraction and automation when they create computational artifacts and engage
in analysis when they decode computational models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is funded by the STEM + Computing Program, which seeks to study the
applied integration of computational thinking and computing within disciplinary
STEM teaching and learning in early childhood education through high
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.