* 1934527
* Meta-Surface Design Optimization for Controlling the Surface Waves Propagation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Mary Frecker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2023
* USD 648,362.00

This project will promote the progress of science and advance the national
security and welfare, by generating new fundamental knowledge on the control of
surface wave motion. Surface waves (e.g., vibration) are generated by natural
and human-made sources, such as earthquakes, explosions, traffic and
construction operations. Many electronics also use the principles of surface
wave propagation inside the devices. The ability to control surface wave motion
has broad implications across length scales: from design of miniature electronic
devices to earthquake or vibration isolation of critical structures. This award
supports fundamental research needed to purposefully control the propagation of
surface waves by modifying the surface conditions to reflect or divert wave
energy. This project will provide multi-disciplinary training and career
preparation for participating graduate students. The research team will
incorporate the methods and findings of the research into graduate and
undergraduate courses, as well as secondary level teaching at K-12 schools in
Pennsylvania and across the country through a collaboration with the Center for
Science and the Schools (CSATS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project presents a
novel approach for controlling surface wave motion based on a fundamental study
of the boundary conditions' influence on the surface wave propagation. This
enables implementation of a rational design philosophy for meta-surfaces to
control Rayleigh surface waves. The boundary-condition (BC) based strategy will
be implemented in order to create a resonant meta-surface to minimize the
transmitted energy in a prescribed frequency bandwidth to a particular location.
An optimization procedure will be developed to find the optimal resonator
topology such that the desired BCs are satisfied and to determine the resonator
spacing. A method to broaden the frequency stopband will be tested. This
approach is fundamentally different from the commonly used frequency tuning and
parametric design process. Since the BCs are frequency-independent, the new
approach is transportable across length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.