* 1934365
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Greener Processes for the Sustainable Development of Bio-Based Polyesters
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Joseph Stanzione, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

The development of green separation and processing strategies to produce bio-
based polymers is beneficial to ensure environmentally sustainable materials for
future generations. Current monomer production methods typically use petroleum
and require hazardous processes. Biomass offers diverse alternate starting
materials for polymer chemistries. However, current strategies for isolating
monomers from biomass and their polymerizations are limited and often not
sustainable in practice. The development of sustainable bio-based polymers
requires a holistic approach that tackles key sustainability issues associated
with monomer sourcing and extraction, polymer creation, and end-point feedback.
This project seeks to utilize residual biomass sources, green extraction
techniques, and appropriate polymer syntheses to incorporate structurally rigid
monomers (i.e. pentacyclic triterpenols) into the backbones of polymer networks
and elucidate the fundamental relationship between processing, structure, and
properties of these polyesters derived from natural feedstocks. Key
considerations include the methodologies by which feedstocks are sourced,
separated, and subsequently translated into useful polymers. Ultimately,
knowledge gained will provide impetus for and education in the transformation of
bio-refined products into macromolecules that meet the diverse needs of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives target a fundamental
understanding of the processing-structure-property relationships of bio-based
polymers derived from green separation techniques. The project will holistically
consider the choice of feedstock, extraction technique, polymer synthesis, and
polymer degradation to ultimately produce environmentally sustainable processes
and products. An iterative approach will use sustainability metrics throughout
and will evaluate these metrics to determine the overall process viability from
economic and environmental perspectives. By integrating process sustainability
metrics into traditional processing-structure-property relationship methodology
used in polymer development, the approach will shift the conventional polymer
design paradigm to comprehensively address both polymer function and
sustainability via the following interconnected, concurrent aims: (I) Leverage
green solvent extraction to produce enriched monomer fractions from renewable
feedstocks, (II) Sustainably develop polyester thermoplastics and thermosets
derived from fractionated biomass, and (III) Evaluate process technoeconomic and
life cycle sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.