* 1934300
* Physics-Constrained Deep Learning for Surrogate Modeling of Dynamics of Fluids and Fluid-Structure Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Martina Bukac, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 300,288.00

This project will develop an innovative modeling framework for coupled dynamics
of fluid-structure systems based on deep learning, which will contribute new
knowledge on rapid modeling of dynamic systems in general. Complex fluids and
their interactions with surrounding structures are ubiquitous in natural and
industrial processes, e.g., blood flows in compliant vessels, flapping-wing
miniature air vehicles, flexible risers in the offshore industry. Predictive
modeling of fluid-structure interaction problems is of great significance in
numerous engineering applications. However, existing models are primarily based
on first-principles methods and numerical discretization techniques, which are
computationally expensive and require significant domain expertise. This
drawback poses great challenges to real-time predictions (e.g., clinical
diagnosis of vascular diseases) and many-query applications (e.g., optimization
design of aircraft and uncertainty quantification in high-consequence systems).
This grant will support fundamental research on the development of a novel
modeling framework by leveraging recent advances in machine learning and prior
knowledge of physical principles. This new approach will enable rapid modeling
and fast prediction for dynamics of fluid-structure systems, which will have
strong practical impacts on a broad spectrum of real-world problems, including
cardiovascular diagnosis, aerodynamic design, and active flow control.
Therefore, the results of this research can help enhance U.S.
healthcare/wellness, national security, and economic competitiveness. Moreover,
the multi-disciplinary research topics across physical modeling and artificial
intelligence can stimulate interest in the STEM disciplines among young people
and thus will have a positive impact on science and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data-based surrogate modeling is a
computationally feasible way to tackle fluid-structure interaction problems that
require rapid predictions or repeated model evaluations. Deep learning is
becoming a popular surrogate modeling approach due to its capability of handling
strong nonlinearity and high dimensionality. However, current success of deep
learning in the computer science community heavily relies on large-scale labeled
data, which are usually not available in the physical modeling community. To
address this challenge, this research aims to pioneer a physics-constrained deep
learning framework for surrogate modeling of fluid-structure interaction
dynamics, which will enable efficient learning with sparse training data.
Specifically, a structured deep neural network will be devised to encode the
initial and boundary conditions, and the governing equations will be imposed
during the training by redesigning the loss (or likelihood) functions to conform
to the physics. Numerical experiments of a suite of dynamic fluid-structure
interaction problems are planned to answer questions regarding the effect of
adding physical constraints in deep learning and their potential in modeling
complex physical systems in a parametric setting. This project tackles long-
standing difficulties in surrogate modeling of complex dynamical systems with
nonlinearity, high-dimensionality, and data scarcity, and contributes to the
modeling of dynamical systems in general. The learning framework will bring
revolutionary impacts on data-driven surrogate modeling by shifting the paradigm
from black-box, data-intensive learning to physics-constrained, data-scarce
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.