* 1934161
* Mathematics through Programming in the Elementary Grades
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Deborah Spencer, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,496,758.00

Working with children and their teachers in grades 3-5, this 3-year project
investigates the idea that expressing and exploring mathematics through an
appropriate programming language may make it easier for children to engage fully
and enjoy and learn that mathematics. Children need their natural language to
talk about the contexts in which mathematics gets used - far more than just word
problems - and also their reasoning when solving problems. Over the years, they
learn a second language, that is, the mathematical symbols needed for expressing
arithmetic and algebraic statements. Both are needed, but neither is optimal for
expressing a process - showing the way a calculation is performed (think of
explaining how to multiply 37 x 43 or add 3/4 + 1/2), or encoding the method for
solving a word problem in a way that can be repeated with different starting
values. For that, a third language is needed. In an earlier exploratory work
conducted with second grade students, the research team investigated the use of
a child-friendly but very rich programming language (Snap!) as the third
language. When children are provided with an opportunity to explain a process to
a machine - that is, by describing the process as a small program, they develop
clearer and more concise ways to explain the process in their natural language.
Expressing the process as a small program helps children not only experiment and
generalize but gives them a "runnable" notation for their thinking. Unlike
writing on paper, which just sits there, correct or incorrect, a runnable piece
of code lets children get immediate feedback on their work and helps their
mathematical learning long before career or college. Building the program,
articulating the methods, and generalizing are all key elements of computational
thinking (CT), which is increasingly a national, state, and school priority,
because it is now so necessary both for careers and for modern college study.
This project extends the investigation to grades 3-5, seeking new opportunities
in the more advanced mathematics of those grades and seeking clearer data on the
effects on both mathematical learning and CT. This project is funded by the STEM
+ Computing (STEM+C) program that supports research and development to
understand the integration of computing and computational thinking in STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand how
programming, integrated with elementary students' regular mathematics study,
influences mathematical and computational thinking, and to determine whether,
and under what conditions, it enhances thinking. This early-stage design and
development study explores both the promise of materials that integrate
programming into the mathematics curriculum to extend students' learning
opportunities in the elementary math classroom, and the feasibility of the
implementation of these materials. The project will (1) investigate a model that
integrates programming into elementary mathematics and builds foundational CT
ideas; (2) develop programming microworlds and other instructional resources
(e.g., print materials and teacher guides) for grades 3-5 to support teachers
and students; (3) pilot the materials in 48 classrooms, testing for feasibility
and usability; (4) explore how the modules influence student learning and
identify design features that help or interfere with learning; (5) describe
challenges to broader use and identify potential solutions; and (6) provide
greater opportunities for a wide range of students to learn in these domains. A
design experiment methodology will be used to develop, test, and refine the
microworlds and modules. Teacher interviews and classroom and student
observation tools will be used to collect data, and a pilot study will be
conducted using a mixed-methods approach that will compare the computational and
mathematical thinking of students who experience the integrated modules with a
comparison group in similar classrooms in the same
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.