* 1934960
* HDR TRIPODS: FINPenn: Center for the Foundations of Information Processing at the University of Pennsylvania
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kostas Daniilidis, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

Recent advances in artificial intelligence have led to significant progress in
our ability to extract information from images and time sequences. Maintaining
this rate of progress hinges upon attaining equally significant results in the
processing of more complex signals such as those that are acquired by autonomous
systems and networks of connected devices, or those that arise in the study of
complex biological and social systems. This award establishes FINPenn, the
Center for the Foundations of Information Processing at the University of
Pennsylvania. The focus of the center is to establish fundamental theory to
enable the study of data beyond time and images. The center's premise is that
humans' rich intuitive understanding of space and time may not necessarily be
applicable to the processing of complex signals. Therefore, matching the success
in time and space necessitates the discovery and development of foundational
principles to guide the design of generic artificial intelligence algorithms.
FINPenn will support a class of scholar trainees along with a class of visiting
postdocs and students to advance this agenda. The center will engage the
community through the organization of workshops and lectures and will
disseminate knowledge with onsite and online educational activities at the
undergraduate and graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FINPenn builds on two
observations: (i) To understand the foundations of data science it is necessary
to succeed beyond Euclidean signals in time and space. This is true even to
understand the foundations for Euclidean signal processing. (ii) Humans live in
Euclidean time and space. To succeed in information processing beyond signals
with Euclidean structure, operation from foundational principles is necessary
because human intuition is of limited help. For instance, convolutional neural
networks have found success in the processing of images and signals in time but
they rely heavily on spatial and temporal intuition. To generalize their success
to unconventional signal domains it is necessary to postulate fundamental
principles and generalize from those principles. If the generalizations are
successful they not only illuminate the new application domains but they also
help establish the validity of the postulated principles for Euclidean spaces in
the tradition of predictive science. The proposers further contend that the
foundational principles of data sciences are to be found in the exploitation of
structure and the associated invariances and symmetries that structure
generates. The initial focus of the center is in advancing the theory of
information processing in signals whose structure is defined by a group, a
graph, or a topology. These three types of signals generate three foundational
research directions which build on the particular strengths of the University of
Pennsylvania on network sciences, robotics, and autonomous systems which are
areas in which these types of signals appear often. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data
Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.