* 1934566
* EAGER:Collaborative Research:Innovating technologies to inform synthetic plant metabolism through a new understanding of the cellular protein machinery
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Brenda Winkel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

Plant metabolism is a high priority target for synthetic biology, with
significant potential to address global challenges ranging from food production
to energy and the environment. However, the successful application of synthetic
biology strategies in complex eukaryotes faces unique challenges. In particular,
large gaps remain in the knowledge of how cellular processes are controlled at
the nanoscale, which is an essential component of engineering design. The
project will develop new electron microscopy-based strategies to visualize and
create structural models of labile protein complexes captured from plant cells.
Ultra-sensitive methods will be established to rigorously identify the protein
components of these complexes using advanced proteomics and in planta validation
techniques. This will establish a critical new framework for synthetic
metabolism. The project will also create a unique interdisciplinary/inter-
institution training environment at Virginia Tech and Pennsylvania State
University that will engage students at all levels of
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will enable the
study of dynamic multi-enzyme complexes in plants. A new integrated platform
will be established for characterizing protein assemblies in the act of
performing their biological functions in the uniquely-complex cellular
environment of the plant cell. This suite of technologies will integrate
advanced electron microscopy, proteomics, and 3D modeling capabilities to enable
the nanoscale-level interrogation and understanding of the large, dynamic
assemblies of proteins that define cellular biochemistry, and ultimately
physiological function. The plant specialized pathway leading to flavonoids, a
long-standing target for synthetic biology, will serve as the experimental
model. This will generate outcomes that can be readily validated in planta and
serve as a template the study of other biochemical systems. Altogether, the work
will create a powerful new capability to address a critical information gap in
current synthetic biology design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.