* 1934871
* Student Support: 4th North American Industrial Engineering and Operations Management Conference, Toronto, Canada; October 23-25, 2019
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Ahad Ali, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,984.00

This award supports student participation in the 2019 Fourth North American
International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management in
Toronto, Canada. It is organized by the Industrial Engineering and Operations
Management (IE0M) Society International. The conference provides a forum for
academia, researchers and practitioners to exchange ideas and recent
developments in the fields of industrial fourth revolution / cyber physical
systems, also referred to as Industry 4.0. Smart technologies are shaping our
industries and societies. US industries are competing in the global footprint to
lead in smart intelligent technologies along the entire supply chain. The new
workforce is expected to have new job types that currently do not exist. Student
participants will have opportunities to learn from industry practitioners and
academia from conference technical and keynote sessions related on Internet of
Things (IoT), artificial intelligence (AI), big data, iCloud, cybersecurity and
related fields. Most important to student participants is the opportunity to
gain a world-wide perspective from representatives from over 50 countries about
research, development, design and manufacturing of global supply chain networks,
vertical integration, and the use of cyber-human systems comprising sensors,
IoT, and understood through advanced analytics and computational modeling. The
investigators will enable students to improve their knowledge of disruptive
technologies of Industry 4.0 and contribute to the competitiveness of the 21st
Century U.S. workforce.

This award supports conference registration, lodging and a portion of the travel
expenses of approximately 51 graduate and undergraduate students who should be
enrolled full-time at a United States colleges or universities. Students at
colleges and universities will be made aware of the opportunity through a
posting on the conference website, the conference committee network, and from
students who participate in various competitions, posters and technical papers.
Students will be selected for the award by the conference committee. The
criteria for granting a student award includes the following: enrolled in a U.S.
college or university as a full-time student, desire to present a paper or
poster, and willingness to attend the Industry 4.0 related sessions. Preference
will be given to students from historically underrepresented communities
including African Americans, Native Americans and Hispanics. After the
conference, the list of student awardees will be announced on the main
conference website, in the IEOM post-conference report, and in the IEOM Society
Awards website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.