* 1934280
* Global-Position Tracking Control for Highly Versatile Bipedal Robotic Walking
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yan Gu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 383,803.00

This project will contribute to the advancement of the national health, security
and welfare, by improving capabilities, safety and reliability of bipedal
walking robots. Bipedal robots are emerging as a critical technology for a broad
range of important applications, such as search and rescue, emergency response,
home assistance and health care. This project will address important
technological challenges of controlling and tracking robot movements in various
surroundings. The resulting highly versatile walking robot will be able to avoid
obstacles, such as avoid pedestrians in human-populated environments and falling
debris on disaster sites. This project will integrate the research with
education and outreach activities for engaging students from diverse groups to
participate in robotics and control research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to advance the knowledge in the control of hybrid systems for
achieving highly versatile bipedal robotic walking through reliable global-
position tracking control. The research draws upon feedback control theory and
hybrid systems to create a systematic method of tracking controller design for
general hybrid systems with state-triggered jumps that include bipedal walking
robots. To reach the research goal, the following objectives will be pursued:
(1) to formulate a new method of reference trajectory modification for solving
the intermittent tracking-error divergence issue underlying the trajectory
tracking problem of hybrid systems with state-triggered jumps; (2) to extend
Lyapunov theory to general hybrid systems with state-trigged jumps for creating
a large class of controllers that can provably solve the tracking problem; and
(3) to synthesize a control framework that exploits the researched controller
design to achieve high versatility simultaneously with provable stability,
agility, and energy efficiency for bipedal robotic walking. This project will
lay a foundation for the creation of next-generation legged robot systems
capable of safe and reliable real-world operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.