* 1934153
* Collaborative Research: PrimaryAI: Integrating Artificial Intelligence into Upper Elementary Science with Immersive Problem-Based Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* James Lester, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 985,585.00

Artificial intelligence has emerged as a foundational technology that is
profoundly reshaping society. With rapid advances in a wide array of AI and
machine learning capabilities, these technologies are quickly finding broad
application in every sector of the economy. The growing recognition of the
demand for an AI-literate workforce highlights the urgent need to develop a deep
understanding of how to introduce K-12 students to AI and how to support K-12
teachers in this endeavor. Because the elementary grades are a critical time for
developing students? positive perceptions and dispositions toward STEM, creating
engaging AI learning experiences for elementary grade students is of paramount
importance. Similarly, developing disciplinary core ideas in life science in the
elementary grades is important for creating enduring understanding of and
interest in STEM for diverse learners. However, AI has been conspicuously absent
from elementary education, and there has been limited research examining AI
learning and teaching at the elementary level. A key open question for AI
elementary education is how can students be introduced to the fundamentals of AI
in the context of its application to solving core science problems? This
question poses significant challenges because addressing it entails developing a
socio-cognitive account of student learning processes and outcomes that can be
used to inform the design of an integrated AI and science curriculum. By
embedding AI in elementary life science education, researchers of this project
will investigate how to meet the demand for targeted AI education while
simultaneously creating innovative approaches to robust life science learning at
the elementary level. This project is funded by the STEM + Computing (STEM+C)
program that supports research and development to understand the integration of
computing and computational thinking in STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address three research questions: 1) How can we create engaging
learning experiences integrating artificial intelligence and life science for
upper elementary students by leveraging immersive problem-based learning? 2) How
can we design a teacher professional development model for integrating
artificial intelligence and life science in upper elementary classrooms? and 3)
In what ways does engagement with immersive problem-based learning support upper
elementary students' learning artificial intelligence and life science? To
address the first research question, the project team will iteratively design,
develop, and refine PrimaryAI, an integrated AI-science curriculum and immersive
learning environment that will introduce AI concepts including perception,
planning, robotics, and machine learning, as well as AI ethics, into upper
elementary science classrooms. PrimaryAI will enable students to collaboratively
learn about artificial intelligence by using age-appropriate AI tools to solve
ecology problems in science adventures as they engage in argument from evidence,
analyze and interpret data, develop models, and construct explanations. To
address the second research question, the project team will create the PrimaryAI
professional development model. The model will prepare teachers to use PrimaryAI
with fidelity within their classrooms. It will take the form of a community of
practice designed around three key elements: teacher professional learning,
coaching, and an online community. Teacher learning will center on mentoring and
participatory co-design of the immersive problem-based learning environment to
ensure deep teacher knowledge of AI-infused life science education. To address
the third research question, the project team will conduct design-based research
to investigate how PrimaryAI improves students' understanding of computing
centered around AI concepts, and of disciplinary life science content and
practices. Student learning and engagement will be assessed using 1) video
analysis and interaction analysis, 2) focus groups, including thematic analyses,
3) interviews with students to pilot prototypes and measures, 4) cross-case
analyses of implementations, including student engagement rubric coding, 5) pre-
post measures on artificial intelligence and life science content. To assess the
professional development model, teacher classroom practice will be measured with
1) video analysis and interaction analysis of co-design and implementation, and
2) analyses of teacher lesson plans, journals, materials, notes, and
reflections, including fidelity and adaptation, engagement coding, heuristic
case studies, and interaction analyses. The deliverables of the project will
include the PrimaryAI curricula, the PrimaryAI immersive problem-based learning
environment, the PrimaryAI professional development model and its associated
materials, and the PrimaryAI online community portal. The outcome of this
project will build knowledge on the design and development of AI-infused life
science learning environments and teaching models for upper elementary
grades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.