* 1934753
* Determining the Driving Force for Fatigue Crack Nucleation in a Superelastic Nickel Titanium Shape Memory Alloy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Dinc Erdeniz, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 492,186.00

The fatigue life of a material is the number of load cycles it can withstand
before breaking; for example, the fatigue life of a straightened paperclip is
the number of times it can be bent back-and-forth before it breaks. Aircrafts,
automobiles, and biomedical devices are prone to such failures, yet many of the
mechanisms that govern fatigue life are poorly understood. This understanding is
especially limited for Nickel-Titanium alloys, which are used in such varied
applications as biomedical devices and Mars rover tires. This award supports
research into the cause of fatigue crack formation which eventually leads to
material failure in a Nickel-Titanium material and will create a design tool for
enhancing fatigue life. The result will benefit the healthcare field by
increasing the robustness of artificial heart valves, stents, and other
minimally invasive biomedical devices, therefore decreasing patient trauma and
healthcare costs. This project also exposes graduate students to high-
performance computing and Argonne National Laboratory's Advanced Photon Source.
Skills gained at the Advanced Photon Source will position the student to
contribute to national energy and defense needs. High-performance computing
training will expand a workforce focused on big-data, machine learning, and
artificial intelligence. Additionally, this project will familiarize students
with engineering vocabulary by producing a video about fatigue that is intended
to reduce barriers for first generation engineers and improve engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superelastic Nickel-Titanium elastically
recovers from large deformations and thus is ideal for minimally invasive
biomedical devices and other applications such as Mars rover tires. However, due
to microscale defects, Nickel-Titanium is prone to cyclic fatigue cracking. This
project builds a crystal plasticity model of Nickel-Titanium and measures crack
nucleation around a defect using X-ray micro-tomography and high energy
diffraction microscopy. The measured defect geometry is then combined with the
model to predict the plastic strain around the measured fatigue crack. Plastic
strain plays a key role in fatigue crack nucleation but is difficult to measure;
thus, a crystal plasticity model will be used. A data-driven procedure will
automate the generation of a fatigue indicator parameter that predicts the
mechanical state driving crack nucleation. Fatigue indicator parameters are a
commonly proposed tool in the computational design of materials for fatigue
resistance; however, current fatigue indicator parameters suffer from
inaccuracies, which this project addresses. The projects outcomes are a
validated fatigue indicator parameter-based modeling paradigm and a
transformative design tool for the development of fatigue resistant superelastic
Nickel-Titanium materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.