* 1934846
* HDR TRIPODS: Institute for Integrated Data Science: A Transdisciplinary Approach to Understanding Fundamental Trade-offs and Theoretical Foundations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Markos Katsoulakis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Many areas of science, engineering, and industry are already being
revolutionized by the adoption of tools and techniques from data science.
However, a rigorous analysis of existing approaches together with the
development of new ideas is necessary to a) ensure the optimal use of available
computational and statistical resources and b) develop a principled and
systematic approach to the relevant problems rather than relying on a collection
of ad hoc solutions. In particular, there are many interrelated questions that
arise in a typical data science project. First is the acquisition of relevant
data: Can data be collected interactively and might this reduce the costs of
data acquisition? Is the data noisy and how might this impact the results?
Second is the processing of data: If the data cannot fit in the memory of a
single machine, how can we minimize the communication costs within a cluster of
machines? When are approximate answers sufficient and how does the required
accuracy trade off with the computational resources available? Third is the
prediction value of the available data: Can the uncertainty of the final results
be quantified? How can the modeling assumptions used by our algorithms be
efficiently evaluated? This award supports a data science institute with the
main goal of developing an understanding of the fundamental mathematical and
computational issues underlying the aforementioned questions. Ultimately, this
will enable practitioners to make more informed decisions when investing time
and money across the life cycle of their data science project. Achieving this
goal necessitates a transdisciplinary approach and the team of investigators
includes experts in theoretical computer science; applied and computational
mathematics; machine learning and statistics; and coding and information theory.
In addition to pursuing the above research goals, the institute will coordinate
education and training activities and develop resources for the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research goals explored in this project
include: 1) Understanding the trade-off between rounds of interactive data
acquisition and statistical and computational efficiency. 2) Minimizing query
complexity in interactive unsupervised learning problems. 3) Understanding
space/sample complexity trade-offs when processing stochastic data. 4)
Developing fine-grained approximation algorithms relevant to core data science
tasks. 5) Using coding theory to enable communication-efficient distributed
machine learning. 6) Designing variational inference methods with statistical
guarantees given limited resources. 7) Developing a principled approach to
exploiting trade-offs between bias, model complexity, and computational budget.
Specific institute activities include: 1) Technical workshops and training
activities for researchers in domain sciences. 2) A virtual speaker series. 3)
Education initiatives including the development of new courses that will teach
foundational topics in data science and resources that can be used across
different institutions. The grant will also train postdoctoral scholars and
undergraduate researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the
National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.