* 1934964
* HDR TRIPODS: Innovations in Data Science: Integrating Stochastic Modeling, Data Representations, and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Shayn Mukherjee, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award supports TRIPODS@Duke Phase I, a project that will develop the
foundations of data science both at Duke University and in the broader NC
Research Triangle and surrounding region. A total of 25 faculty at Duke
representing the disciplines of Computer Science, Electrical Engineering,
Mathematics, and Statistical Science will be involved in Phase I. Activities
include five semesters of workshops, with 3-4 one-week workshops each semester.
These workshops will involve local and national participants and will bring
experts on data science to the area. The project will support graduate students
and postdoctoral trainees both in terms of education in the foundations of data
science as well as in their professional development. Educational activities
include the development and teaching of data science across curricula in
Computer Science, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mathematics, and
Statistical Science, both at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The project
will also leverage existing data science programs, including the Rhodes
Information Initiative at Duke, a center for "big data" computational research
and expanding opportunities for student engagement in data science; and the
Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute (SAMSI), one of the
NSF/DMS-funded Mathematical Sciences Research Institutes (MSRIs), which is a
partnership among Duke University, North Carolina State University (NCSU), and
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
topics of the signature workshops supported by the TRIPODS@Duke Phase I project
are (1) scalable inference with uncertainty, (2) causal inference, (3) neural
networks, (4) complex and dynamic image and signal processing, and (5)
interpretable models. These five topics all fall under three research themes
that require transdisciplinary collaborations among computer scientists,
electrical engineers, mathematicians, and statisticians: Theme I: Scalable
algorithms with uncertainty for data science; Theme II: Data science at the
human-machine interface; and Theme III: Fundamental limits of data science. The
potential research innovations for the three themes that will be developed and
or advanced include: For Theme I, scalable Bayesian and generalized Bayesian
inference, robust optimization for uncertain inputs, and algorithm and
architecture design for neural networks; for Theme II, interpretable models and
algorithms, causal inference with high-dimensional complex observational data,
and image and signal processing for screening and monitoring; and for Theme III,
robust optimization for uncertain inputs, statistical and approximation power of
deep neural network architectures, and fundamental limits of causal inference in
observational studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National
Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.