* 1934429
* Conference:  CO2 Assimilation in Plants from Genome to Biome: Innovations in Photosynthesis to Solve Global Challenges REVISED, Newry, Maine, June 8-9, 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Katie Becklin, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,075.00

Photosynthesis is a critical process in plants that impacts food and energy
security, ecosystem productivity, and climate. The overarching goal of the 2019
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Carbon
Dioxide Assimilation in Plants (June 8-14, Newry, ME, USA) is to advance our
understanding of photosynthesis by bringing together top researchers and future
scientific leaders from across the globe to discuss new ideas and innovative
approaches in plant biology. GRC participants and speakers are some of the most
active and world-renowned scientists who are exploring photosynthesis at the
highest levels. The GRS, which occurs just prior to the GRC, is specifically
designed to engage junior scientists who represent the future of this field.
Mentoring of junior scientists by established leaders is a hallmark of the GRS
and GRC. Support from NSF will be used to fund participation at these meetings
by students and other early-career scientists, with an emphasis on supporting
individuals from underrepresented groups in science. Bringing together a diverse
scientific community for meaningful discussions and networking will have long-
lasting implications for the development of photosynthesis research and
encourage innovative solutions to global challenges at the nexus of food,
energy, and climate concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2019 GRC and associated
GRS on CO2 Assimilation in Plants from Genome to Biome (June 8-14, Newry, ME,
USA) will bring together an international group of senior and junior scientists
to explore the dynamics of carbon exchange between the biosphere and the
atmosphere with an emphasis on understanding physiological mechanisms that
underlie plant responses to biotic and abiotic factors and to link these traits
to productivity and carbon storage at the global scale. Emerging scientific
questions will be explored in the context of evolutionary mechanisms that led to
novel plant innovations, modeling approaches to scale responses from cellular to
ecosystem levels, metabolic feedbacks that link CO2 assimilation to other plant
processes, and leveraging photosynthesis research to improve agricultural
productivity. The meeting will host speakers from 10 different countries, and
highlight questions at the nexus of plant molecular, physiological, ecological,
and evolutionary biology. Planned activities include 11 organized scientific
sessions, 6 highly interactive poster sessions, a career panel discussion for
early-career scientists, and a "Power Hour" discussion of gender and diversity
challenges. Together these meetings will facilitate the exchange of cutting-edge
ideas on fundamental plant processes; promote international scientific
collaborations that can shape the field for years to come; and foster the
professional development of women, minority, and early-career scientists. NSF
funding will be used to support attendance at both events by early-career
scientists, with an overall commitment to broadening participation in this
field. This award was co-funded by the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics
Program and the Integrative Ecological Physiology Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.