* 1934772
* Determination of the Key Parameters Causing Unexplained Dynamic Phenomena in High-Speed Atomic Force Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Ryan Tung, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 356,662.00

The ability to accurately and rapidly measure the physical properties of
materials at extremely small length scales is key to advancing scientific
research and technological progress. The atomic force microscope, in which a
micrometer sized cantilevered beam is used to physically probe a material of
interest, is one of the primary tools for making quantitative measurements of
material properties at scales on the order of one billionth of a meter. However,
when conducting atomic force microscope measurements at high scanning speeds,
unexplained phenomena present themselves. These unexplained phenomena impede
accurate scientific measurement. There is currently a lack of experimental data
to properly characterize and model these unexplained phenomena. A set of well-
designed experiments and numerical simulations that test the suspected variables
related to these scanning speed phenomena will be conducted. Highly quantitative
and rapid measurements, such as the real-time evolution of the mechanical
properties of viruses exposed to various stimuli or nano-scale corrosion
processes occurring in real-time, will be enabled by this work and will allow
new and cutting-edge research in areas such as medicine, biology, and materials
engineering, thus, benefiting the US economy and the progress of science. In
addition, the project's educational plan will develop a hands-on, interactive,
and portable learning platform that will expose K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students to atomic force microscopy and the scientific principles used
in its operation. The educational plan will engender further interest and
retention in the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objective is to determine the key
parameters that cause observed scan velocity related phenomena in contact mode
high-speed atomic force microscopy and to develop mathematical models that will
predict this behavior. The project objective will be obtained by pursuing the
following specific tasks: 1) Systematically determine the primary variables
causing the scan velocity phenomena via a suite of experiments that control the
suspected sources of the phenomena such as relative humidity, scan speed, scan
angle, sample composition, fluid environment, and AFM tip radii. The output data
will also be used to determine the functional form of predictive models used to
characterize the scan velocity related phenomena. 2) Perform computational
fluid-structure interaction simulations to investigate the effect of scan
velocity on the hydrodynamic forces acting on the bulk microcantilever. The
large scan velocities used in high-speed atomic force microscopy domains will
affect the hydrodynamic forces acting on the microcantilever, which to date, are
calculated under the assumption that the surrounding fluid is quiescent. These
fluid-structure interaction simulations will be used to determine a mathematical
model to predict the hydrodynamic forces on the cantilever system due to fluid
velocity effects. This research will allow for accurate contact mode high-speed
atomic force microscopy measurements that extend beyond topographical imaging,
across a wide range of scan velocities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.