* 1934666
* RUI:  Structural and Functional Investigations of Ferritin Heteropolymers Using a Novel Expression System
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Fadi Bou-Abdallah, SUNY College at Potsdam
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2024
* USD 451,046.00

Most organisms have evolved mechanisms to maintain a balance between iron as an
essential nutrient and iron as a potential toxin. Ferritins are multi-subunit
iron storage and detoxification proteins that play a central role in the
biological management of iron. The goal of this project is to express and purify
recombinant isoferritins using a novel expression system, and for the first
time, correlate structure-function relationships between recombinant
isoferritins and native isoferritins extracted from animal tissues and organs.
Isoferritins are complex molecules with exquisite architectural nanostructures
made up of two distinct subunit types, named H and L. Despite their discovery
more than 8 decades ago, no studies have ever been performed on recombinantly
produced isoferritins, nor has any research group been able to synthesize
ferritins that mimic native isoferritins in-vivo. Understanding the functional
differences between various isoferritin populations, and how different
proportions of H- and L-subunits affect the biochemical and functional
properties of isoferritins is of critical importance to understanding the
biological processing of iron in mammals. This work will also provide
undergraduate students training in modern biochemical and biophysical
techniques, and laboratory skills necessary to address challenging questions
about iron homeostasis, and preparation for future STEM careers in academia or
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout this project, undergraduate
students will be involved in original research pertaining to the biosynthesis,
purification, and characterizing of isoferritins of different subunits
composition, using a novel expression system that provides any desired
combinations of H- and L-subunits within the ferritin molecule, mimicking native
isoferritins found in various tissues and organs. To achieve these goals, a
combination of molecular biology techniques, light absorbance and fluorescence
spectroscopy, capillary electrophoresis, differential scanning calorimetry,
Mossbauer spectroscopy, magnetometry, and high-resolution scanning and
transmission electron microscopy will be employed. The extensive investigation
outlined in this project should provide fundamental insights into isoferritins
structure-function relationships and the dynamics of iron metabolism, both at
the systemic and the cellular levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.