* 1934380
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 ACM Symposium of Operating Systems Principles (SOSP)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Robbert VanRenesse, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 06/30/2020
* USD 19,992.00

This proposal is for support of student travel to the 27th ACM Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles (SOSP 2019), Oct. 27-30, 2019. For over 50 years,
SOSP has been a leading forum for innovative research in operating systems.
Continuing in the SOSP tradition, SOSP 2019 will bring together leading
researchers and luminaries in the field and will feature the best and brightest
of the PhD candidates in computer systems. Participants present and discuss
their research and experience and cover the full range of theory and practice.
The goal of SOSP and this travel grant is to advance science by bringing
together researchers from across the computer systems community - including
distributed systems, operating systems, and broad computer systems - to foster
cross disciplinary approaches and to address shared research challenges. This
cross-disciplinary emphasis makes it well suited as a target for student
participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This travel grant support the attendance of
at least 12 US-based graduate and undergraduate students. Participation in
leading conferences is an extremely important part of graduate students and
advanced undergraduate students - school experience, providing the opportunity
to interact with more senior researchers and to be exposed to leading edge work.
This award provides a concrete opportunity to broaden participation. Funds will
be dispersed with preference given to students who would not otherwise be able
to attend the conference, paying particular attention to
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.