* 1934924
* HDR TRIPODS: Data Science Principles of the Human-Machine Convergence
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Konstantin Mischaikow, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,628,779.00

This project will develop a new transdisciplinary Institute on Data Science for
Intelligent Systems and People Interaction referred to as DATA-INSPIRE. This
institute is premised on the belief that advances in data science principles are
needed to impact the emerging paradigm of intelligent machines and their
convergence with human society, and in particular to further improve the
performance and better explain the operation of such machines that can
accomplish diverse, real-world tasks and interact effectively with people.
Fundamental notions of data science that can enhance development of intelligent
machines can impact pressing problems facing our planet: healthcare,
transportation, urban systems, etc. DATA-INSPIRE will bring together
mathematicians, statisticians, and computer scientists for transdisciplinary
research projects, new educational initiatives, workshops, and other efforts
designed to catalyze a new foundational data science community focused on the
development of intelligent, interactive machines. It will prepare students for
transdisciplinary foundational work in data science, aid curriculum development,
and involve government and industrial partners in collaborations and to aid in
understanding of workforce issues resulting from use of intelligent
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intelligent machines, such as robots, are
evolving from simple automata performing repetitive tasks in highly structured
and enclosed workspaces to sophisticated, closed-loop systems capable of
satisfying human specifications in dynamic environments that include people. To
manage and master the operations of complex machines and their interactions with
people, it is necessary to better understand and adapt the data that drive the
algorithms that control them. DATA-INSPIRE will address the following
challenges. (1) Failures in tasks such as autonomous driving or robotic surgery
can have devastating consequences. Data-driven solutions are often opaque
computational tools for which it is impossible to verify correctness or explain
failures. Formal tools, integrated with data, are needed to remove ambiguity
about what causes intelligent machines to perform in certain ways. (2) Data-
driven solutions frequently depend critically on vast corpora of accurately
labeled training instances, which can be difficult to collect for physical
operations. Tools are needed to reduce machine learning methods' dependence on
large amounts of task-specific supervision. (3) Most intelligent machines need
to react to sensing data under critical deadlines, which, if not met, can
jeopardize operations. Mathematical and statistical analyses of the dynamics of
learning and control are needed to assist with more effective real-time decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.