* 1934554
* Collaborative Research: BEE: A dormancy refuge in host-parasite eco-evolutionary dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Jay Lennon, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 708,041.00

Understanding the emergence and spread of disease-causing parasites is an
essential goal of evolutionary biology. It is well recognized that dispersal in
space can provide protection for hosts against infection, however many organisms
can also disperse in time through the process of dormancy. Dormancy reflects the
ability of an individual to enter a reversible state of reduced metabolic
activity. It is a strategy that has evolved numerous times across the tree of
life, but is particularly prevalent among microorganisms. While it is well known
that dormancy allows populations to persist in the face of harsh environmental
conditions like thermal stress and starvation, far less is known about whether
dormancy can provide protection against infection by parasites. This project
will advance multiple fields of biology through the integration of mathematical
theory, laboratory evolution experiments, and bioinformatic analysis of genomic
data collected from a range of ecosystems around the world. The project will
engage elementary students and the public through a combination of K-5 classroom
activities and an exhibit in a public science festival. Educational impacts
include immersing students from diverse ages and backgrounds in teaching modules
and research experiences that use physical and computer models to emphasize the
scale and nature of microbial interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
premise of the research project is that dormancy is an important life-history
strategy that modifies the evolutionary ecology of host-parasite interactions.
The project addresses this premise, first, by developing theory to assess how
fluctuations caused by host-parasite dynamics influence the emergence and
maintenance of dormancy beyond classical expectations. Second, experimental
evolution trials with a bacteria-virus (i.e., phage) system will be used to test
predictions about how the preservation of genetic and phenotypic diversity in
dormant pools (i.e., seed banks) affects the rate and mode of host-parasite
coevolution. Finally, a combination of informatics and direct molecular
manipulation will be used to test the ability of parasites to overcome a
dormancy refuge by modifying host behavior via a novel arms-race strategy.
Bridging major themes in life history and population biology, the research will
advance the study of dormancy and how it alters the long-term ecology and
evolution of host-parasite interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.