* 1934933
* GCR: Social, Ecological, and Technological Infrastructure Systems for Urban Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Mikhail Chester, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,797,600.00

The objective of this Growing Convergence Research project is to explore how
social, ecological, and technological systems (SETS) interact to generate
vulnerability or resilience to extreme weather events and how urban SETS
dynamics might be guided along more resilient and sustainable trajectories. This
project is motivated by the challenge of minimizing the impacts of extreme
events, such as hurricanes and the accompanying storm surges, extreme heat, and
flash flooding brought on by heavy rain events, on cities. The research team
will develop convergence a) by bridging across the social, ecological, and
technological domains; b) integrating socio-ecological-systems (SES), socio-
technological systems (STS), and engineering theories of resilience into a
common definition of resilience in which adaptive capacity is central; and c)
working together with practitioners and community members to collaboratively
envision resilient urban futures and articulating needs for implementing system-
oriented solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing Atlanta, New York, Phoenix,
and San Juan as study cities, this project will: a) apply and integrate
simulations of power, water, transportation, and building systems to assess
vulnerabilities to extreme events for future infrastructure scenarios in each
city; b) model projections of heat and flood exposure combined with land
use/land cover (LULC) change scenarios to assess future extreme event risk for
future infrastructure scenarios in each city; c) analyze governance networks
that address resiliency and associated actor agency, including visions, mental
models of system vulnerabilities, institutional structures, and decision-making
processes that are essential to navigate transformational changes in future
scenarios; d) employ participatory visioning to co-develop future scenarios of
resilient SETS infrastructures and explore with practitioners responses to
future extreme event scenarios and social-ecological-technological changes; e)
develop a researcher-practitioner transdisciplinary process to explore how
resilience solutions might be implemented in diverse urban systems; and f)
synthesize outcomes of future simulations and scenarios in an online interactive
researcher-practitioner visualization platform as a potential decision-support
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.