* 1934704
* Workshop on Next Generation Cloud Research Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* John Brassil, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2023
* USD 66,547.00

Cloud Computing Research Infrastructure (CRI) provides an environment for
computing and networking systems researchers to host their scientific
experiments to advance knowledge and to educate the next generation of systems
researchers. The systems research community has relied extensively on National
Science Foundation (NSF)-supported computing research infrastructures to advance
technologies underlying today's commercial cloud systems including computer and
network virtualization, Infrastructure-as-a Service deployments, advanced
programming models and software stacks, and software defined networks.
Commercial compute clouds have also evolved rapidly in recent years, and promise
to play a continued and growing role in accelerating scientific research.
Researchers and educators can and do leverage these cloud platforms to
accelerate and improve their research and teaching, complementing their use of
specialized CRI systems. Given the evolution of research community experimental
requirements and the rapid evolution of commercial cloud offerings, the
computing research community faces the need to periodically assess the
specialized research infrastructure it needs to advance science. This project
seems to convene the research community to engage in a dialogue about future
directions for NSF-supported cloud research
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will bring
representatives from academia, industry, and government to articulate a research
agenda for advancing cloud research infrastructure. The two day workshop is
planned for November, 2019, in Princeton, New Jersey. The project will also seek
to supplement the workshop findings by surveying the broader computing and
networking research community about their current and future use and
expectations of cloud computing infrastructures. The workshop will seek to
realize the following goals:&lt;br/&gt;1) convene key cloud research
infrastructure stakeholders to evaluate the current state of academic cloud
research infrastructure, and its role in the context of evolving academic use of
commercial cloud offerings;&lt;br/&gt;2) provide a forum for infrastructure
developers and experimenters to meet and engage in objective and constructive
dialog about future directions for cloud infrastructure. Industry participants
-- primarily from commercial cloud technology providers and public cloud
operators -- will be invited to share their views about the complementary role
of public infrastructure to advance science, and their anticipated technology
requirements;&lt;br/&gt;3) allow researchers to exchange information about
system needs to address their future research experiments, and assess the
current and future impact that cloud research infrastructures can and will have
on commercial cloud offerings; and&lt;br/&gt;4) exchange ideas on how to further
develop and strengthen a workforce ready to contribute to the advancement of the
large-scale cloud-based platforms that are increasingly central to the US
economy.&lt;br/&gt;Following the workshop, report will be written and
disseminated to share findings and survey results with the broader systems
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.