* 1934668
* Collaborative Research: Knowledge Guided Machine Learning: A Framework for Accelerating Scientific Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Imme Ebert-Uphoff, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2022
* USD 399,745.00

The success of machine learning (ML) in many applications where large-scale data
is available has led to a growing anticipation of similar accomplishments in
scientific disciplines. The use of data science is particularly promising in
scientific problems involving processes that are not completely understood.
However, a purely data-driven approach to modeling a physical process can be
problematic. For example, it can create a complex model that is neither
generalizable beyond the data on which it was trained nor physically
interpretable. This problem becomes worse when there is not enough training
data, which is quite common in science and engineering domains. A machine
learning model that is grounded by explainable theories stands a better chance
at safeguarding against learning spurious patterns from the data that lead to
non-generalizable performance. This is especially important when dealing with
problems that are critical and associated with high risks (e.g., extreme weather
or collapse of an ecosystem). Hence, neither an ML-only nor a scientific
knowledge-only approach can be considered sufficient for knowledge discovery in
complex scientific and engineering applications. This project is developing
novel techniques to explore the continuum between knowledge-based and ML models,
where both scientific knowledge and data are integrated synergistically. Such
integrated methods have the potential for accelerating discovery in a range of
scientific and engineering disciplines. This project will train
interdisciplinary scientists who are well versed in such methods and will
disseminate results of the project via peer-reviewed publications, open-source
software, and a series of workshops to engage the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a framework that
uses the unique capability of data science models to automatically learn
patterns and models from data, without ignoring the treasure of accumulated
scientific knowledge. Specifically, the project builds the foundations of
knowledge-guided machine learning (KGML) by exploring several ways of bringing
scientific knowledge and machine learning models together using pilot
applications from four domains: aquatic ecodynamics, climate and weather,
hydrology, and translational biology. These pilot applications were selected
because they are at tipping points where knowledge-guided machine learning can
have a transformative effect. KGML has the potential for providing scientists
and engineers with new insights into their domains of interest and will require
the development of innovative new machine learning approaches and architectures
that can incorporate scientific principles. Scientific knowledge, KGML methods,
and software developed in this project could potentially be extended to a wide
range of scientific applications where mechanistic (also known as process-based)
models are used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National
Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.