* 1934931
* HDR TRIPODS: Collaborative Research: Institute for Data, Econometrics, Algorithms and Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Ivan Canay, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2023
* USD 849,819.00

The Institute for Data, Econometrics, Algorithms, and Learning (IDEAL) is a
multi-discipline (computer science, statistics, economics, electrical
engineering, and operations research) and multi-institution (Northwestern
University, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, and University of
Chicago) collaborative institute that focuses on key aspects of the theoretical
foundations of data science. The institute will support the study of
foundational problems related to machine learning, high-dimensional data
analysis and optimization in both strategic and non-strategic environments. The
primary activity of the institute will be thematically focused quarters which
will coordinate graduate course work with workshops and external visitors. The
institute will facilitate collaboration between Chicago-area institutions
through a number of initiatives, and across multiple disciplines. Several
components of the research agenda have direct applications areas, and the PIs
will involve practitioners in development economics, online markets, public
policy, as well as data scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research areas
supported by the institute focus on three broad themes: (1) High dimensional
data analysis, to address algorithmic and statistical challenges in dealing with
high dimensional data, and investigate topics like metric embeddings, sketching,
and problems in unsupervised learning; (2) Data Science in Strategic
Environments, to address computational and information theoretic challenges in
econometric models of strategic behavior like inference on high-dimensional
structural parameter spaces, dealing with unobserved heterogeneity, partial
identification, and machine learning in econometrics; and (3) Machine learning
and optimization, to address foundational questions in both continuous and
discrete optimization and its use in machine learning including topics like
representation learning, robustness in learning, and provable bounds for non-
convex optimization. Initially, six research topics will be selected that tie
interests across the institutions: inference and data science on networks;
theory of deep learning; incentives in shared data infrastructure; robustness in
high-dimensional statistics; high-dimensional data analysis; and algorithms for
partially identified models. There will be special quarters (fall and spring)
where the Institute will bring together investigators, postdocs, and Ph.D.
students to focus on one of the topics. In the following quarter (winter and
summer) teams will continue research that advance the proposal
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.