* 1934351
* Collaborative Research: Sustainable Ambient Printed High Efficiency Organic PhotoVoltaics (SAPHE-OPV)
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Harald Ade, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2024
* USD 302,244.00

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) technology has the potential of significant economic
impact due to its unique features such as flexibility, low weight, and short
energy payback time. In order to achieve greater commercial application, OPVs
need to address significant technology challenges in large area device
efficiency, stability, and benign/sustainable and safe production. This project
will explore scalable, environmentally benign, sustainable and operator-safe
ink-based processing methods to produce large scale OPV devices in ambient air
conditions. The success of this project will contribute to the transformation of
the Nation's energy infrastructure and help transition OPV technology to become
a sustainable energy transformation technology that reduces fossil fuel use and
reduces greenhouse gas emissions. The participating graduate and undergraduate
researchers will benefit from the interdisciplinary nature of this project and
will gain broad exposure to topics of material science, polymer chemistry,
device physics and obtain marketable skills for careers in science and
engineering. This work is embedded in the activities of the Organic and Carbon
Electronics Laboratory (ORaCEL) at NCSU. Overall, the interdisciplinary nature
of the research and its societal significance provides significant opportunities
for educational outreach and curriculum development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this fundamental research project is to address organic
photovoltaic technology needs for environmentally benign processes. This project
will fabricate novel high efficiency semi-conducting polymer:non-fullerene based
solar cells via blade-coating, a scalable fabrication technique. The OPV active
layers will be processed with (a) petrochemical solvents such as anisole,
o-methylanisole and THF that are safer and more benign than currently used
chlorinated solvents, and (b) renewable, green biosolvents such as limonene,
ethanol and potentially water. The molecular engineering needed will be guided
by molecular interaction considerations and detailed structure-function-
morphology relations. This project involves a multidisciplinary team comprising
experts in synthesis (You), miscibility/thermodynamics (Ade), processing (Ade,
You, Amassian), in-situ characterization (Amassian), and morphology
characterization (Ade, Amassian). The overall strategy will be to provide
feedback to the synthesis by validating molecular level guidance from Hansen
solubility parameter calculations, miscibility measurements, and in-situ
monitoring of morphology development. If successfully implemented, this work
will improve process realization and economic feasibility and exceed current
state-of-the-art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.