* 1934712
* Collaborative Research: Near Term Forecasts of Global Plant Distribution, Community Structure, and Ecosystem Function
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Emmanouil Anagnostou, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 943,275.00

This project is the first to explore how plant species distributions across the
entire globe may respond to global change. The project brings together
ecologists, environmental engineers, data scientists, and conservation
stakeholders to determine optimal ways to integrate these data sources to make
near term forecasts for all plants globally by addressing changes in (1)
species' abundance and geographic distribution, (2) community structure, and (3)
ecosystem function. This three-pronged approach is designed to span a range of
approaches to understand the spectrum of possible futures consistent with
current knowledge while integrating knowledge across scales of biological
organization. These forecasts will be used along with input from conservation
stakeholders to assess how differing conservation decisions can minimize the
impacts of global change responses. An ultimate goal of the project is to
automate a pipeline to ingest new incoming data, update forecasts, and serve
these to end-users to enable a near-real time forecasting workflow to provide
best-available predictions at any given time to inform conservation decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key aspect of these forecasts is their reliance on novel
environmental information that better characterize the conditions that influence
plant performance, including soil moisture and extreme weather events based on
NASA satellite observations. These species-level predictions will be linked to
community demography models that integrate a variety of relatively untapped data
sources for understanding global change, including plant trait data, community
plot data across the globe, highly detailed plot data from National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) and Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites, and
global biomass data from NASA's Global Ecosystem Dynamics Investigation (GEDI)
mission. By integrating this wide variety of data sources, the mechanistic
understanding needed to make robust near term forecasts can be made, to
understand ecosystem properties like Net Primary productivity, Carbon stock, and
resilience. Based on workshops with conservation stakeholders, researchers will
determine how best to use this unique suite of forecasts to best inform
different conservation questions in different regions of the world. The project
will also result in an open, cleaned and curated database on global plant
distributions. This will aid others in exploring data and predictions by
delivering and visualizing complex future scenarios in an easy to use portal.
All results of the project can be found at the website for the Biodiversity
Informatics and Forecasting Institute or BIFI, at
https://enquistlab.github.io/BIFI .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of
the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.