* 1934222
* WORKSHOP: Toward User-Oriented Agents: Research Directions and Challenges
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Maxine Eskenazi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2021
* USD 42,197.00

Many intelligent agents such as Alexa and SIRI have appeared as products for
general consumption in the past decade. The public has welcomed them with open
arms. Public use has brought interesting and novel challenges for the research
community that works on intelligent agents and dialog. On the one hand, the
acceptance of these agents lets research to push its boundaries, challenged by
many new applications, interactions with real users, and accounting of how well
the agent performs. On the other hand, in order to maintain this golden
opportunity, the users' expectations must be met. At present much of the
research on intelligent agents has centered on the agent itself: giving it
human-like qualities and concentrating on advanced statistical methods to decide
what the agent should say. While this has produced much interesting work, it has
not taken the user into account: how the user feels about the agent's
performance, whether the agent was useful to the user, how reliable the agent
has been. The goal of the USER workshop is to identify the challenges for future
research in dialog and intelligent agents that will push researchers to turn the
focus of their research from the agent to the user. To achieve this goal, the
USER workshop will gather experts from fields related to intelligent agents and
dialog for a discussion of how their research can be better directed toward the
user, going from "how may I help you?" to "have I helped you?". &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present research into intelligent agents concentrates on
the characterization of the agent and its actions and rarely characterizes the
user: the user's assessment of system performance, real user data, the behavior
of the user, and the evolution of the user's needs during the course of a
dialog. Orienting an agent to serve the user touches on expertise in many
domains within Artificial Intelligence such as: advanced dialog systems,
commercially available agents, dialog assessment, datasets, entrainment and
adaptation, ethics. The goal of the USER workshop is to provide a guideline for
future research in dialog and intelligent agents as focus turns to the user. It
will explore the present state of the art and envisage the research path of the
future on intelligent agents and dialog. Specifically, it will define large
scale collaborative projects and community-wide challenges. It will also
identify priorities in research and the best directions in which to invest
research funding. The workshop will produce a report that integrates input from
all participants and conclusions from the workshop, which can be used by funding
agencies to shape the future direction of research in this area. It will
concentrate on the issue of user-directed research and give examples of
successful past work and several concrete future research directions. It will
reflect the opinions of a community of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.