* 1934675
* Collaborative Research: High-Dimensional Spatio-Temporal Data Science for a Resilient Power Grid: Towards Real-Time Integration of Synchrophasor Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Le Xie, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 185,959.00

The project will establish an Institute at Arizona State University (ASU) with
Texas A&amp;M (TAMU) that considers the electric power grid and examines
critical real-time decision-making by developing core data-driven science
methods and applications. This is motivated by the modern electric power system
which is experiencing heightened unpredictability from increasing demand for
renewable energy, efficiency, and resilience. To address this, industry
stakeholders are deploying GPS-synchronized phasor measurement units (PMUs), or
synchrophasors, that provide direct measurements of voltage and current phasors
with high temporal granularity. However, the potential real-time situational
awareness enabled by these measurements has been impeded by the massive scale of
the time-series PMU data and have limited its use to passive, post-event
forensics. The Institute meets this need for PMU-based real-time decision-making
by examining five critical problems: (i) ensure data quality against bad,
missing, or stale data; (ii) exploit the fine granularity of PMU data to track
real-time changes in network parameters; (iii) detect, identify, localize, and
visualize oscillation and failure events; (iv) assess and visualize
cybersecurity threats and countermeasures specific to PMUs; and (v) create
synthetic PMU datasets for testing and validation. The Institute leverages the
PIs' synergistic multidisciplinary background in information sciences and
statistics, machine learning, data visualization, cybersecurity, and power
systems. The team will apply state-of-the-art techniques including hidden Markov
models, LSTM neural networks, graphical models, errors-in-variables models,
graph signal processing, adversarial examples, low-dimensional feature
extraction, and constrained GANs. Another key research focus is the development
of visual analytics for high-granularity spatio-temporal PMU data to enable
improved operator review and decision-making. These innovations will be fueled
by massive PMU datasets accessible to the PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Phase I
institute has the potential to tip PMUs from a promising-but-mostly-underused
resource into an essential part of power system best practices. The data science
outcomes will impact application domains such as transportation networks, smart
buildings, and manufacturing, each of which increasingly faces high-dimensional
streaming data challenges. The PIs will disseminate their research to both
academic and industry stakeholders and will continue their outreach on teaching
AI and machine learning (ML) modules to underrepresented high school students.
Finally, the multi-disciplinary strength of this institute lends itself
naturally to a larger, integrated, and comprehensive Phase II institute focused
on data-intensive research for critical infrastructure
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity. This effort
is co-funded by the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
within the Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.