* 1934348
* GCR: Collaborative Research: Socio-Technological System Transitions: Michigan Community &amp; Anishinaabe Renewable Energy Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Laura Schmitt-Olabisi, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 343,708.00

The objective of this Growing Convergence Research project is to lay the
foundations for a convergent, transdisciplinary field of study focused on
understanding transitions in socio-technological systems. This project aims to
converge social science theories of values and motivation with engineering and
economics understandings of technological feasibility to develop a comprehensive
understanding of how and why energy systems, in particular, are reconfigured to
include renewable energy resources. This project brings together scholars from
resource management, chemical and materials engineering, electrical engineering,
sociology, energy policy, philosophy of science, and regional planning to
simultaneously explore the social, cultural, and technological dimensions of
energy system transitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate
energy system transitions in eight case communities (two Anishinaabe Tribal
Nations and six non-tribal Michigan communities) that vary along characteristics
key to understanding energy transitions - including rural vs. urban, renewable
energy sources, degree of transition, governance, and type of utility provider.
Project sub-teams will a) engage with community partners to explore how
communities understand and envision energy transitions; b) examine risks,
barriers, and opportunities for energy transitions; and c) develop an integrated
spatial model and decision support tool to study the trade-offs between
strategies, spaces, and futures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.