* 1934876
* HDR TRIPODS: Penn Institute for Foundations of Data Science
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sanjeev Khanna, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,310,524.00

The growing field of data science promises to bring many benefits to society:
personalized knowledge and services; improved healthcare; improved decision-
making at individual, organizational, national, and international levels; a
safer and possibly fairer society; and many others. The ability to realize these
promises, however, depends critically on building the right foundational
principles for the field. This project establishes an NSF TRIPODS Institute,
termed the Penn Institute for Foundations of Data Science (PIFODS), at the
University of Pennsylvania, with the goal of bringing together scientists and
ideas from multiple disciplines, including computer science, electrical
engineering, statistics, and mathematics, in order to collectively develop long-
lasting principles for data science that can serve the field for decades to
come. The main activities of the Institute will include transdisciplinary
research, education and training, engagement with the broader research community
through invited seminars and workshops, and engagement with applied scientists
and practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIFODS team seeks to develop
principles for the following five thrusts: principles for complex learning
tasks; principles for efficient optimization (convex, non-convex, and
submodular); principles for streaming, distributed, and massively parallel data
analysis; principles for privacy-preserving and fairness-preserving data
analysis; and principles for reproducible data analysis. Each of these thrusts
addresses an important foundational need in data science. These needs range from
designing learning algorithms with stronger performance guarantees, and
developing principles for optimization in adaptive settings, to developing a
fundamental understanding of the tradeoffs between various modern computational
resources in data science, as well as developing data science algorithms that
guarantee meaningful notions of privacy, fairness, and reproducibility. Each
thrust requires interactions among several of the TRIPODS disciplines; several
of these thrusts also naturally interact with each other. On the education and
training side, the PIFODS team has already initiated several new
transdisciplinary courses related to data science that are aimed at developing a
common language across disciplines; under the aegis of the Institute, the team
will continue to further develop and refine these courses, and will incorporate
feedback from these courses to inform the university's emerging
transdisciplinary data science curriculum. On the applications side, the PIFODS
team will actively engage with applied scientists and practitioners of data
science, including both members of the broader university community and selected
industry practitioners; these engagements will both help to inform possible
additional research thrusts in the future, and help to solve important data-
driven problems in society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the
National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.