* 1934782
* Vertical Search Engine and Graph Homomorphism for Enhancing the Cybersecurity Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Dongwon Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 316,000.00

When there is a new or rapidly changing labor market, there is often an
information gap between job seekers on documenting their competencies and
employers in evaluating credentials. This is particular a challenge in the
rapidly expanding cybersecurity workforce. This project will create practical
tools to bridge the gap between employers and individuals interested in
cybersecurity careers, using the SFS program as a test bed. The project will
also support a Community of Practice of cybersecurity educators to encourage the
adoption of these innovative tools. This exploratory project may face challenges
with collecting and integrating job posting data from many sites and with
creating data structures from unstructured texts. However, if successful, this
project could have a significant impact by helping cybersecurity career seekers.
It may also serve as a pilot to develop similar tools for other labor markets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop two important and practical
tools to support future and current cybersecurity workforce: (1) a vertical
search engine, called Bruce, a clearinghouse for finding comprehensive
cybersecurity learning resources; and (2) a matchmaking tool between
cybersecurity job postings and job seekers' skills and competencies. The project
will conduct research to create an accurate, scalable, fine-grained Named Entity
Recognition (NER) method that can extract various entities from cybersecurity
learning resources, including course title, instructor name, textbook, and exam
information. In addition, the proposed research will design a mapping algorithm
between posted jobs and job seekers with varying structures and vocabulary
beyond a simple syntactic/semantic matching. Cybersecurity job postings will be
mapped to the most relevant functions and categories in the NIST NICE
Cybersecurity Framework, a modern taxonomy of cybersecurity related activities,
roles, skills, and profiles. The project's research approach is to use
techniques in graph homomorphism from theoretical computer science and graph
embedding from machine learning fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.