* 1934932
* HDR TRIPODS: UT Austin Institute on the Foundations of Data Science
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rachel Ward, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,499,999.00

This project establishes a new institute on the Foundations of Data Science at
the University of Texas at Austin. The Institute will be a collaboration between
eight PIs in the electrical engineering, computer science, mathematics and
statistics departments at UT Austin, as well as postdocs and graduate students
from the new programs this Institute establishes. It will form a central hub for
theoretical research into machine learning and data science by looking at
foundational approaches to analysis and design. This is necessary to devise
novel complex and sophisticated machine-learning and artificial-intelligence
theory and algorithms that can handle the accelerating scale of received data
and the faster computational speeds of computers. The algorithms and systems
will interpret and predict behavior from data and the environment with the goal
towards better design methods performed in a principled way. The research will
also open avenues for applications in fields such as autonomous vehicles and
personalized medicine. The research and education will be integrated to create
new inter-departmental postdoctoral and graduate research programs, establish a
unified degree and portfolio program in data science at UT Austin, run dedicated
seminar series and hold workshops, and partner with industry as well as domain
experts in the sciences. It will significantly expand, via funded initiatives,
the PIs' ongoing efforts to expand participation of under-represented groups in
this important field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research focuses on fundamental
mathematical theory of machine learning and optimization, including neural
networks, robustness, and graphs. The research is organized around three themes:
(a) developing an algorithmic theory for deep learning, with new and provable
methods for training, doing hyper parameter optimization and developing
confidence measures, (b) making machine learning robust to both adversarial and
incidental errors in data, and (c) devising new methods for statistical
inference using graph algorithms, including fast estimation of graph statistics,
and their use in biological and vision applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data
Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.