* 1934194
* Integrating Computational Science Practice, Weather Data Analysis, and 3D Visualization in the Secondary Earth and Environmental Science Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Yan Sun, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,632,209.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration of
computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school. Scientific inquiry
often requires scientists to use large datasets and computational models to
advance knowledge about the structure and functions of complex systems, and to
predict changes in those systems. Middle and high school students will be
engaged in these scientific processes by infusing the computational practices
and thinking needed to model, visualize, and communicate atmospheric processes
and changes into science teaching and learning. The project will design,
develop, and test eight learning modules for middle and high school students
that integrate computational practices and thinking with atmospheric science
through use of data analysis, visualization, and modeling of large-scale weather
datasets. Each of the modules will engage students in using a free, open-source
application for analyzing and visualizing geoscience data. Each module will also
emphasize the following computational science concepts and practices: 1) The
ability to access and manipulate data, 2) The ability to use computational tools
to analyze and interpret data, and 3) The application of computational reasoning
and model-based understanding to construct quantitative, scientific explanations
and predictions about events and processes in atmospheric systems. Teachers will
be participate in developing and testing new approaches to teaching an learning,
as well as development of a framework for supporting ongoing teacher efforts to
create new instructional materials that integrate computational thinking science
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a design-based research
approach to test the hypothesis that science education empowered by large-scale
atmospheric datasets and fused with computational thinking and practices will:
1) promote meaningful science learning as envisioned by the Next Generation
Science Standards, and 2) foster literacy in atmospheric and computational
sciences among middle and high school students. The project team includes
academic specialists in instructional systems and workforce development,
geoscience, electrical and computer engineering, and a high-performance computer
collaboratory, and this team will collaborate with schoolteachers from eight
school districts to develop, test, and implement the new learning modules. The
project will directly engage approximately 44 secondary school teachers and
2,000 of their students. The work of the project is guided by five objectives:
1) Develop and test 3D Weather learning modules that integrate computational
thinking and practices into atmospheric science learning through data analysis,
and 3D visualization and interpretation of large-scale weather data; 2) Develop
and conduct teacher professional development that supports integration of
computational thinking and practices into secondary science instruction and
empowers secondary science learning with large-scale weather data; 3)
Investigate how the integration of 3D Weather data modeling and visualization
into Earth and environmental science classes support students' and teachers'
development of computational thinking and model-based understanding of the
complexity of the atmospheric systems; 4) Investigate teachers' experiences and
perceptions of integrating computational thinking and practices into atmospheric
science instruction in order to learn how to support teachers to engage in these
instructional practices, and 5) Develop a research-based framework guiding
teachers' future efforts of developing new instructional materials integrating
computational thinking and practices into science instruction. Research
activities related to each of these objectives will be employed to guide the
iterative process of improving educational practices through analysis, design,
development, and implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.