* 1934830
* Honoring the Whole Student: Developing Good Practices for Supporting the Intersectionality of Diverse Undergraduate Students in Geoscience
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Quentin Tyler, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2021
* USD 49,340.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;The academy often focuses on one facet of a student's
identity without regard for the identity of the whole student. This over
simplified view of identity leaves diverse students feeling alienated because
their identity is not fully understood, recognized or supported. The objective
of this workshop is to bring together geoscience diversity leaders from seven
underrepresented communities (women, Native American/Alaska Native (NA/AN),
Pacific Islanders, disability, first-generation, African American and Latinx) to
cultivate a network poised to critically examine practices for the support and
mentorship of undergraduate students who identify with more than a single
diverse community. This workshop will provide participants with geoscience
micro-field experiences on Alaska Native Haida tribal land, and Haida cultural
activities (focused on forest, plant and marine ecology)- with the goal of
prompting broader discussions about diversity in
geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
workshop is to bring together faculty and academic staff working in different
aspects of diversity and geoscience to develop a 10-page toolkit outlining good
practices for supporting the intersectionality of diverse undergraduate students
in geoscience. The questions associated with this workshop are 1) what do
faculty and academic staff need to know to support the intersectionality of
diverse students in geoscience, and 2) how can the instructional and mentorship
practices of faculty and academic staff be enhanced to better support
intersectionality of diverse students in geoscience? In thinking about the
potential of developing a toolkit, it is important to consider 1) how activities
in the toolkit will boost an understanding of diversity, 2) when and where
should the toolkit be used, and 3) what is the potential for action once faculty
and academic staff have used the toolkit? Through the workshop activities, the
participants will engage each of these questions to support their own learning,
as well as engaging in curricular development to support other geoscience
faculty and academic staff working with diverse
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.