* 1934111
* Computational Thinking Counts in Elementary Grades:  Powerful STEM Teaching and Learning for the 21st Century
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Ramprasad Balasubramanian, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 11/30/2023
* USD 2,116,315.00

Computational thinking (CT) is often referred to as an analytical practice that
involves engaging in problem solving, (re)formulating problems and expressing
solutions in ways that can be carried out by a human or a machine. Opportunities
to engage in CT during the elementary school years often occur in after school
clubs or other informal learning settings. To increase the reach of these
opportunities, this project will develop and implement a professional learning
approach that introduces grades 3-5 teachers in three low-income schools to CT,
supports their understanding of the math and science they teach, and supports
the integration of CT into their math and science instruction. This project is
funded by the STEM + Computing (STEM+C) program that supports research and
development to understand the integration of computing and computational
thinking in STEM learning. As computing has become integral to the practice of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing
program seeks to address emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through
the applied integration of computational thinking and computing activities
within STEM teaching and learning in early childhood education through high
school (preK-12).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grounded in Wenger's community of
practice and design-based instructional research, learning opportunities for
teachers include: three, one-week summer workshops; monthly video clubs focused
on teacher noticing (18 hours per academic year); in-class support; an annual
mini-conference; and school, family, and community workshops. Across these
activities, the project will focus on two pedagogical approaches: design
thinking and project-based learning, and will involve educators in the
curriculum design process. Data to be collected include video of teacher
learning activities, teacher interviews, self-report surveys, artifacts and
assessments of teacher knowledge of math, science and CT. Outcomes of the
project include teacher-developed project-based or design thinking lessons; a
longitudinal understanding of teacher professional learning for promoting CT in
the elementary grades, a scalable professional learning model, and a set of
video teaching cases that offer teachers models of how to implement CT lessons
in ways that recognize a variety of student thinking
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.