* 1934357
* Dual-Step Sintering of Metal Nanoparticles with Femtosecond Laser Pulses
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Yaguo Wang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 11/30/2023
* USD 347,137.00

Selective laser sintering of metal particles, an additive manufacturing process,
has great potential in the manufacture of metal components with complex
geometries. Current systems which utilize nanosecond and continuous-wave lasers
to sinter (bond) the metal particles can suffer from high porosity and high
residual stresses. Femtosecond lasers, with a pulse duration of less than 10^-12
s, have high associated power and a limited heat affected zone, and thus can
effectively sinter metal nanoparticles to produce dense parts with reduced
residual stresses. That said, challenges remain in the effective sintering of
metal nanoparticles with femtosecond lasers as the high-power pulses can ablate
(remove) the particles before they are sintered resulting in incomplete printed
features. To address this problem, a double-pulse train strategy is planned,
whereby the first laser pulse will heat the particles to a level below where
ablation occurs, while the second pulse will induce the required sintering.
Successfully widening the femtosecond laser processing window will facilitate
the manufacture of metal components with complex, small-scale geometries and
high mechanical/electrical/thermal integrity; a combination that offers
potential for industries requiring precision components for critical
applications, i.e. aerospace. The small associated heat affect zone implies the
approach could also positively impact the manufacture of flexible electronics.
Additionally, this award will provide research training for minority graduate
and undergraduate students, and will generate teaching materials for
dissemination through Research Experience for Teachers (RET) programs in the
Austin, Texas region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-thermal ablation by femtosecond
lasers is widely used in high-precision manufacturing, where the rapid
accumulation of hot electrons can cause the breaking of atomic bonds and
facilitate the removal of unnecessary material. This is beneficial in the
shaping of bulk materials. However, in the sintering of metal nanoparticles, hot
electrons can result in ablation and seriously jeopardize the effectiveness of
the desired process outcomes. To achieve proper sintering, metal nanoparticles
must be partially melted, which requires increasing the lattice temperature
above a certain threshold. Hot electron effects however occur much faster than
electron-phonon coupling, hence preventing the desired increase of lattice
temperature. A two-step sintering strategy is proposed that will use a double-
pulse train to suppress the hot electron effects while still promoting sintering
across a broad range of experimental conditions. To achieve this the mechanisms
of femtosecond-laser interaction with noble metal nanoparticles (silver, copper,
gold) must first be understood. The mechanisms will be investigated using
ultrafast broad-band transient absorption spectroscopy, and transient
thermoreflectance measurements during femtosecond laser sintering experiments.
Modified two-temperature models will be developed to analyze experimental data
and to provide a foundation from which viable processing windows can be
isolated. Knowledge delivered through this research will reveal the dynamic
process of femtosecond-laser sintering of metal nanoparticles and bridge the
long-standing gap between theoretical predictions and conventional sintering
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.