* 1934521
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Impacts of War: A Long Term Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Amber VanDerwarker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 25,075.00

Warfare has profound influences on human economic activities and health.
Characterizing the effects of warfare is a critical step towards understanding
the true costs of war and helps to realize how people living in war zones cope
with chronic risk. Nevertheless, it remains a substantial challenge to
understand the complex relationships between warfare, economics, and health.
Difficulties arise from the myriad pathways through which warfare can affect
subsistence and well-being, and in-turn, how one's heath can impact their
susceptibility to violence. Moreover, studies of this kind require large,
longitudinal datasets, which can be difficult to obtain in modern contexts due
to the dangers of working in areas with ongoing violence. Archaeology can
provide critical insights into warfare by 1) focusing on the long-term impacts
of violent conflict, 2) assessing warfare among small-scale societies that are
more representative of humans shared evolutionary past, and 3) allowing
researchers to study populations experiencing war without putting investigators
or participants in harm's way. This research project will help to understand the
complex ways in which people cope with conflict, and the socioecological
conditions that encourage individuals to adopt risk-prone or risk-averse wartime
economic strategies. Specifically, this research seeks to explain how people
living in warzones proactively respond to warfare in ways that maximize the
likelihood of attaining their economic and health needs while minimizing the
probability of violent encounters. Further, it will evaluate why some
individuals decide to maintain risky wartime economic activities that others
have long abandoned. The research team will also generate novel datasets for
evaluating the timing and severity of warfare in the ancient Andes, while
creating educational opportunities for students that are traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields or labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this doctoral
dissertation award NSF funding will be used to date the archaeological sites
under consideration and conduct stable isotope analyses to reconstruct wartime
dietary strategies and mobility. Materials used for the project include human
skeletal remains excavated from the Nasca highlands of Peru from cemeteries
dating to the Late Intermediate period (LIP; AD 1000-1450). Previous research
conducted by the dissertation student Weston McCool and his team revealed a
pattern of chronic, internecine warfare in this region during the Late
Intermediate Period, defined by high rates of lethal trauma among both sexes and
all age cohorts that are significantly higher than the preceding Middle Horizon
period (AD 500-1000). Rates of disease also significantly increased during the
LIP as revealed by high percentages of pathologies indicative of nutritional
deficiencies. McCool's team will use small samples of bone from the excavated
human skeletal material to evaluate each individual's stable isotope chemistry.
Stable carbon isotope analysis will reveal dietary plant composition, while
stable nitrogen analysis will assess how hunting and herding "the major sources
of dietary meat protein in the region" changed during wartime. Stable oxygen
isotope chemistry will be used to elucidate patterns of mobility, by evaluating
whether the LIP population constrained their movement throughout the landscape
during this period. These combined analyses will reveal how LIP peoples altered
economic activities in response to the risk of warfare-related
violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.