* 1934386
* Functional analyses of the vocal central pattern generators of African clawed frogs
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Constance Cepko, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

The most salient output of brain function is behavior, but how the nervous
system produces behavior is not well understood, largely because most of the
neural pathways underlying behavior in vertebrates are complicated. In this
research project, the vocal behavior of African clawed frogs is used as a model
because their vocal neural pathways are simple, straight forward, and accessible
using techniques previously developed in the PI's laboratory. Traditionally, the
signal within behavioral neural pathways has been considered to flow in one
direction, from the upstream command center to the output station in the brain
that activates muscles that generate behavior. However, the investigators
recently obtained evidence that, in addition to activating muscles, the neuronal
signal from the output station also flows back to the command center within the
brain. It is hypothesized that the feedback signal plays an important role in
shaping the behavior of animals. In this study, functional roles of the feedback
signal will be examined using a variety of experimental techniques. The results
of the study will provide us with an understanding of how behaviors are
generated in general, and may shed light on the importance of feedback signal
for behavioral neural circuitry in general. In addition to the significance of
the scientific outcomes, the project will be used as an opportunity to train
students from diverse backgrounds, including under-represented minorities, in
the field of neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal in neuroscience is
to understand how neural networks function to generate motor programs that
underlie behavior. Although analyses of a complete neural network that generates
behavior is a formidable task, the central vocal network of African clawed frog,
Xenopus laevis, allows detailed investigation of the dynamic organization of the
brain in action. In this study, the investigators will carry out cellular
analyses of the newly discovered population of neurons that projects back from
the motor nucleus to the premotor nucleus using electrophysiological and
optogenetic approaches. The application of optogenetic tools to non-genetic
model organisms such as Xenopus laevis is still in its infancy. One of the goals
of the project is to perfect the technique so that it can be utilized by a
broader community of comparative neuroscientists. The results of the study will
not only provide insight into the structure and function of the rhythm-
generating neural network underlying functional behavior at the cellular level,
but also may reveal the potential importance of a feedback loop within a neural
network to generate stable neuronal rhythms. Rhythmic neuronal activity is not
limited to motor systems, but is prevalent across the entire CNS and is
considered to underlie important functions such as perception and cognition.
Thus, understanding the biophysical principles that govern rhythm generation
using a simple neural network has a potential to elucidate mechanisms underlying
neuronal oscillations in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.