* 1934445
* Planning Grant: Tohono O'odham Language Center
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Paul Robertson, Tohono O'odham Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2021
* USD 171,687.00

This project supports a one-year planning grant to develop a Language Center at
Tohono O'odham Community College (TOCC) in Sells Arizona. This planning grant
will provide a springboard toward a larger grant for an Enterprise Advancement
Center (TEA), a program offered by the Tribal Colleges and University
Partnership Program at the National Science Foundation. This project is
consistent with the goals of the Native American Languages Act, passed by the
U.S. Congress in 1990, which enacted into policy the recognition of the unique
status and importance of Native American languages. This center would serve the
Tohono O'odham Nation as a clearing house for information about the Tohono
O'odham language, an endangered Indigenous language spoken on both sides of the
Arizona / Mexico border. The center will provide a support for teachers and
students throughout the speaking community and a site for continued
documentation and development of material resources for those seeking to teach
or learn the language and / or for those with research interests related to the
Tohono O'odham. Broader impacts also include the potential to enhance economic
activity for a tribal nation, and to broaden participation for Native Americans,
who are underrepresented in all the sciences, including
linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When completed, the Tohono O'odham
Language Center will provide a hub for all intellectual activity related to
addressing the endangered status of the Tohono O'odham language. This includes
building the capacity of students at TOCC and language workers throughout the
community through training in language recording, language data management,
language archiving, and in language-processing technology appropriate for
community use in both language documentation and language teaching. There is
also intellectual merit in the securing of appropriate academic resources and
archival materials needed to support these activities. A center of this type
will have language and language-related activities at its core, but will also be
a center for community networking and media outreach. The broader impacts will
ripple throughout the tribal college system at all levels, throughout the Tohono
O'odham community and its related tribes, throughout other Indigenous
communities in Arizona and around North America. Other stakeholders within
Arizona Universities and state colleges, in tribal government and other entities
charged with ensuring a future for Indigenous languages, will notice and feel
the effects of centralizing language work for the betterment of all. Such a
center is truly transformative and the vision is very much geared toward
creating a replicable model, complete with state-of-the-art equipment and
methods. There will be wide-ranging publicity from the planning stages onward as
the research team gathers and shares information about the literal construction
and the growing list of resources that will be
included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.