* 1934248
* I-Corps: Novel Nano-Framework for Lithium
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Hemali Rathnayake, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is significant
for lithium producers that can selectively extract and recover efficiently high-
grade lithium from brine and salt water, resulting in a significant impact on
the lithium market. The proposed research will enable understanding of the
technology challenges, needs, and improvement in current lithium extraction
technologies. The training process will help graduate students to improve their
entrepreneurial skills, learn how to work with academia, industrial sectors,
customers and the public. The developed technology is expected to find broader
commercial applications in environmental, healthcare, and energy sectors. The
customer of the proposed innovation is potentially any company that produces
brine solution. Oil companies and lithium producers are the key targets for this
innovation. The proposed innovation enables a novel technology that would
selectively extract lithium from brine solution resulting in high lithium
recovery and low-cost production and conversion of lithium to its end products,
lithium carbonate and lithium hydroxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project develops a fibrous mat from a novel coordination polymer framework that
possesses molecular sieving and selective chemical affinity to lithium,
providing fast and efficient lithium extraction and recovery. The global demand
for lithium is expected to witness substantial growth owing to its increased
demand for energy storage, electronic bikes, electrification of tools, and other
battery-intense applications. It is unlikely that traditional lithium extraction
operations from hard rock and brine deposits will be able to respond to future
lithium markets to meet current demands. Mining lithium from hard rock deposits
requires high operating cost regardless of its low technology requirements and
short processing time. The current brine operations are also more capital
intensive, incur significant lead times to generate high grade lithium
production. The proposed innovation is unique due to its high selectivity, rapid
extraction ability, and the feasibility to apply into any shape and size brine
ponds. The current stage of the project focuses on developing the fibrous mat
with tailored porosity and high-density chemical affinity to demonstrate its
utility and versatility for selective extraction of lithium ions from salt
solutions and seawater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.