* 1934440
* Third HBCU-HDI Women in STEM Conference
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Sonya Teresa Smith, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,678.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) supports conferences that seek to increase the research capacity of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) faculty and students at HBCUs.
Howard University will organize the Third HBCU-HDI Women in STEM Conference for
women scientists, researchers, graduate students and faculty from Historically
Disadvantaged Institutions (HDIs) in South Africa and from Historically Black
Colleges and Universities in the United States. The conference will be held
November 26-29, 2019 in East London, South Africa. This conference award
supports women STEM faculty and students from HBCUs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of the conference is to bring together leaders from academia, industry
and government to collaborate on strategies to attract and retain women in STEM,
targeting women of color faculty in STEM from HBCUs and HDIs. The conference
will focus on exploring the following questions: What are the similarities in
professional trajectory among women in STEM in South Africa and in the US? What
is the professional climate for women in STEM? Are programs used in the US to
improve culture and climate issues applicable to South Africa and vice versa?
Are there unique opportunities or challenges for women in STEM at HBCUs and
HDIs? How can HBCU and HDI STEM women faculty partner to encourage more women to
pursue STEM terminal degrees and faculty careers? The plenary sessions and
breakout sessions on each full day of the conference will be devoted to
addressing one of the guiding questions. The final conference session will
summarize the recommendations and solutions proposed by the conference
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.