* 1934354
* Deciphering the Physics of Critical Heat Flux (CHF)
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Saeed Moghaddam, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2024
* USD 349,996.00

Boiling is a common mechanism of heat transfer that has numerous applications
ranging from cooling and refrigeration systems used in most buildings to large
boilers used in energy and process industries. The performance of the boiling
heat transfer process is limited by a phenomenon commonly known as the critical
heat flux. Critical heat flux is the highest heat flux a heater can exchange
with a boiling fluid before the formation of a vapor layer of low thermal
conductivity that isolates the surface from the liquid. Despite nearly a century
of research on critical heat flux, its underlying physics is still not fully
understood because the relevant phenomena are transient, geometrically complex
and limited by multiple, coupled physical mechanisms. This research project aims
to address fundamental physical questions about the nature of critical heat
flux. Outcomes of this research could potentially benefit many applications in
which thermal management is a limiting factor, such as X-band radars, laser
diodes, semiconductor-based power transformers, data centers and more reliable,
compact nuclear reactors. The results of this study also will enrich thermofluid
science courses through inclusion of new knowledge on physics of boiling heat
transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to describe the
physical mechanisms of critical heat flux in boiling and to provide design rules
to maximize critical heat flux for a wide range of fluids. The first aim of this
proposal is an investigation of the coupling between hydrodynamic enhancement
and wickability. Using the new configuration of a phobic membrane above the
surface to optimize multiphase flows, the respective contributions of
hydrodynamics, wicking and liquid pressure on critical heat flux will be
identified and individually optimized. This research project also aims to build
on the hypothesis that extended area ratios enhance critical heat flux when
specific geometries with sub-millimeter fins are used. An extensive array of
experiments involving low and high-surface tension fluids, high-speed
visualization and state-of-the-art heat flux mapping will provide the data to
validate, quantify and generalize the above contributions. The effort will
culminate in a science base for the limits of critical heat flux and with design
tools to maximize critical heat flux for a wide range of heater materials and
fluids. The fundamental knowledge and theories generated under this work serve
as major validation thresholds in boiling science that can facilitate
development of next generation two-phase systems with a drastically improved
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.