* 1934405
* Collaborative Research: Framework for Integrative Data Equity Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Bill Howe, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 656,000.00

Data Science continues to have a transformative impact on Science and
Engineering, and on society at large, by enabling evidence-based decision
making, reducing costs and errors, and improving objectivity. The techniques and
technologies of data science also have enormous potential for harm if they
reinforce inequity or leak private information. As a result, sensitive datasets
in the public and private sector are restricted from research use, slowing
progress in those areas that have the most to gain: human services in the public
sector. Furthermore, the misuse of data science techniques and technologies will
disproportionately harm underrepresented groups across race, gender, physical
ability, sexual orientation, education, and more. These data equity issues are
pervasive, and represent an existential risk for the use of data-driven methods
in science and engineering. This project will establish a Framework for
Integrative Data Equity Systems (FIDES): an Institute for the study of systems
that enable research on sensitive data while preventing misuse and
misinterpretation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FIDES will enable interdisciplinary
community convergence around data equity systems, with an initial study in
critical domains such as mobility, housing, education, economic indicators, and
government transparency, leading to the development of a novel data analytics
infrastructure that supports responsibility in integrative data science. Towards
this goal, the project will address several technically challenging problems:
(1) To be able to use data from multiple sources, risks related to privacy,
bias, and the potential for misuse must be addressed. This project will develop
principled methods for dataset processing to overcome these concerns. (2)
Individual datasets are difficult to integrate for use in advanced multi-layer
network models. This project considers methods to create pre-trained tensors
over large collections of spatially and temporally coherent datasets, making
them easier to incorporate while controlling for fairness and equity. (3) Any
dataset or model must be equipped with sufficient information to determine
fitness for use, communicate limitations, and describe underlying assumptions.
This project will develop tools and techniques to produce "nutritional labels"
for data and models, formalizing and standardizing ad hoc metadata approaches to
provenance, specialized for equity issues. In addition to supporting
methodological innovation in data science, the Institute will become a focal
point for sharing expertise in data equity systems. It will do so by
establishing interfaces for interaction between data science and domain experts
to promote expertise development and sharing of best practices, and by
consistently supporting efforts on diversity and
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution Big Idea activity. The effort is
jointly funded by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.