* 1935628
* Collaborative Research: Software Engineering Workforce Development in High Performance Computing for Digital Twins
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Abdollah Arabshahi, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 57,635.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers
and technicians in production engineering. It will do so by supporting two, two-
day workshops on production engineering education by the University of Tennessee
Chattanooga and Tennessee Technological University. The overall goal of the
workshops is to recommend educational approaches for the rapidly expanding
production technology of digital twin research and development. A digital twin
is a virtual model of a process, product, or service. This pairing of virtual
and physical worlds enables analysis and improvement of systems, including
production engineering systems. For example, by developing new efficiencies
first in the digital twin, and then testing them in the physical twin, processes
and products can be improved. It is expected that these workshops will
contribute to achieving scalable, reliable, and cost-effective strategies for
creation of digital twins that accurately represent complex systems, such as
manufacturing and chemical plants, airplanes, and wind turbines. The workshops
will also contribute to developing guidelines for training the STEM workforce
needed to develop and implement digital twins in production engineering and
other applications. The first workshop will be held at the University of
Tennessee Chattanooga and will result in a report describing the intellectual
contributions of multiple disciplines to the use of digital twins in production
engineering. The second workshop, to be held at Tennessee Technological
University four months later, will result in a report describing curriculum
recommendations for digital twin production engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These workshops will convene thought leaders in
high-performance computing, software engineering, uncertainty quantification,
control system, digital twin modeling and simulation, and engineering education
to develop recommendations for effective, innovative, distributed education
related to digital twins, particularly in production engineering. In addition,
they are expected to lead to convergent research projects at the intersection of
educational research and the multidisciplinary areas needed to design,
implement, and operate digital twins. At the workshops, these disciplines will
come together to establish conceptual models for education that will prepare
workers to design digital twins that better integrate with production
engineering environments. Collaborations are expected to emerge between
educators and domain experts, yielding outcomes such as the enhanced design of
high-performance simulation and machine learning software systems that are both
responsive to evolving needs of production environments and suitable for use in
classroom and virtual environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
by NSF's EHR Core Research: Production Engineering Education and Research (ECR:
PEER) program, which seeks to improve the education of future and current
professionals in production engineering. It also aims to study the effectiveness
of the innovative educational strategies adopted by these
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.