* 1935294
* EFRI C3 SoRo: 3-D surface control for object manipulation with stretchable materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Mark Yim, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project will create knowledge to realize a new class of active soft robots
that can dynamically evolve three-dimensional soft protuberances from a
nominally planar surface. These moving shapes will be capable of gently and
safely positioning and manipulating heavy but delicate objects that are resting
on the surface. Soft robots are ideal for interactions with humans because they
safely deform upon contact, much as biological soft tissue does. This project
will enable active soft robotic surfaces able to track and manipulate human-
sized objects in three-dimensional space without high contact forces. In 2018
patient handling injuries accounted for 25% of healthcare-related worker's comp
claims and back injuries to workers cost the US healthcare industry $8.6
billion. The results of this project will advance the goal of assisting the safe
and comfortable handling of patients, to enhance the quality of healthcare and
reduce injuries in the nursing workforce. By preventing injury and reducing
nurses' work load this project will address the grand challenge of providing
care to our aging population. The project will promote an educational program to
build the cross-disciplinary literacy of engineering and nursing students, by
giving each experience in the other?s work domain and deepening their
understanding of current healthcare capabilities and
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will make fundamental
advances to soft robotic capabilities through three innovations: 1. electrically
addressable polymers that modulate the stiffness of inflated elastomers, 2.
real-time shape sensing, contact detection, and shape prediction using Gaussian
curvature, and 3. a hierarchical control policy that, rather than attempting
precise control of the deformable robot, achieves desired motion of the
manipulated object through contact points. This project builds from strengths of
the assembled team to overcome fundamental challenges in soft robotics research,
including shape-controlled actuation with high strain and large forces, soft
robotic sensing and proprioception, modeling and estimating the infinite
dimensional state of stretchable materials while interacting with external
objects, and control strategies to manipulate external objects with continuous,
compliant, and re-configurable elastomeric surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.