* 1935378
* Looking for the silver lining: Assessing the impact of silver in showerheads on opportunistic pathogen abundance and resistance
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Jill Millstone, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 330,000.00

Water disinfection has been highly effective at preventing illness from
microorganisms. However, no existing strategy can completely prevent waterborne
microbial exposure through drinking, showering, and washing hands. While most
microorganisms are harmless or even beneficial, some are harmful. This is
particularly true for opportunistic pathogens that harm those who are sick or
have weak immune systems. Opportunistic pathogens cause thousands of illnesses
each year resulting in significant healthcare costs to the Nation each year.
Silver (Ag) coated water fixtures have been designed to address this issue. The
presence of Ag is thought to kill bacteria based on the known antimicrobial
properties of this heavy metal. However, heavy metal exposure is also known to
transform some bacteria into antibiotic resistant forms. Antibiotic resistance
is considered one of the greatest healthcare challenges for the Nation. This
raises the question of whether Ag-amended fixtures create an even larger problem
than they are attempting to solve. This research is designed to resolve whether
Ag amendment creates conditions that cause formation of antibiotic resistance.
This will be achieved using state-of-the-science molecular techniques to explore
the response of Legionella pneumophila to Ag-amended showerheads. Legionella is
chosen as one of the most important opportunistic pathogens responsible for
waterborne fatalities in the US. Successful completion of this research will
provide results that can guide further use of Ag amended fixtures to protect
human health. Benefits to society include outreach and education efforts that
will enhance the STEM capability and scientific literacy of the Nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silver (Ag)-amended showerheads are thought to mitigate
bacterial infection due to waterborne exposure through the antimicrobial
properties of Ag. However, evidence of their efficacy in preventing illness due
to opportunistic pathogens (OPs) like Legionella pneumophila, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and nontuberculous mycobacteria has critical limitations. For
example, conventional culture-based approaches are used to evaluate efficacy,
while these techniques are known to provide false-negative results if OPs are in
a viable but non-culturable state (VBNC). A second concern regarding the use of
Ag is the emerging science demonstrating the potential for bacteria to develop
antibiotic resistance due to exposure to heavy metals like Ag. Given these
concerns, there is a critical need to determine whether Ag-amendment mitigation
approaches benefit or further exacerbate human health outcomes. The hypothesis
of this research is that Ag-modified showerheads will impact the microbial
community in premise plumbing in a way that increases OP abundance and promotes
the VBNC state, thus increasing the potential for adverse human health outcomes.
This hypothesis will be tested through two research objectives to: (i) identify
the impact of showerhead fixture design and influence of Ag on the microbial
community in water exiting the showerheads using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing
and absolute quantification of key OPs using digital droplet PCR, and (ii)
conduct targeted laboratory experiments to isolate the water and/or showerhead
property(ies) governing the underlying mechanisms responsible for the abundance
of L. pneumophila and their presence in the VBNC state. These will be achieved
using a custom-built rig simulating a real shower environment to elucidate the
critical interactions between the showerhead and the biofilm, and uncover the
molecular mechanisms governing Ag-mediated inactivation or resistance
development. The findings from this research will provide evidence for the
efficacy of Ag-mediated mitigation strategies and the potential to induce
antibiotic resistance in shower water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.