* 1935670
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Liquefaction Mitigation of Silts using MIDP and Field Testing with NHERI UTexas Large Mobile Shakers
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Arash Khosravifar, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 165,571.00

The overall objective of this Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project
is to evaluate the potential for a soil liquefaction mitigation technique in
relatively fine-grained soils. This technique uses new advancements in the field
of bio-remediation and will be tested in the field at a site located in
Portland, Oregon. The project addresses a major seismic problem in Oregon, where
many infrastructure facilities are founded on non-plastic to low-plasticity
silts that are susceptible to liquefaction in a Magnitude 9 Cascadia Subduction
Zone earthquake. The site selected for study are near the Critical Energy
Infrastructure (CEI) hub located in northwest Portland, where 90 percent of the
Oregon's liquid fuel and all jet fuels for Portland's airport are handled. The
seismic vulnerability of fuel tanks at the CEI hub is a critical impediment to
Oregon's resilience and energy reliability in the wake of a major earthquake. If
the mitigation method in this project is proved to be effective in the field, it
will provide a vertical step for adopting this solution for infrastructure
founded on liquefiable silty soils. This will enhance the resiliency of Oregon
after a major earthquake, and it can be adopted in other places with similar
subsurface conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate the
potential for microbially induced desaturation via dissimilatory reduction of
nitrogen (denitrification) to mitigate liquefaction potential in relatively
fine-grained soils. We hypothesize that 1) denitrification via two weeks of
treatment can lower the degree of saturation to 80 percent in silty soils in the
field, 2) this level of desaturation will eliminate pore water pressure
generation in treated soils subjected to in-situ cyclic strains, and 3) the
desaturation will persist for years due to the small pore size in silty soils
(although this will need to be verified in subsequent research). Our approach to
evaluate these hypotheses involves in-situ shaking using NHERI@UTexas field
equipment at a site before and after treatment, and periodic monitoring of
compression (P-) wave velocities during the next 3 to 5
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.