* 1935920
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Trace Element Analysis as a Guide to Exchange
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Danielle Dadiego, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2020
* USD 5,698.00

Danielle L. Dadiego, of the University of California, Santa Cruz, will undertake
research to study the effectiveness of Spanish economic institutions in a
borderland region. Recent studies have illuminated the diverse actions that
native groups enacted in response to Spanish colonialism ranging from allying
with the Spanish for military support to cleaving out a wedge in the market
economy. Current work has considered issues of transculturation, indigenous
agency, persistence, and autonomy; however, these examinations focus on the
scale of the household or local economy, and neither place native agents within
a larger economic network, nor do they consider the agency of Spanish and other
European actors in the context of a colonial economy. Colonial Pensacola,
Florida provides an ideal stage to examine how monolithic trade policies
intersect with economic reality, but this context is not unique. All over the
world, past and present, individuals, groups, and institutions innovate and
improvise within and against the global market and national trade policies.
Understanding how this process played out in the past can lead to a better
understanding of how people in local contexts navigate their daily lives within
a globally connected economy.

Danielle L. Dadiego combines archival research, traditional artifact analysis,
and chemical composition and isotopic analysis of glass beads and lead shot
using Laser Ablation-Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS)
and acid dissolution to study the role that both colonial and native people
played in disrupting or contributing to colonial economic institutions. Glass
beads are ubiquitous on colonial period sites, common trade items for Europeans,
and, most importantly, socially charged items within native thought-worlds. Lead
shot is equally ubiquitous; however, it is considered a mundanely functional
item. Although broadly recovered from sites, lead shot and monochrome glass
beads lack diagnostic physical or stylistic characteristics that would
facilitate interpretations of production, distribution, and use patterns.
Innovations in methodological techniques, including LA-ICP-MS, allow the use of
formerly ignored artifact categories to trace the distribution of goods across
the landscape. These chemical methods are used in conjunction with a close
examination of historical documents to provide evidence of how goods moved
through colonial and indigenous communities, foregrounding the importance of
economic agency among settlers and natives, even when these practices challenged
idealized models of mercantilism and colonial government regulations. The
combination of the datasets described above will provide evidence of how the
Spanish reacted or interacted with indigenous exchange systems that were
considered illicit based on Spanish trade regulations. Traditional
archaeological approaches have equated the Spanish economic system as a dominant
force in the colonial economy of Florida, as well as subsumed local or economic
agency as illicit or informal. Moreover, determining chemical recipes and
identifying compositional groups to illuminate economical choices people made
during colonization is a new approach that only just begun to gain momentum.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.