* 1935160
* Meaning in Flux 2019 Conference: Connecting development, variation and change; Oct 2019 - New Haven, CT
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Maria Pinango, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2021
* USD 15,487.00

The connections between meanings and the speech signals through which they are
linguistically conveyed vary systematically and change systematically over time,
not only across speech communities but crucially, within the same speech
community. Meaning in Flux 2019 is a conference, unique in the world, that
showcases cutting-edge empirical and experimental research at the intersection
of language variation and change dynamics and how these dynamics are driven by
and/or constrained by the human cognitive architecture and by the processes of
language growth that take place during human early development (early childhood
through adolescence). The specific questions of the conference are: (a) to what
extent are linguistic meaning and linguistic sound dynamics construable as
dynamics that emerge from and are guided by real-time implementation processes?
(b) how are the actuation and propagation of these dynamics driven by discourse
context and other communicative constraints? By societal pressures? (c) are
there causal relations between the arcs of meaning-sound acquisition/development
and change?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Answers to these questions have ramifications
throughout society, such as the study of language impairments and developmental
disabilities, and the understanding of individual differences as they impact
language use in educational settings. It also has direct implications for our
understanding of lesser understood speech communities, such as those connected
to developmental disabilities (i.e. Autism), societally marginalized peoples
(i.e. Black, LGBTQ+), and the Deaf Signing population. Such understanding will
help demonstrate that these communities are all expected manifestations of the
linguistic, cognitive, and social properties of humankind, which should inform
the creation of fair economic, educational, and social policy. The conference
also incorporates disciplines that are guiding the creation of new tools for
speech technology and improved human-machine interaction. The inclusion for this
iteration of sound and speech will only amplify the potential impact that the
stimulus that the conference represents can have on these applied areas of
knowledge and potentially of industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.