* 1935438
* Understanding Firn Rheology Through Laboratory Compaction Experiments and Radar Data
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Christine McCarthy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 824,833.00

The ice sheets of Antarctica and Greenland are losing mass and contributing to
accelerating global sea-level rise. Satellite altimetry provides precise
measurement of ice-sheet volume change, but computing ice-sheet mass change—the
quantity relevant for estimating the ice sheet’s sea-level contribution—requires
knowing the density of the ice sheet. The density near the ice-sheet surface
also affects age estimates of air bubbles recovered in ice cores, which are a
key source of information on past climate changes. Ice-sheet density is
primarily controlled by the rate at which firn (snow that has persisted for a
year or more on ice sheets) compacts into ice, but there is currently no widely
accepted theory of how this compaction occurs. The goal of this project is thus
to advance understanding of how firn densifies. The team will conduct laboratory
experiments and analyze ice-penetrating radar and ice-core data from Antarctica.
A key desired outcome of the project is a new model of firn densification that
can be used to improve satellite-based altimetry measurements of present-day
ice-sheet change and reconstructions of past climate changes from ice cores.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine laboratory experiments,
numerical modeling, and geophysical techniques to determine the rheology of firn
as it compacts to form ice. The team will use two methods to measure firn
compaction: (1) lab-based experiments and (2) analysis of ice-core and radar
data. For the lab-based work, the team will conduct a suite of compaction
experiments on synthetic firn samples under uni-axial strain and constant
temperature and axial stress. They will also measure the grain-size evolution.
By running a large number of experiments (&gt; 25), the team will constrain key
parameters that determine how firn compaction rate depends on density,
temperature, grain size, and axial stress. The experiments will be conducted in
a table-top apparatus at temperatures as low as -40 degrees C and axial stresses
up to 4 MPa. For the field-data-based component, the team will analyze ice-core
and ice-penetrating radar data to produce the first coincident set of radar-
derived firn compaction rates, borehole temperatures, firn densities, and firn
grain sizes. Results from lab and field data will be tied together using a
numerical firn compaction model. This model is formulated using conservation of
mass, momentum, and energy, along with an explicit description of firn rheology
and grain-size evolution. Constraints on firn rheology will be incorporated into
this model and the team will use it to examine fundamental questions about how
changes in the climate affect firn density. This is a crucial unknown that
contributes significant measurement uncertainty in estimates of past and present
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.