* 1935558
* Student Travel Support to Attend the North American Annual and European Summer Meetings of the Association For Symbolic Logic
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2025
* Russell Miller, Association For Symbolic Logic
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2025
* USD 76,000.00

This award will support the program run by the Association for Symbolic Logic,
granting travel support to doctoral students to allow them to attend the two
principal conferences in mathematical logic each year during the period
2020-2024. These two meetings, the North American Annual Meeting of the ASL and
the Logic Colloquium (or European Summer Meeting), cover all aspects of logic:
complexity theory, theoretical computer science, fragments of arithmetic,
philosophical logic, pure and applied model theory, proof theory, computability
theory, set theory, subsystems of analysis, topos theory and more. They are well
attended by logicians of all stripes, and are of paramount importance to young
researchers entering logic. The grants supplied by the ASL using this award will
allow American students to attend each of these meetings, and will also support
foreign PhD students coming to the U.S. for the North American Annual Meeting.
This has been the case for the past 21 years, as an ongoing series of NSF awards
has allowed the ASL to offer such grants continuously since 1998. The first
meeting held under the auspices of this grant will be the 2020 North American
Annual Meeting of the ASL, to be held at the University of California at Irvine
in March 2020. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These conferences promote all areas of
modern mathematical logic and their applications to other areas of mathematics,
and beyond. The invited presentations provide an opportunity for discussion of
the latest developments in the field, and the contributed talk sessions give
graduate students and young researchers an opportunity to present their own
work, thereby contributing to their training and professional development.
Financial support to attend the conference will preferentially be given to
students from groups underrepresented in logic and mathematics, as well as to
students who may not otherwise be able to attend the conference. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;ASL website: aslonline.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.