* 1935950
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:IP): Zettawatt-Equivalent Ultrashort Pulse Laser System (ZEUS)
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Karl Krushelnick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 16,669,886.00

The Gerard Mourou Center for Ultrafast Optical Science (CUOS) at the University
of Michigan was founded by the National Science Foundation and has been an
interdisciplinary research center for more than 25 years. CUOS promotes the use
of ultra-short duration laser pulses for basic scientific exploration and new
technologies. As a result of the present grant, the existing HERCULES laser
system at CUOS will be turned into a unique, world-class suit of lasers to be
available as an NSF scientific user facility for the academic community. The
facility will be called ZEUS and will provide world-leading capabilities for
scientific, medical, defense and industrial research, such as novel particle
accelerators, advanced radiological tools, and industrial diagnostics. Major
societal impacts of this research will include the training of the next
generation of laser scientists, the licensing of patents in new technologies and
the formation of spin-off companies in addition to scientific understanding of
matter in extreme electromagnetic fields. The establishment of the ZEUS facility
will enable CUOS to continue to produce a large number of PhD scientists who
will go on to work in academia, high technology industries and at US national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past two decades have witnessed the
development of revolutionary light sources having the unprecedented ability to
probe and control matter with atomic scale precision. The Center for Ultrafast
Optical Science has been at the forefront in the development of this high-power
laser technology, with the HERCULES laser presently operational at peak powers
up to 500 TW. The ZEUS facility to be constructed as a result of this grant will
include a dual-beamline 3 PetaWatt laser system that will provide unique new
capabilities. This will be a high power laser user facility for US scientists as
well as for the wider international research community, and will have an open
and transparent external review process for facility access and 30 weeks per
year dedicated to external user experiments. The name ZEUS (Zettawatt-Equivalent
Ultrashort pulse laser System) refers to the interaction of a PetaWatt laser
pulse colliding with a GeV energy electron beam that can be generated by one of
its two beamlines. This geometry provides the equivalent of a "Zettawatt" power
laser interaction (10^21 Watts) in the rest frame of the electron beam. It will
consequently allow exploration of fundamental yet unanswered questions regarding
non-linear quantum electrodynamics in relativistic plasmas, including non-
perturbative quantum radiation reaction and electron-positron pair production
mechanisms. Further experiments enabled by this facility will include pump-probe
experiments using femtosecond x-rays as a probe of material dynamics on ultra-
short timescales, the production of GeV ion beams, the generation of
instabilities in electron-positron jets, the exploration of vacuum polarization
effects, relativistic astrophysical shocks, and the production of "exotic"
particles such as pions and muons. Once completed, the ZEUS laser system will be
the highest-power laser system in the US and will be among the highest-power
lasers worldwide for the next decade. This project is part of the Foundation-
wide Mid-scale Research Infrastructure program and the facility capabilities
will allow scientists to address the goals of NSF's "Windows on the Universe:
The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" Big Idea. Primary support for the
project is provided by the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division of
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.