* 1935994
* Mid-Scale RI-1 (M1:DP): Compact X-ray Free-Electron Laser Project (CXFEL)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Onur Erten, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,765,713.00

An award is made to Arizona State University to conduct a comprehensive design
study of a Compact X-ray Free Electron Laser (CXFEL), a novel instrument to
produce very brief and intense hard x-ray pulses at a much lower cost and
smaller size than existing large-scale X-ray lasers. The smaller size and lower
cost of the CXFEL will enable installation at university campuses, medical
institutions, and industrial labs, greatly expanding national access and
fulfilling an urgent need in the broad US research community. This instrument
will directly observe, manipulate, and control molecules and materials at the
nanometer spatial scale and femtosecond time scale which controls much of
biochemistry and solid-state physics. Fifty investigators across a diverse range
of science and engineering fields will contribute to this project, which
addresses the NSF's Big Ideas for Understanding the Rules of Life, the Quantum
Leap, and Growing Convergence Research. This project will build the STEM
workforce through workshops and lab tours connected to Arizona State University
programs that reach more than one hundred underrepresented or first-generation
college students annually. Ten students will participate in undergraduate
internships for each year of the project. Additionally, CXFEL will engage four
local high school and community college educators each year in a five-week
summer program, in which the teachers will participate in research and develop
lesson plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CXFEL is a room-sized X-ray laser with
full coherence in time and space that allows, for the first time, full control
of the frequency and temporal properties of an X-ray laser. The CXFEL offers
full control of the X-ray phase using a new method of electron-beam patterning
that provides customized time-structuring of the bream such as attosecond
pulses, very narrow linewidths, or extremely precise timing among multiple
pulses of different wavelengths. This method will be far more stable in
pointing, energy, wavelength, and bandwidth than large machines. The CXFEL will
be combined with related instruments into a midscale suite of probes and end-
stations with highly synchronized ultrafast pulses of electrons, x-rays, and
other coherent photons from terahertz to ultraviolet. The unique probe
capabilities extend beyond time and space to measure momentum and energy
transfer, providing the deep multidimensional information needed for
transformative discoveries in a wide range of disciplines including biology,
chemistry, and condensed matter physics. The primary result of the design study
will be a Final Design Report including the documents needed for construction of
the suite of instruments and end-stations for experiments in biochemistry,
molecular dynamics, and quantum materials. This project is supported by the
Foundation-wide Mid-scale Research Infrastructure program. The project will be
managed by the Division of Biological Infrastructure with the Director for
Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.