* 1935075
* Workshop on Information and Decision Sciences, To Be Held MIT Campus, Cambridge, MA, November 1-2, 2019.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* John Tsitsiklis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 30,000.00

Information and decision systems are an essential part of many present-day
systems in a vast array of domains, from engineering and operations to the
social sciences and the life sciences. For example, communications and
information technology is ever-present in many daily activities, while
autonomous systems are also becoming ubiquitous. This two-day workshop will lay
out the foundations for future research in the underlying information and
decision sciences and will help identify critical open problems to be addressed
by the community.

Many of the spectacular recent advances in data science and machine intelligence
are all about systems that process information, and then make inferences and
decisions. Research in information and decision sciences provides much of the
methodological core that underlies such developments, illustrating that despite
tremendous changes in the technological landscape, many of the fundamental ideas
and tools are timeless. This workshop will examine the past, present, and future
of the field of Information and Decision Sciences, with focus on the following
themes: Systems, Optimization, and Control; Communications, Information Theory,
and Networks; Data, Inference, and Machine Learning; and Transitions from theory
into practice or between fields. This intellectually significant event will act
as a catalyst for opening new research directions along these themes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.