* 1935676
* SitS NSF-UKRI: Real-time and Continuous Monitoring of Phosphates in the Soil with Graphene-Based Printed Sensor Arrays
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2023
* USD 888,630.00

This award was made through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a
collaborative partnership between the National Science Foundation, the United
States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(USDA NIFA) and the following United Kingdom Research and Innovation (UKRI)
research councils: 1) The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), 2) the
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), 3) the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), and the Science and
Technology Facilities Council (STFC). Phosphorous, one of the major three
nutrients in fertilizer, is required for plant growth, and it serves as an
indicator for global environmental sustainability. It is important to understand
the variations of phosphate in soils and soil-water systems in order to address
a number of global challenges such as food production and regulating fertilizer
applications for crops grown in various soil conditions and climate regimes. The
goal of this research project is to use the latest graphene-based technology to
develop a low-cost sensor capable of real-time monitoring of the phosphorus
content in soil. This collaborative project between researchers at the U.S.
institutions of Kansas State University and the University of Alabama at
Huntsville, and the U.K. institution of the University of Sheffield, will be
conducted by an interdisciplinary team with expertise in soil and water science,
geology, electrical engineering, and the fundamental chemistry and physics of
soil-graphene interactions. Successful demonstration of such sensors would
enable farmers to choose the right amount of fertilizer to apply to the fields.
Consequently, this research will help to strengthen the national and economic
security of both the U.S. and the U.K. and will strengthen the future workforce
by bridging the gaps between science, technology, agriculture, and environmental
disciplines through the training of graduate students, undergraduate students,
and postdoctoral scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to
develop an additively-manufactured graphene sensor array and a portable wireless
system for continuous in-field monitoring of electrochemical signals. Such a
system would be applied to the mapping of soil phosphates in diverse
agricultural landscapes in the US Midwest (Kansas) and the UK East Midlands
(Derbyshire Dales and Peak District). Structurally and chemically tailored
graphene materials will be used to print graphene sensors with quasi-3
dimensional and porous graphene morphologies. The materials will be designed to
to achieve high electrical conductivity as well as reversible and high electron
charge-transfer characteristics when exposed to soil phosphates. A fundamental
understanding of phosphate ion binding with various graphene morphologies will
be gained using state-of-the-art ultrafast laser spectroscopy and high-end
computational modeling. A Bluetooth communication module with an Arduino
platform will be constructed and interfaced with the sensor arrays for sensor
data acquisition. Controlled environmental testing of spatial and temporal
variations of phosphate ions over other interfering ions will be carried out at
specific sites in Kansas and at Europe's largest controlled environment
P3-facility housed at the University of Sheffield. The fundamental sensing
characteristics and drift optimization with temperature, humidity, salinity, and
soil pH will be identified and optimized for reliable data collection. Soils
ranging from coarse calcareous to loamy montmorillonitic and silicate-rich soils
in two countries will be utilized as testbeds to measure the sensing
capabilities of the printed arrays. Furthermore, the project will explore the
detection of phosphates over other interfering ions in soils, such as nitrates,
silicates, and heavy metals, by using chemically-functionalized graphene
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.