* 1935295
* AlInN-GaN Vertical Power Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Nelson Tansu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 04/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Power electronics require materials that can
withstand high voltages and currents. Ultrawide bandgap semiconductors have the
potential to fulfill this role. Unlike conventional semiconductors that absorb
visible and near infrared light, ultrawide bandgap semiconductors are
transparent to visible light and absorb in the ultraviolet. These properties
also allow them to be used in devices that operate at high temperatures and
voltages, which is crucial for power electronics. This project researches
methods to create advanced power electronics using an ultrawide bandgap
semiconductor, aluminum indium nitride (AlInN). AlInN, used in combination with
gallium nitride, has the potential to produce high performance power electronic
devices. AlInN-based power devices will lead to a reduction in the size, weight,
and power of electrical systems. Power devices created in this program will
positively impact the nation's economy and increase energy efficiency. Graduate
students will be trained in the essential areas of advanced semiconductor
materials synthesis, materials and device physics, and device fabrication and
design. The topics of this program will be integrated into graduate and
undergraduate courses to broaden students' educational experience beyond the
laboratory. They will also be incorporated into K-12 education and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
explores aluminum indium nitride/gallium nitride (AlInN/GaN) for vertical power
electronic devices with superior performance over state-of-the-art technologies
based on GaN. AlInN is in the ultra-wide bandgap class of semiconductors with
desirable device properties such as a lattice-matched substrate (GaN), high
electron mobility, n- and p-type doping, useful GaN/AlInN heterointerfaces, and
the ability to create a native oxide. The program has two thrusts. The first is
to investigate AlInN as drift layers for power diodes by advancing the state-of-
the-art growth of AlInN; designing novel edge termination structures;
fabricating and testing AlInN power diodes; and measuring fundamental properties
such as impact ionization. The second is to create 3-terminal AlInN-based power
devices such as junction field-effect transistors (JFETs) and metal oxide
semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) by investigating the insulating
and charge properties of the AlInN native oxide; using the oxide to create novel
device architectures; using technology computer-aided design (TCAD) modeling to
guide device decisions; and fabricating and testing transistors. The program has
broad goals of creating experimental methods for AlInN-based power devices and
gain a deep understanding of the physics of AlInN and its
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.