* 1935173
* Unrecognized microbial sources of methyl mercury in freshwater lakes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Katherine McMahon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 329,608.00

The chemical methylmercury is toxic environmental pollutant that can be found in
high concentrations in fish. This has led to numerous fish consumption
advisories. While we know that this chemical can be produced by microorganisms
that change mercury from a non-toxic form into a toxic form, there are many
questions concerning where this occurs in the environment. The goal of this
project is to identify which microorganisms can perform this reaction in lakes.
The study will focus on high resolution mapping where these microorganisms are
active in lakes that have fish with high levels of methylmercury. These maps
will be compared with state-of-the-science metagenomics techniques link activity
to methylmercury production. Water managers, regulatory agencies, Hmong
subsistence fishers, and other stakeholders will be engaged to increase
understanding of the potential threat methylmercury poses. Successful completion
of this work will lead to a better understanding of mercy methylation and lead
to more informed decision making to minimize human exposure to contaminated
fish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methylmercury (MeHg) is an environmental pollutant of
major concern due to its role as a neurotoxin that bioaccumulates in aquatic
food webs, leading to human exposure through fish consumption. After inorganic
mercury enters ecosystems due mainly to human activity, microbes are responsible
for transforming it into the much more toxic MeHg. Preliminary data suggests
that mercury methylation genes are distributed within and across divergent
microbial lineages, including those with few or no cultured representatives. The
role of these novel organisms in methylation is almost completely unexplored.
Filed studies will be performed in collaboration with the US Geological Survey
at two contrasting field sites: Lake Mendota in Madison, WI and a series of
reservoirs along the Snake River in Hell's Canyon, Idaho. Both are highly
eutrophic with primary production being fueled by agricultural nutrient input.
Work to date has shown that MeHg accumulates just below the thermocline at both
sites. The proposed work will build on these observations by pursuing three
specific aims: Aim 1 is to measure methylation and demethylation rates across
spatial and temporal redox gradients in the water column using samples collected
from the study sites. Aim 2 is to link methylator guilds to in situ
biogeochemistry using metagenomics and metatranscriptomics using shotgun
sequencing community DNA and cDNA and computational analysis to recover
population genomes while linking gene expression to individual functional
groups. Key populations will be quantified using qPCR to provide a more
quantitative and replicated view of the methylator distributions in time and
space. Aim 3 is to define metabolic constraints on methylation using mesocosm
incubations with mercury isotopes and targeted amendments hypothesized to
inhibit or promote methylation. Successfully establishing the presence of
mercury methylation in the water column would be transformative to our
understanding of MeHg dynamics, as our current understanding is that this
normally occurs in anaerobic sediments. By providing detailed analysis of Hg
methylation dynamics, new approaches to controlling methylation and/or
preventing uptake in fish may be possible. Outreach to a local Hmong community
of fishers will increase the potential benefits by increasing understanding of
how MeHg is take up by fish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.