* 1935870
* COLLABORATIVE: Population Growth at the Southern Extreme: Effects of Early Life Conditions on Adelie penguin Individuals and Colonies
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Arvind Varsani, Point Reyes Bird Observatory
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,713,304.00

Part 1: Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;Polar regions are experiencing some
of the most dramatic effects of climate change resulting in large-scale changes
in sea ice cover. Despite this, there are relatively few long-term studies on
polar species that evaluate the full scope of these effects. Over the last two
decades, this team has conducted globally unique demographic studies of Adélie
penguins in the Ross Sea, Antarctica, to explore several potential mechanisms
for population change. This five-year project will use penguin-borne sensors to
evaluate foraging conditions and behavior and environmental conditions on early
life stages of Adélie penguins. Results will help to better understand
population dynamics and how populations might respond to future environmental
change. To promote STEM literacy, education and public outreach efforts will
include multiple activities. The PenguinCam and PenguinScience.com website
(impacts of &gt;1 million hits per month and use by &gt;300 classrooms/~10,000
students) will be continued. Each field season will also have ‘Live From the
Penguins’ Skype calls to classes (~120/season). Classroom-ready activities that
are aligned with Next Generation Science Standards will be developed with media
products and science journal papers translated to grade 5-8 literacy level. The
project will also train early career scientists, postdoctoral scholars, graduate
students and post-graduate interns. Finally, in partnership with an
Environmental Leadership Program, the team will host 2-year Roger Arliner Young
Conservation Fellow, which is a program designed to increase opportunities for
recent college graduates of color to learn about, engage with, and enter the
environmental conservation sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging 25 years of data on marked individuals from
two Adélie penguin colonies in the Ross Sea, combined with new biologging tags
that track detailed penguin foraging efforts and environmental conditions,
researchers will accomplish three major goals: 1) assess the quality of natal
conditions by determining how environmental conditions, relative prey
availability, and diet composition influence parental foraging behavior, chick
provisioning, and fledging mass; 2) determine the spatial distribution and
foraging behavior of juvenile Adélie penguins and the relative influence of
natal versus post-fledging environmental conditions on their survival; and 3)
determine the role of natal and post-fledging conditions in shaping individual
life history traits and colony growth. Data from several types of penguin-borne
biologging devices will be used to provide multiple lines of evidence for how
early-life conditions and penguin behavior relate to penguin energetics and
population size. This study is the first to integrate salinity, temperature,
light level, depth, accelerometry, video loggers, and GPS data with longitudinal
demographic information, providing an unprecedented ability to understand how
penguins use the environment and enabling new insights from previously collected
data. Changes in salinity due to increased glacial melt have important
implications for sea ice formation, ocean circulation and productivity of the
Southern Ocean, and potentially global temperature change. The penguin-borne
sensors deployed in this study will support the NSF Office of Polar Programs
priority: How does society more efficiently observe and measure the polar
regions? It represents only the second study to track juvenile Adélie penguins
at sea, the first in the Ross Sea region, the first with substantial sample
sizes, and the first to assess juvenile survival rates directly, integrating
early life factors and environmental conditions to better understand colony
growth trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.