* 1935945
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Temperatures during the Mid-Pliocene Warm Period in the McMurdo Dry Valleys with Cosmogenic Noble Gases
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Marissa Tremblay, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 281,913.00

.&lt;br/&gt;____________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part I:
Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Scientists study the Earth's past climate in
order to understand how the climate will respond to ongoing global change in the
future. One of the best analogs for future climate might the period that
occurred approximately 3 million years ago, during an interval known as the mid-
Pliocene Warm Period. During this period, the concentration of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere was similar to today's and sea level was 15 or more meters
higher, due primarily to warming and consequent ice sheet melting in polar
regions. However, the temperatures in polar regions during the mid-Pliocene Warm
Period are not well determined, in part because we do not have records like ice
cores that extend this far back in time. This project will provide constraints
on surface temperatures in Antarctica during the mid-Pliocene Warm Period using
a new type of climate substitute, known as cosmogenic noble gas
paleothermometry. This project focuses on an area of Antarctica called the
McMurdo Dry Valleys. In this area, climate models suggest that temperatures were
more than 10 C warmer during the mid-Pliocene than they are today, but indirect
geologic observations suggest that temperatures may have been similar to today.
The McMurdo Dry Valleys are also a place where rocks have been exposed to Earth
surface conditions for several million years, and where this new climate
substitute can be readily applied. The team will reconstruct temperatures in the
McMurdo Dry Valleys during the mid-Pliocene Warm Period in order to resolve the
discrepancy between models and indirect geologic observations and provide much-
needed constraints on the sensitivity of Antarctic ice sheets to warming
temperatures. The temperature reconstructions generated in this project will
have scientific impact in multiple disciplines, including climate science,
glaciology, geomorphology, and planetary science. In addition, the project will
(1) broaden the participation of underrepresented groups by supporting two
early-career female principal investigators, (2) build STEM talent through the
education and training of a graduate student, (3) enhance infrastructure for
research via publication of a publicly-accessible, open-source code library, and
(4) be broadly disseminated via social media, blog posts, publications, and
conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The mid-Pliocene Warm Period (3-3.3 million years ago) is
the most recent interval of the geologic past when atmospheric CO2
concentrations exceeded 400 ppm and is widely considered an analog for how
Earth’s climate system will respond to current global change. Climate models
predict polar amplification - the occurrence of larger changes in temperatures
at high latitudes than the global average due to a radiative forcing - both
during the mid-Pliocene Warm Period and due to current climate warming. However,
the predicted magnitude of polar amplification is highly uncertain in both
cases. The magnitude of polar amplification has important implications for the
sensitivity of ice sheets to warming and the contribution of ice sheet melting
to sea level change. Proxy-based constraints on polar surface air temperatures
during the mid-Pliocene Warm Period are sparse to non-existent. In Antarctica,
there is only indirect evidence for the magnitude of warming during this time.
This project will provide constraints on surface temperatures in the McMurdo Dry
Valleys of Antarctica during the mid-Pliocene Warm Period using a newly
developed technique called cosmogenic noble gas (CNG) paleothermometry. CNG
paleothermometry utilizes the diffusive behavior of cosmogenic 3He in quartz to
quantify the temperatures rocks experience while exposed to cosmic-ray particles
within a few meters of the Earth’s surface. The very low erosion rates and
subzero temperatures characterizing the McMurdo Dry Valleys make this region
uniquely suited for the application of CNG paleothermometry for addressing the
question: what temperatures characterized the McMurdo Dry Valleys during the
mid-Pliocene Warm Period? To address this question, the team will collect
bedrock samples at several locations in the McMurdo Dry Valleys where erosion
rates are known to be low enough that cosmic ray exposure extends into the mid-
Pliocene or earlier. They will pair cosmogenic 3He measurements, which will
record the thermal histories of our samples, with measurements of cosmogenic
10Be, 26Al, and 21Ne, which record samples exposure and erosion histories. We
will also make in situ measurements of rock and air temperatures at sample sites
in order to quantify the effect of radiative heating and develop a statistical
relationship between rock and air temperatures, as well as conduct diffusion
experiments to quantify the kinetics of 3He diffusion specific to each sample.
This suite of observations will be used to model permissible thermal histories
and place constraints on temperatures during the mid-Pliocene Warm Period
interval of cosmic-ray exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.