* 1935817
* Establishing Quantitative Functional Metrics to Evaluate the Efficacy of Corneal Crosslinking (CXL) Therapeutic Procedures
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* giuliano scarcelli, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 11/30/2020
* USD 106,112.00

Keratoconus and related ectatic disorders are the leading indication for corneal
transplantation and the primary concern of refractive surgery screening in the
US. Corneal collagen crosslinking (CXL) has emerged as the only effective
treatment to stop keratoconus progression by stiffening the corneal stroma. CXL
safety and efficacy is determined by its mechanical outcome, but currently
morphological not biomechanical parameters are used to characterize CXL. This
proposal aims to establish novel functional metrics to quantify the mechanical
outcome of corneal crosslinking (CXL) procedures to facilitate future evaluation
of their safety and efficacy. The research is highly synergistic with the FDA
collaborator Dr. Ilev, whose lab has been working to develop repeatable and
optical radiation safe CXL procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this
need, the lab has developed Brillouin microscopy which enables a CXL test
methodology by characterizing corneal stiffness in situ and in vivo with three-
dimensional resolution. Our central hypothesis is that the stiffening induced by
CXL as evaluated by Brillouin microscopy can be used to predict corneal shape,
i.e. visual outcome. To test this hypothesis, they will (1) validate Brillouin-
derived mechanical metrics to gold-standard compressive mechanical tests; (2)
correlate CXL-induced mechanical changes to cornea morphological behavior by
inducing dynamic deformation of the cornea with air-puff; and (3) correlate
Brillouin corneal profiles after CXL to morphological changes due to increasing
intraocular pressure (IOP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.