* 1935633
* New Frontiers of Mechatronics Education for Mobility, Energy, and Production Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Gene Liao, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 99,907.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers
and technicians in production engineering. It will do so by supporting workshops
on mechatronics education. Mechatronics is a multidisciplinary/
interdisciplinary science that integrates knowledge from electronics, mechanics,
control theory, and computer science. An industrial robot is an example of a
mechatronics system. Hybrid systems important to mechatronics include production
systems, automotive subsystems such as anti-lock brakes, and everyday tools such
as autofocus cameras, video, hard disks, and CD players. The field of
mechatronics offers many employment opportunities for existing workforces that
face automation-related job loss, as well as for future workers. The workshops
will explore educational pathways into mechatronics careers, from K-12 through
working professionals, including development of new mechatronics curricula and
hands-on laboratories. In addition to defining education pathways, the workshops
will explore new teaching methods using mechatronics technologies for
mechatronics workforce development, including the use of virtual, augmented, and
mixed reality approaches. The workshops will also explore workforce diversity
and equity issues in the mechatronics production engineering field. Results of
the workshops will be published on a project website for free download by any
interested person or group. This report will include descriptions of the
participants and insights resulting from the workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
workshops will be held, one at Wayne State University in Detroit Michigan
(focused on focusing on mechatronics applications in the ground mobility and
alternative energy) and the other at California State University, Long Beach
(focused on mechatronics applications in aerospace engineering). The workshops
will include representatives from local industry and universities. Discussions
will center on pedagogies, tools, assessment methods, technological progress in
mechatronics, and societal impacts including workforce diversity. In the
workshops, current challenges and future trends in mechatronics markets and
technologies will be discussed by industry personnel. Researchers and university
faculty will present recent research and the latest inventions. Engineering
education faculty and K-12 teachers will contribute experiences and ideas for
new teaching technologies such as design software, control hardware and
software, and extended reality visualizations through virtual reality, augmented
reality, and mixed reality. Experts will also discuss the development and growth
of a mechatronics workforce for production engineering, including how to develop
a diverse workforce and provide equitable access to mechatronics education and
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by NSF's EHR Core
Research: Production Engineering Education and Research (ECR: PEER) program,
which seeks to improve the education of future and current professionals in
production engineering. It also aims to study the effectiveness of the
innovative educational strategies adopted by these
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.