* 1935514
* Extending Max-Pressure Control for Traffic Network Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Michael Levin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 316,236.00

Traffic signal timing-ways to distribute right of way at signalized
intersections-can significantly affect vehicle flows and create delays in urban
cities. This project develops a new adaptive method for signal timing (max-
pressure control) through mathematical proof and experimental results. Max-
pressure control uses vehicle queue length information to optimize signal
timing. This research addresses key fundamental limitations with existing work
that discourage implementation and limit the practical benefits. This project
also includes a pilot deployment study by partnering with Hennepin County in
Minnesota to evaluate potential benefits on their intersections. Finally, it
will extend the mathematics to suggest alternative route choices to minimize
total congestion, and maximizing passenger flow in ridesharing services such as
Uber and Lyft. Mathematical knowledge gained from this project will be directly
taught through graduate school courses and Ph.D. student mentoring. To improve
public awareness of the studied problems, outreach activities will be conducted
to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce realistic
traffic flow assumptions into existing store-and-forward queueing models, namely
high-density restrictions on flow, queue spillback, and first-in-first-out
behavior. Since max-pressure signal timing normally relies on sensors to
estimate queue lengths, it will investigate alternative data sources to
calculate queue pressure, i.e. road travel delays. During these tasks, this
project will search for new Lyapunov functions and modify the max-pressure
control to retain the maximum-stability results. Simulation results will be used
to study the effects on congestion when users change their routes in response to
new signal timings. The project will further investigate actual benefits by
partnering with Hennepin County in Minnesota to perform microsimulation and a
pilot deployment on their intersections. Finally, the project will extend the
throughput-maximizing approach to system optimal dynamic traffic assignment and
passenger service in mobility-on-demand by using queueing models for those
problems. Essentially, this research will bring the attractive analytical
properties of max-pressure control into a more accurate model to move towards
effective implementation in urban cities to realize the benefits in practice.
The intellectual challenges of successful Lyapunov-based proofs of maximum-
stability are significant. In addition, applications of the max-pressure
approach to other transportation engineering problems with similar modeling
goals will broaden the impacts across the transportation
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.