* 1935518
* I-Corps: Noninvasive Detection System for Skin Disease
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Ben Wu, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is an
innovative, noninvasive method that dramatically speeds up the diagnostic
process for a broad spectrum of skin diseases, benefiting primary care
physicians, private practice dermatologists, and urgent care centers, as well as
the patients. The existing diagnostic methods require sample preparation and
tissue removal from skin, potentially causing further damage to the disease
area. The proposed method will eliminate the need for invasive sample
collection, and allow primary care physicians and dermatologists to diagnose and
treat various skin diseases, such as melanoma, non-melanoma skin cancer, and
mycosis fungoides at a much earlier stage. Urgent care centers will also benefit
from this ultrafast diagnostic technique, by immediately evaluating urgent skin
conditions, such as skin burn and inflammatory skin lesions. The proposed
approach will also eliminate the potential reluctance in patients - otherwise
due to the invasive nature of current skin biopsy process - in seeking timely
medical care, and lead to earlier treatment and better prognosis.

This I-Corps project develops an ultrafast and noninvasive three-dimensional
fluorescence microscopic imaging of live human skin. This is achieved by (1) the
design and demonstration of the hardware system that captures microscopic image
with structured light illumination, and (2) the innovative algorithm for three-
dimensional (3D) reconstruction and image processing to determine potential skin
disease. This technology can be applied directly on live human skin without
biopsy, which greatly reduces the delay and laboratory cost for biopsy
preparation and assisting diagnosis of skin disease at an earlier stage. The
high-resolution 3D image provides an accurate measurement of the shape and
dimensions of the disease skin. The fluorescence function of the system
indicates the distribution of the abnormal metabolites of a skin area. Both of
the morphological changes and the distribution of the abnormal metabolites can
be used as key parameters to determine the skin disorder at an early stage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.