* 1935930
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:IP): The Next Generation Wyoming King Air Atmospheric Research Aircraft
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey French, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 09/30/2024
* USD 15,810,587.00

The University of Wyoming King Air (UWKA) research aircraft is one of three
airborne facilities for the research and education community of atmospheric
sciences supported by the National Science Foundation. Because of its agile
maneuverability and relatively inexpensive operational cost, UWKA is the most
frequently requested airborne facility for cloud, precipitation, atmospheric
chemistry, wildfires, and boundary layer meteorology research and education.
This Mid-scale Research Infrastructure-1 Implementation project aims to
modernize the aging UWKA by building a state-of-art airborne atmospheric
research and education laboratory (UWKA-2) on a new King Air aircraft that has
the same agility and cost-effectiveness. These technologies will become an
integral part of the NSFs Lower Atmospheric Observing Facility. The advanced
airborne in-situ and remote sensing measurement capabilities are critical for
validation and refinement of algorithms used in space-borne measurements and
providing observational constraints on numerical models for weather, climate,
air quality, and wildfire predictions, and supporting many federal agencies'
missions, such as those of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the
Department of Energy (DOE), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the
Department of Interior (DOI), and the Department of Defense (DOD). The
modernized instrument suite, extra payload capability, a longer flight range,
and advanced communications will enable innovative observations and education in
Arctic science that addresses the NSF's Navigating the New Arctic Big Idea. The
new capabilities of real time access to the platform and instruments during
field experiments will allow special educational deployments and enable
students, early career scientists from many universities, and K-12
students/teachers to remotely participate in field
campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are five components in this NSF Mid-scale
Research Infrastructure Implantation project: (i) Convert the baseline aircraft
to airborne research platform that involves mission-specific and research-
specific aircraft modifications and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
certification; (ii) Upgrade airborne millimeter-wave radars to allow vertical-
plane dual-doppler capability both below and above flight level, and dual
frequency profiling capability for measurements of both rain and cloud droplets;
(iii) Build airborne lidar capabilities based on Raman and Doppler lidar
technologies for remote sensing of temperature, humidity, aerosols, and
3-dimensional wind profiles; (iv) Assemble an updated instrument package for
measurements of trace gases and aerosols to support atmospheric chemistry
research; and (v) Develop a novel ground-aircraft communication system with
real-time analysis/display capabilities for education, training, and flight
management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Foundation-
wide Mid-scale Research Infrastructure program with co-funding from the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Division
of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences/Directorate for Geosciences. The project
will be managed by the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences within the
Directorate for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.