* 1935942
* ADVANCE Partnership: Joining forces - A Midwestern Partnership for STEM Faculty Success
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Ann Burnett, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 09/30/2024
* USD 232,039.00

This ADVANCE Partnership project is a collaboration among four research-
intensive midwestern institutions: Iowa State University, North Dakota State
University Fargo, Western Michigan University, and Michigan Technological
University. Programs developed with prior ADVANCE funding will be integrated
into a coordinated and portable package, the Integrated Equity Support (IES)
system. The IES includes cross-institutional components including: mentoring
communities, male advocates and allies, and department chair professional
development. In addition, the IES will be complemented and supported with the
development of a IES Caucus to facilitate sharing and community building. The
IES Caucus will expand to include additional institutional members increasing
the reach of the Partnership project beyond the original four institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be implemented in three phases over the
duration of the project. In the first year, three of the partner universities
will adapt and adjust existing programs for IES cross-institutional
collaborations; in the second and third years the IES will be implemented as a
pilot program at Western Michigan University; in the third year, the partner
institutions will disseminate the program. The long-term outcome of this project
is expected to be increased retention and career advancement at midwestern
universities of underrepresented women and women with family responsibilities in
STEM department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to
foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support to
collaborations among STEM professional societies and academic and non-academic
non-profit organizations designed to broaden the implementation of evidence-
based equity strategies and have a national or regional
reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.