* 1935320
* Travel Support: 15th US National Congress on Computational Mechanics (USNCCM  XV); Austin, Texas; July 28-August 1, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2019
* John Foster, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2019
* USD 25,000.00

This grant provides travel support for graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars to participate in the 15th US National Congress on Computational
Mechanics (USNCCM XV) to be held in Austin, Texas, from July 28 to August 1,
2019. USNCCM has been the premier event of the U.S. Association for
Computational Mechanics (USACM) since 1991. The biennial event attracts a wide
international and US audience covering broad aspects of computational sciences,
including topics of fluid mechanics and solid mechanics, computational
mathematics, biology, manufacturing, materials science, nanotechnology and high-
performance computing. The conference will be attended by researchers and
professionals from industry, governmental laboratories, and academia. Through
this grant, the students and post-doctoral researchers will be exposed to the
state-of-the-art developments in computational sciences and mechanics. They will
also be given opportunities to present their research as well as conduct
networking for professional prospects. The organizing committee will make a
concerted effort to encourage underrepresented minority students and postdocs to
participate in the overall experience through travel
awards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At USNCCM XV, the focus of the presentations will
be on the development and applications of novel, state-of-the-art computational
models and numerical methods in a wide variety of fields, including
nanotechnology, materials, manufacturing, bioengineering, and geomechanics.
Constitutive behavior, multiscale methods and multiphysics phenomena in these
fields will be covered at substantial length through more than 70 mini-symposia
that will be held. In a close alignment with NSF?s Big Idea on Harnessing the
Data Revolution, the intersection of physics-based modeling and data-
driven/machine learning approaches will be a major theme covered by 8 mini-
symposia. More than 1000 presentations are expected to be delivered at the
conference. The students and postdoctoral scholars supported by the grant will
find opportunities to present their research as well as conduct networking. Two
forums will be provided for the presentations: technical sessions and a poster
contest. Additionally, a plenary panel discussion is also planned with
representatives from academia, government laboratories, and industry for
professional development and career advice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.