* 1935312
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Between a Soft Robot and a Hard Place: Estimation and Control Algorithms that Exploit Soft Robots' Unique Abilities
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Joshua Schultz, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,999,984.00

This project will improve the ability to control fabric-reinforced inflatable
soft robots. Soft robots offer tremendous promise because they can conform to
features in an unknown environment and then change shape to perform tasks, such
as entwining objects or squeezing into small gaps. These could be useful in
search and rescue, disaster relief, and increasing customization in
manufacturing. While scientists and engineers have managed to demonstrate these
types of movements by trial and error, getting them to work under computer
control has been difficult. Because soft robots are usually made of elastomeric
materials, a multitude of sensors can be molded into the robot, measuring touch,
proximity, and the shape of objects in the environment. With such a large number
of sensors, the robot has access to a rich amount of data that can be used to
help determine the current position and shape of the robot. The elastomeric
material of soft robots also offers the opportunity to incorporate active
materials that can change their properties upon command from a computer. These
materials can be used to tune the stiffness of the soft robot or provide
additional options for changing its shape. If successful, this research project
will produce improved algorithms to process these sensor inputs so that the soft
robot can distill them into meaningful information about itself and the world.
The techniques will be leveraged to broadly spread the benefits of the research
to the wider community. Teams of selected K-12 teachers will participate in a
decathlon-style contest, using a single robot to compete in a series of diverse
tasks and building their skills with soft robot technology for later use in
their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort centers around
developing concise models for the motions of a fabric-reinforced rubber tube
that can be evaluated quickly by a computer. Particular attention will be given
to behaviors that are difficult to represent by existing techniques, such as
wrinkling, pleating and buckling. Based on the simplified model, the algorithm
will postulate a variety of possible shapes for the robot at each instant. The
algorithm will then decide which is correct by comparing measurements from its
many sensors to the predictions of the model. Using the data gathered by the
robot platforms, the robot will be able to learn how to select the appropriate
commands -- that is, the combinations of pneumatic valve signals and tunable
stiffness patches in the rubber walls -- to autonomously complete useful tasks
where the robot must push on the environment. The algorithm will be validated in
representative tasks such as hanging drywall and retrieving objects in
clutter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.