* 1935836
* NSF/FDA/SIR: Evaluating cellular integrity as a function of bioprinter nozzle geometry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Brad Berron, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 106,662.00

"Bioprinting" is an approach to assemble individual living cells to form tissue
like skin or muscle, much like 3-D printing with metal or plastic to form
machine parts. This method promises to revolutionize fabrication of tissue
replacements or tissue models for drug testing. A limitation of bioprinting is
that individual cells are fragile and may be damaged by being squirted through a
narrow tube called a capillary through a small opening. The project proposes to
measure damage to the cell membrane, internal skeleton, and DNA depending on the
properties of the printing capillary. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The applicants
propose to address an important issue in "bioprinting", which is like 3D
printing to assemble cells into tissue like skin or muscle. The issue is that
the shear forces in the narrow capillary in the print head can damage the cell
membrane, cytoskeleton, and DNA in the nucleus; slowing the liquid flow in the
capillary to reduce the shear force may result in an unacceptable reduction in
print speed. The applicants propose to determine the effects of shear time and
changes in capillary properties on the cell damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.