* 1935762
* Spatial Patterning in the Progressing Tumor - The Role of Notch
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Herbert Levine, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 01/31/2023
* USD 753,170.00

Cancer becomes deadly when tumor cells become motile and begin to spread
throughout the patient's body. To become motile, cells must undergo radical
changes in their composition and behavior, the so-called epithelial-mesenchymal
transformation (EMT). These radical changes arise as the network of genes
controlling the state of the cell transitions from one type of stable fate to
another. This project details a joint theory-experiment physics-biology effort
to study how EMT is coordinated in space and time by chemical signals passed
among the tumor cells. The specific focus here is on the Notch signaling
pathway. This pathway has been studied extensively for its role in developmental
biology and has been implicated indirectly in cancer, but has never been studied
systematically in this context. The hypothesis to be investigated is that this
pathway can allow the formation of small clusters of cells that have undergone
EMT together, and which thereafter travel as a collective en route to the
establishment of a secondary tumor. If proven to be true, these ideas will shed
light on the fundamental origins of metastasis and might in the future offer new
strategies for both prognosis and treatment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cell-cell
interactions, both between tumor cells proper and between tumor and stromal
cells, are known to be a key component of many solid tumors. The investigators
will focus on how one of these interactions, that mediated by the Notch pathway,
can coordinate cell phenotypes and can thereby control tumor progression. To
accomplish this will require the use and extension of sophisticated theory
techniques from the field of non-equilibrium pattern formation coupled to an
experimental plan focused on pancreatic cancer cell lines to be studied in both
2d and 3d in vitro conditions, both without and with supporting cancer-
associated fibroblasts. Of particular importance will be measuring spatial
correlations of EMT state (and other known correlates) and comparing these to
expectations based on different signaling assumptions. Iterating these
experiments with increasingly realistic model-building and model-solving will
allow for the creation of a quantitatively reliable picture for the collective
behavior of the tumor, going well-beyond current individual cell
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is cofunded by the Physics of
Living Systems Program in the Physics Division and the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division at NSF.