* 1935618
* ISN2: Coordinated Interdiction for Disruption of Labor Trafficking in the Agricultural Sector
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Amy Farrell, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 642,407.00

This award will advance national health, welfare, and prosperity by furthering
our understanding of effective operational methods to combat labor trafficking
within the U.S. agricultural sector. Labor trafficking has been documented
within supply chains that provide much of the food we consume and many of the
products we use each day, with migrant labor workers being particularly
vulnerable to exploitation. Thus far, the primary approach to combating human
trafficking in the U.S. has been through crime control efforts by the criminal
justice system (e.g. arrest, prosecution, incapacitation of offenders). However,
prior research has identified limitations of this approach, particularly in
addressing labor trafficking, which suggests additional mechanisms should be
considered. This interdisciplinary research project exploits the knowledge of
operational models and methods from commercial supply chain management to guide
efforts to disrupt labor trafficking in the U.S. agricultural sector, focusing
paticularly on infrastructure use, economic factors affecting supply and demand,
and environmental factors, such as legal and regulatory frameworks. In addition,
the project will study how a broad range of anti-trafficking stakeholders with
limited resources can most efficiently coordinate their efforts to ensure that
supply chains are free of trafficked labor. This research has the potential to
transform the ways anti-trafficking policies and programs are formulated and
evaluated, leading to more effective disruption of human trafficking supply
chains within a limited resource environment. The project will support the work
of two graduate students working at the interface of engineering, business
analytics, and social science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will generate
advances in network interdiction optimization and supply chain vulnerability
theory while contributing to an emerging literature on operations engineering
models that address illicit supply networks. Informed by data and perspectives
from community partners and federally prosecuted labor trafficking cases in the
U.S. agricultural sector, the research team will apply network analysis to
qualitative labor trafficking typologies and identify key vulnerabilities in
labor trafficking supply networks. To assess the impact of multiple anti-human
trafficking stakeholders independently pursuing different tactics to disrupt
labor trafficking, a multi-agent decentralized min-max flow interdiction model
where interdictors operate on subgraphs of a common network will be developed.
This decentralized approach will be compared with approaches in which anti-human
trafficking stakeholders collaborate and coordinate their efforts. In the event
that not all organizations and entities involved in anti-trafficking efforts are
willing or able to coordinate, it will also serve as a basis for identifying
which groups of decision makers and tactics are the most critical to creating
impactful disruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.