* 1935590
* Dynamic Wetting Effects in the Spectrum of the Sessile Drop: Organizing Principles from the Symmetry-breaking Perspective
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Joshua Bostwick, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2023
* USD 355,934.00

The oscillations of a drop laying on a substrate (sessile drop) is a subject
critical to a number of emerging technologies, such as 3D printing (rapid
prototyping), aerosol drug delivery, and the fabrication of semiconductor chips
using immersion lithography. This grant will support research to develop a
mathematical framework to predict and control the droplet dynamics on solid
substrates in order to advance the aforementioned technologies, among others.
Results from this research will, for example, provide an enhanced understanding
of how drops change in shape during the 3D printing process which could lead to
the ability to pinch-off multiple satellite droplets from a single inkjet for
high resolution printing that would transform the industry through enhanced
capabilities and significant improvement in printing speeds. Since rapid
prototyping is widely used in the manufacturing industry, this research will
benefit the U.S. economy as a whole. The research project is integrated with
undergraduate education through the Creative Inquiry program at Clemson
University where students will develop an experimental drop dynamics
demonstration unit to be used as a module for undergraduate dynamics and
vibrations courses to enhance their understanding of drop
oscillations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than a century ago, Lord Rayleigh (1879)
predicted that a free liquid drop will oscillate with a degenerate spectrum,
reflecting the underlying rotational symmetry of the sphere, consistent with
Noether?s theorem. Sessile drops differ from free drops through their
interaction with the solid substrate and the symmetry can be broken spatially
through dynamic wetting effects and temporally through mechanical excitation.
Systems with broken symmetry need a mathematical framework around which to
organize the associated spectra, because classical theories of spectral ordering
are often not applicable. This research plans a mathematical framework using a
bifurcation theoretic approach. The fluid dynamical field equations are mapped
to the free-surface boundary using a boundary integral approach which results in
an integrodifferential equation for the interface shape. This equation is recast
as an operator equation from which one can systematically predict how the
spectrum varies with the symmetry-breaking parameters. Simple spectral rules-of-
thumb are immediate from this framework and can be used to develop a
classification system. Mathematical homotopy can be established through
deformation of the solid boundary which allows the sessile drop to be related to
the liquid bridge and bead-on-fiber. Parametric oscillations in sessile drops
will be analyzed using Floquet theory and a frozen interface approximation or
dual-spectral method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.