* 1935712
* Development of a Modular, Scalable, and Extensible Model-Based Systems Engineering Advanced Manufacturing Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Azad Madni, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,999,846.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers
and technicians in production engineering, specifically in advanced
manufacturing. Advanced manufacturing is key to keeping U. S. manufacturers
competitive by reducing cost, improving quality, and producing innovative
products based on new technologies. The project will support the design,
deployment, and evaluation of an advanced manufacturing curriculum that
integrates advanced systems engineering concepts. This curriculum will consist
of a set of modular, online courses designed to serve working professionals, as
well as students at two-year and four-year colleges or universities. To ensure
industry and community college participation, the project will be conducted by
the University of Southern California in collaboration with East Los Angeles
Community College, Los Angeles City College, Santa Monica College, Los Angeles
Trade Technical College, and the Industry Advisory Board for the USC Viterbi
Center for Advanced Manufacturing. An innovative aspect of the curriculum is its
use of telepresence and simulation technologies to provide students with virtual
design and testing experiences when they do not have access to physical
laboratories. As a result, the project has the potential to provide important
results about the effectiveness of virtual laboratory experiences as substitutes
or enhancements for hands-on experiences. In addition, because the curriculum
will allow students to learn course content remotely and is easily scalable, it
has the potential to reach thousands of students across the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to design,
develop, and deploy online curricula to accelerate training of the U. S.
workforce in the critical systems engineering skills area and its application to
advanced manufacturing. The first aim is to identify the required competencies
in the systems engineering-related areas that are needed for the workforce in
advanced manufacturing enterprises. Second, the project plans to develop modular
courses that integrate relevant simulation-based and telepresence-based
experiments to improve comprehension and retention of content during online
delivery. Third, the project will conduct a research-based assessment of the
courses. Specifically, it will investigate the effectiveness of a challenge-
based, guided experiential learning pedagogical approach in an online context at
the two-year college, four-year college, and professional settings. The research
will be grounded in social cognitive and socio-constructivist learning theories,
using guided experiential learning as its instructional framework. The project
will use grounded assessments including multidimensional challenge-focused
rubrics, checklists and student concept inventories and questionnaires to
measure faculty use of guided experiential learning pedagogy and students'
subject mastery and attitudes. This project will be evaluated using a formative
and summative mixed methods approach, using information from an independent
advisory group, students, and faculty via surveys and focus groups. Results of
this project will be delivered as open educational resources using a web-based
repository. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by NSF's EHR Core
Research: Production Engineering Education and Research (ECR: PEER) program,
which seeks to improve the education of future and current professionals in
production engineering. It also aims to study the effectiveness of the
innovative educational strategies adopted by these
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.