* 1935428
* I-Corps: High-Stability Bio-Inspired Redox Flow Batteries for Grid-Scale Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Ertan Agar, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves
enabling widespread implementation of renewable but intermittent energy sources,
such as wind and solar. Electrical grids currently require demand and supply of
electricity to be exactly balanced in real time to avoid power disruption and
blackouts. This is a challenging task, and growing efforts to integrate
intermittent renewable energy sources create additional problems for grid
resilience and energy security. Large-scale energy storage integrated into an
electrical grid enables utility companies to effectively manage unwanted
fluctuations and provides the flexibility required for widespread implementation
of renewable sources. Furthermore, these systems have additional benefits in
their utilization for peak shaving and load leveling applications. The energy
stored when demand is low can be used to compensate excessive load during peaks.
This practice has economic benefit for electricity consumers and
providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores commercial
application opportunities for high-stability, bio-inspired non-aqueous redox
flow battery (NRFB) systems with high cell-voltage, high current density and low
capacity-fade for the grid-scale energy storage market. State-of-the-art NRFB
systems are limited by decomposition of active materials and the related
significant capacity-fade after minimal cycling. The flow battery electrolytes
we plan to commercialize solve the problem of active material instability that
has prevented commercialization of NFRBs by utilizing metal chelators, the
biosynthesis of which evolved naturally by mushrooms in the Amanita genus. These
molecules have been optimized for stability by millions of generations of
natural selection and exhibit very strong metal-binding that shuts down
decomposition pathways. Preliminary results have shown that the introduced bio-
inspired approach has the potential to address the critical problems, such as
low cyclability and poor performance in commercialization of NRFB
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.