* 1935403
* Optimizing Vaccination Incentives to Prevent Disease Outbreaks
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Shan Liu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 503,363.00

This award will contribute to the advancement of the national health and welfare
by designing effective mechanisms to improve the vaccination rate for
communicable diseases. Vaccination is one of the most effective public health
interventions to prevent, control, and eliminate disease. The objective of this
research is to identify optimal vaccination incentives given resource
constraints to prevent disease outbreaks in a population. Barriers to high
vaccination coverage include vaccine shortages, cost, lack of universal
vaccination records, complexity of adherence, misinformation, and personal and
cultural beliefs. This research will have broad impact on millions of
individuals by providing policy makers with tools to promote vaccination uptake
through sequential intervention design and effective utilization of healthcare
resources to improve population health. The interdisciplinary nature of this
research will provide students with diversified education and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop an integrated modeling
framework that combines incentive mechanism design via a game-theoretic
approach, social network influencer identification, and agent-based simulation
of large population infection networks. The research will advance multi-fidelity
simulation optimization methods and apply them to optimize vaccination incentive
policies to achieve herd immunity using the agent-based simulation. Incentives
may include financial rewards to all individuals seeking vaccination, cost
sharing for medical care, and/or incentives to social influencers via education
outreach. Urban and rural use-cases will be analyzed to provide insights into
controlling and eliminating the measles in the U.S. Going beyond the U.S.
setting, the modeling framework can be generalized to low- and middle-income
countries. The team will disseminate results from this work through publications
in top journals, conferences across disciplines, and targeted public health
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.