* 1935327
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Overcoming Challenges in Control of Continuum Soft Robots through Data-driven Dynamic Decomposition and Light-modulated Materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Elliot Hawkes, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project will advance the control of continuum soft robots in complementary
areas of representation and implementation. First, it will explore the use of
data-driven modeling techniques that are especially well-suited to high-
dimensional nonlinear systems. Continuum systems are high dimensional because
they may be formed into many distinct, independent shapes, while soft structures
frequently exhibit nonlinear dynamics due to their characteristically large
deformations. Second, it will explore sensing and actuation using materials that
change their mechanical properties in response to light. Light may be steered to
various parts of the robot through waveguides made from compliant materials in a
variety of geometries, chosen to naturally match the compliance and geometry of
the robot. Multiple commands or measurements may be combined on a single
waveguide by using different colors of light for different signals. This helps
address the large number of sensors and actuators needed to fully monitor and
control these high-dimensional systems. The results of this work will be a new
class of optically controllable, continuum, compliant, and configurable robots,
or C4 optorobots for short. The capabilities of C4 optorobots will be valuable
in numerous applications, including inspection of hard-to-reach areas and
minimally invasive surgery. This project will include validation experiments,
such as a representative engine inspection task, simulated tissue ablation in
the heart, and simulated blood clot removal in the brain. Outreach activities of
this project will focus on training of graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups, including community college students, in emerging areas
of soft robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine two key
innovations - Koopman Operator Theory (KOT) and light-modulated materials
design. KOT uses a data-driven approach to identify the eigenmodes of a complex,
nonlinear system, thus enabling optimization of control inputs for greatest
impact. KOT can produce a linear dynamical model that matches the system
behavior, suitable for use in a model-based control. Light combined with
photoresponsive materials can provide such control inputs because wavelength,
intensity, pulse duration, and spatial distribution can be precisely and nearly
instantaneously controlled. Accordingly, this project will accomplish the
following goals: 1) Use KOT to extract and formulate linear, dynamic models of
C3 robotic sub-systems and implement model-based control schemes using finite
control inputs; 2) Develop transduction mechanisms, through engineered light
delivery, novel chemical synthesis, and integration into light-responsive
materials, to actuate C3 robotic sub-systems; 3) Integrate light-activated
robotic sub-systems and model-based linear control schemes to realize
controllable, continuum, compliant, and configurable robots -- C4
optorobots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.