* 1935469
* AGEP EAGER: Exploring Conditions for Systemic Equity Transformation that Advance Women and Minority STEM Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sharon Bird, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 295,639.00

The successful post-secondary education of tomorrow's STEM workforce is improved
when women and historically underrepresented minority (URM) faculty are hired
and promoted in our nation's universities and colleges. While there have been
increases in the diversity of academic doctoral positions, the share of women
and URM faculty is considerably less than their share in the U.S. population or
in the number of undergraduate students enrolled in STEM. Addressing the
barriers to STEM faculty careers is accelerated when organizational change
initiatives are employed in the post-secondary education setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory proof-of-concept study is examining which
approaches and which types of leaders, in which institutional contexts, are
advancing university and college faculty equity projects such as those funded by
the NSF's ADVANCE and Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
(AGEP) programs. The project team is creating a toolkit that includes diagnostic
rubrics and equity leadership practices checklists that universities and
colleges can use to identify pathways to successful faculty diversity
initiatives. The project includes pilot testing of the tools with institutions
interested in implementing equity reform on their campuses. The study results
and project outcomes will enable our nation's universities and colleges to
identify key leverage points for systemic equity transformation and the
requisite practices, policies, and cultural changes needed for achieving campus
equity goals, providing a concrete means to on-board institutions into
demonstrated successful equity approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded by the AGEP program, which supports the development, implementation and
study of models to increase the number of URM faculty in STEM and STEM education
research fields. It is also funded by the NSF ADVANCE program, which provides
grants to develop systemic approaches to increase the participation of women in
academic STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.