* 1935453
* War on Boundary Conditions - A Control-Oriented Framework for Partial Differential Equations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Matthew Peet, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 259,981.00

The joke goes like this: "Fusion power is just 20 years away and always will
be". Why 20 years? Because that is how long it takes to build a tokamak fusion
reactor. Why always? Because for a tokamak to produce energy, it must control a
10M degree plasma using a magnetic field, a dynamic process governed by six
coupled nonlinear Partial-Differential Equations (PDEs) in two spatial variables
and no real progress has ever been made on feedback control of such systems. The
goal of the project, then, is to make substantial progress on the control of
coupled PDEs. Such progress is through foundational advances in mathematics and
software infrastructure which will enable the broader PDE controls community to
grow. Specifically, by developing a universal, easily-understood and applied
computational framework for the control of PDEs, this research will provide the
tools needed to allow controls engineers with limited or no PDE experience to
design reliable and effective controllers for these systems. Since nuclear
fusion reactors have no long-term radioactive waste, and since fuel for these
reactors can be extracted from sea water, progress in this area has the
potential for creating an unlimited supply of clean energy. Furthermore, this
work has the potential to advance several applications beyond nuclear fusion
including hypersonic vehicles, traffic management, soft robotics, cavitation,
flow control, and vibration suppression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to replace Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) with Partial
Integral Equations (PIEs). Historically, PDEs are defined by three sometimes
contradictory sets of equations and constraints: the PDE itself, which moves the
state; the Boundary Conditions (BCs), which implicitly constrain the motion of
the state; and the continuity conditions, which couple the BCs to constraints on
the motion of the state. By contrast, PIEs combine PDE, BCs, and continuity
conditions into a single equation, defined by bounded Partial-Integral (PI)
operators, any solution to which satisfies the original PDE and requires no
boundary conditions or continuity constraints. PI operators are bounded, form an
algebra, and can be parameterized using matrices. Further, positivity of PI
operators can be enforced using Linear Matrix Inequalities (LMIs). This means
that algorithms developed for control of ODEs using LMIs can be generalized to
control of PIEs with relatively little effort. This project will pursue the
generalization of several such LMIs to PDEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.