* 1935404
* SBIR Phase I:  CoagCare-A POC Blood Coagulation Diagnostic Platform That Utilizes A Hand-held Meter and Mechanically Sensitive Test Strips for Broad Spectrum Hemostasis Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Ramkumar Abhishek, Abram Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I project will commercialize a
new technology for accurate, portable, and inexpensive measurement of blood
clotting tests routinely performed on patients who suffer from conditions such
as atrial fibrillation, deep vein thrombosis, or have a mechanical heart valve
replacement. These conditions affect millions of patients in the US alone in an
annual market worth more than $3 B worldwide. However, many of the state-of-
practice technologies cannot accurately or conveniently perform multiple blood
clotting tests on the same system, causing clinically significant problems for
patients and raising the cost and inconvenience of routine testing. The
technology in this project fundamentally enables these various blood clotting
tests to be performed in a single portable, test-strip system. This will
potentially lead to cheaper and more convenient blood clot testing for medical
professionals and millions of patients; improve medical care by bringing
accurate and multiple blood clotting tests to a single portable device; bring
competition to devices which rely on older technologies; and foster small
business and job growth in an emerging technology landscape that has the
potential to address a 3 billion dollar, worldwide market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will enable the first-of-its-kind
implementation of a point of care (POC) direct, mechanical test in a meter and
strip format, to more closely replicate the mechanical methods which
fundamentally underlie all blood clotting tests in the clinical laboratory. As a
mechanical measurement, the strip will measure physical properties of the
clotting whole blood sample and account for the confounding factors affecting
point of care blood clotting tests, such as hematocrit for prothrombin time /
international normalized ratio measurement. As a broad-spectrum hemostasis
platform technology, multiple blood coagulation tests can be brought to the
portable point of care format, including thromboelastography (TEG), activated
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), activated clotting time (ACT), and
prothrombin time / international normalized ratio (PT/INR) tests. This SBIR
Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility of a commercial blood
coagulation test, realizing a mechanical, strip-based, portable POC blood
coagulation platform system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.