* 1935724
* CPS: Small: Numerical and Symbolic Techniques for Verification and Synthesis of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Parasara Duggirala, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 385,961.00

Next generation Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), such as automotive systems,
require tight integration between the software and the physical world to satisfy
the ever-increasing requirements. Unintended behaviors of such cyber-physical
systems might lead to loss of property or worse scenarios and hence should be
avoided by performing formal analysis of CPS. Such analysis is challenging as
the tools for reasoning about the physical world primarily use real-analysis and
algebra whereas the tools for reasoning about software uses discrete mathematics
and algorithms. Traditional approaches for formal analysis of CPS primarily use
algebra, which do not scale well with the increase in the number of variables.
This project explores a new algorithmic framework for rigorously reasoning about
cyber-physical systems by bridging the gap between the algebraic properties of
the physical world and algorithmic foundations of the
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed in this project will
exploit the property of superposition principle that is widely observed in the
physical world. By analyzing a sample set of behaviors of CPS, these algorithms
can infer properties of a large subset of all possible behaviors. The project
extends safety verification techniques to linear systems with inputs and
parameters, and develops a new notion of counterexample for safety violations of
state feedback controllers. The investigators explore a simulation-guided
synthesis framework for synthesizing a controller that meets both safety and
liveness specifications. The investigator will incorporate research results into
undergraduate and graduate classes to introduce students to embedded systems and
control design. Additionally, the algorithms and software developed in this
project will be disseminated broadly.