* 1935986
* Collaborative Research: Strategic Observations of Terrestrial Gamma-Ray Flashes and Related Phenomena
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* John Sample, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 259,369.00

This award supports investigation of understanding terrestrial gamma-ray flashes
(TGFs) generated among a small fraction of lightning flashes generated inside
thunderstorms. TGFs are extraordinarily powerful bursts of gamma radiation;
gamma-rays are particles of invisible light, similar to x-rays but in this case
with energies up to about 100 times higher than the x-rays used by doctors and
dentists. Although TGFs are rare, the consequences of a direct hit by one of
these flashes to a plane full of people are significant. The crew and passengers
could receive a very high, sudden dose of dangerous radiation, possibly enough
to cause immediate radiation sickness and a significant risk of cancer later in
life. An unsolved and interesting problem in atmospheric physics regarding to
TGFs is how, why, and when TGFs are produced. The research team seeks
understanding of how the gamma-rays get as bright as they do and why
(fortunately) they only happen in maybe one out of a thousand lightning flashes
based on their current understanding of the ``building blocks'' of a TGF and how
high-energy radiation might naturally happen during lightning. The investigation
will potentially enable the team to predict involvement of TGFs in lightning
flashes that interact with aircraft and provide valuable information on aviation
risks for public safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research
team will deploy a number of gamma-ray detectors (previously constructed under
funding from NSF, NASA, and the Air Force) to ground-based sites, aircraft, and
high-altitude balloons in order to gather new data on TGFs in places they have
been seen before, such as the western coast of Japan in winter, summer
thunderstorms in Florida, and the eyewalls of hurricanes. Each site and the
method of observation have been chosen for measurements of TGFs close to their
production locations. One of the key observations will be how bright TGFs can
get and how faint they get. Currently temporal variations of TGF radiation
intensity predicted by leading models have significant uncertainty. To address
this uncertainty with consideration of a possible series of rapid bursts of
radiation intensity with time, the fast response detector of plastic
scintillators for observing each gamma-ray interaction will be used to determine
the correct model physics. Combining measurements of lightning characteristics
(mostly via radio emission) with complementary meteorological data, the team
would be able to understand not only the detailed behavior of lightning that
produces TGFs, but also lightning data of similar high quality for situations
where a TGF did not get produced, which is equally important to
understand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.