* 1935569
* Symposium on Undergraduate STEM Education 2026 and Beyond: Achieving Exceptional Undergraduate STEM Education for All
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2022
* USD 847,463.00

This project will contribute to the national needs for a strong STEM workforce
and a citizenry that understands science and technology. To this end, the award
will support a national public dialogue about actions that should be taken now
to better align undergraduate science, technology, education, and mathematics
education with the needs and goals of tomorrow's students and tomorrow's
workforce. The Board on Science Education and the Board on Higher Education and
Workforce at the National Academy of Sciences will convene the meeting. The
focus of the meeting will be on how undergraduate STEM education should respond
to the rapidly changing context of higher education, including demographic and
societal changes, changes in workforce demands, advances in technology, and
increased interdisciplinary approaches. The overall goal is to create education
systems that anticipate future societal needs and provide quality STEM education
for all students regardless of their backgrounds, goals, or pathways through
undergraduate learning. The event and related activities will be organized by a
nine-member planning committee in consultation with the National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine and the National Science Foundation.
Participants will consider issues such as: the roles of technology in both the
students' educational experiences and in their future work; ways to integrate
convergent thinking into undergraduate learning to engage students in compelling
problems; how to support teaching, learning, and the preparation of the STEM
workforce, including in STEM teaching. These insights will be helpful to
professional organizations, to colleges and universities, and to NSF and other
federal agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A planning committee will organize a two-
day public symposium, along with stakeholder engagement activities that will
take place before and after the symposium. The project activities will include
developing a dedicated website, hosting webinars, sponsoring a writing
competition, and publishing a written summary of the events and their outcomes.
Targeted efforts will be made to ensure broad participation, so that the
discussions will include perspectives from minority-serving institutions,
community colleges, specialized institutions, rural colleges and universities,
and other groups that are not as frequently included in national STEM education
conversations. The efforts will draw on research and successful programs to
engage students, educators, researchers, higher education administrators, policy
makers, funders, and representatives from industry in conversations about the
future of undergraduate STEM learning. The impact of the project will be
extended through outreach to a diverse set of stakeholders from a wide variety
of institution types, so that they can engage with and inform discussions on
undergraduate STEM learning, current resources, and future opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the NSF's Division of
Undergraduate Education, Division of Engineering Education and Centers, and
Office of Polar Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.