* 1935855
* Student Team Support for International Challenge at American Society of Precision Annual Conference; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; October 28-November 1, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Stuart Smith, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2020
* USD 31,200.00

This project supports 32 students studying at US institutions, including those
from under-represented groups, to participate in the 34th Annual Meeting of the
American Society for Precision Engineering (ASPE). The students will form teams
that will participate in an international student challenge at ASPE. This
funding will provide the students opportunities to exchange ideas with leading
researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and governmental facilities,
as well as with students and faculty from both domestic and international
schools. The students will also participate in expert tutorials.

This project will facilitate the formation of a cohort of students in the
multidisciplinary field of precision engineering by their participation in an
international student design competition and expert tutorials. Furthermore, this
project will provide these students with the opportunity to learn the basic
principles of precision engineering, how to prototype precision systems, and how
to utilize enabling technologies like hardware programing and data acquisition
and analysis. Participation in the 2019 ASPE Annual Meeting will give the
students the opportunity to interact with leading experts from around the world,
as well as with other students with similar interests.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.