* 1935812
* I-Corps: Adaptable Solar Window
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Catty Dan Zhang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to offer
building energy savings, on-site solar power production, and improvement to
building occupants' well-being. The primary application of the project focuses
on the commercial buildings sector for both new and retrofitting buildings,
where heating, cooling, and lighting energy accounts for nearly $70 billion
annually. The project is expected to result in substantial energy saving for
consumers in that target market. Building occupants also receive economic
benefits from direct solar power production. Additionally, the solar window
platform will potentially offer multiple features by controlling multifunctional
attributes such as thermal comfort, daylighting transmission, glare problems,
privacy, and window transparency. The project will explore customer discovery of
this low-cost, durable advanced window system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project incorporates an adaptable organic photovoltaic (OPV) systems that allows
maximum solar power production while being able to respond to varying internal
and external influences. A series of adaptable OPV systems are encapsulated
between two panes of glass to guarantee long-term operation and easy
maintenance. The OPV system consists of micro-OPV shades attached to a circular
gear frame, and is rotating according to sun positions. The system balances
multidimensional functionalities between solar heat gain, daylighting
transmission, user privacy preferences, glare protection, and unobstructed views
to the outside, while allowing users to customize the operation of the system.
The Perturb and Observe Maximum Power Point Tracking algorithm is used to
maximize solar power production. An individual micro-junction box at the micro-
OPV module incorporates a bypass diode to maintain stable energy production
efficiency when partial shading occurs. For maximum OPV efficiency and long-term
performance, the solar window is configured to prevent heat build-up, moisture
formation, and ultraviolet light transmission in the air
cavity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.