* 1935362
* Ultra-fast energy efficient ferrimagnetic memory
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Kang Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 469,650.00

The goal of this project is to achieve an in-depth understanding of the physics
of a new class of magnetic material: ferri-magnets, and to create a new kind of
memory device to resolve the bottleneck in speed and energy beyond today's
technologies. The success of the proposed research will surely set an important
milestone for next-generation information and communications technology. The
research is closely aligned with industrial needs to provide new directions,
which may thus fuel another wave of innovation for socio-economic growth. The
impact is transformative because it aims at the discovery of novel functional
nanomaterials as well as the new physics for high density, high speed, and
ultra-high efficient devices. The forefront research will also have a vast
educational impact since the research trains students with various education
levels, from high school to undergraduate/graduate school (including women and
minorities) as well as school teachers in this inter- and multi-disciplinary and
emerging fields of physical science, engineering, and computer science, through
PI's participation of the outreach programs at UCLA. The training in these
emerging disciplines will provide a diverse human capital, versed in scientific
methods and experienced in the applications. The educational impact is further
amplified by the existing outreach programs established in the UCLA NSF
Engineering Research Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-fast and energy-
efficient memory devices are critical to resolving the limit of speed and energy
dissipation for today's computing challenges in the era of big data and
artificial intelligence. The proposed research is aimed at realizing a radically
different class of memory devices based on insulating ferrimagnetic materials,
which can operate at terahertz speed due to the enormous internal exchange
field. In particular, these materials usually have low damping, enabling high
energy efficiency. The major tasks are to understand and control the dynamics of
nearly compensated ferri-magnets and to build ferri-magnetic prototype memories.
To accomplish the objective, the proposed research will investigate a series of
new insulating ferri-magnets from three perspectives: (1) understanding the
fundamental switching mechanism and the interfacial exchange coupling between a
compensated ferrimagnet and a large spin-orbit-coupling layer through electrical
characterizations, pump-probe, x-ray, and neutron techniques; (2) enabling
electrical manipulation of the compensated ferrimagnetic order to be
demonstrated by anomalous Hall and magnetoresistance effects; (3) realizing
their ultrafast dynamics using electronic ultrashort pulses and optical pump-
probing in the picosecond regime. Fundamentally, the research will enable the
understanding of the interface coupling and the ferri-magnetic dynamics,
resulting in new switching mechanisms. It may provide a new framework for
employing spintronics in quantum technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.