* 1935433
* Workshop to Develop a Framework for Community-Engaged Environmental Engineering Research
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Debbie Niemeier, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2019
* USD 45,791.00

The number of grant proposals including some sort of community engagement in
engineering research has vastly accelerated in the past decade. Despite this
great interest in "citizen science", there are currently no guidelines for
effective coordination of community-engaged engineering research. The purpose of
this workshop is to bring together experts in engineering, community relations,
and ethics to define a framework for community engagement in engineering
research. Workshop participants will examine the recent history and practice of
engagement in communities by engineering researchers with a focus on effective
and ethical research collaboration. The outcome of this workshop will be a new
framework for the practice of community-engaged research. Through these efforts,
the workshop contributes to the advancement of STEM research in service of the
American public. To maximize policy impact, the workshop will be held in
Washington, DC. Staff from Federal STEM agencies and professional societies will
be invited to attend.



Community-engaged research creates opportunities for the public to be directly
involved with forming research questions, participating in research activities
of relevance to the community, and acquiring subject-matter technical expertise.
However, without standards of practice, community-engaged research poses risks
to both engineering researchers and, even more importantly, the communities they
engage. The purpose of this workshop is to remedy this situation by defining a
working framework for community engagement in engineering research. The workshop
will include experts in engineering, community relations, and ethics, as well as
representatives from Federal STEM agencies and engineering professional
societies to maximize outreach and impact to stakeholders. This workshop will
draw on the critical lessons learned from research involving human subjects to
adapt to the different situations of community-engaged research. Workshop
participants will examine the recent history and practice of engagement in
communities by engineering researchers with the purpose of producing a new
framework of engagement. This as a critical step in developing a better
understanding of the protections community members and researchers need when
participating in community-engaged research. The development of this framework
will facilitate effective collaboration to produce scientifically defensible
results and advance STEM research impact through engaged communities. As such,
it will improve the scientific literacy of the Nation and increase public
understanding of engineering science. public understanding of engineering
science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.