* 1935300
* I-Corps: Hydrogels for Intervertebral Disc Repair
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Lawrence Bonassar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
reliable treatment method for patients with intervertebral disc herniations
undergoing spine surgery. There are approximately half a million individuals who
undergo a discectomy procedure each year, where each procedure costs an
estimated $15,000-$50,000. Studies on healthcare economics found that for every
100 patients undergoing the procedure, approximately $300,000 is spent on
revision surgeries due to the failure of the initial surgery (reherniation).
Therefore, of the total population undergoing discectomy each year, there is the
potential to save $1.4 billion annually through prevention of revision surgeries
if reherniation can be prevented. Additionally, using this hydrogel technology
to localize other reparative implants inside the intervertebral disc would
enable more therapies to potentially obtain regulatory approval and improve the
quality of spine repair. Commercialization of the hydrogel technology will allow
the development and clinical use of a variety of biologic and mechanical
implants for spine repair.

This I-Corps project further develops injectable biomaterials for sealing
defects and securing implant devices in minimally invasive procedures with
emphasis on spinal applications. Intervertebral discs are cartilaginous tissues
in the spine that connect adjacent vertebra, absorb shock and allow flexibility
during motion. In intervertebral disc degeneration, lesions in the stiff outer
tissue allow the gelatinous inner tissue to herniate and compress surrounding
nerves. Discectomy, the current standard intervention for intervertebral disc
degeneration, relieves pain but does not actively heal the diseased tissue.
Clinical research has found significant reherniation rates following discectomy
procedures with various efforts attempted to use repair implants that prevent
reherniation and restore lost disc tissue. These implant materials and devices
are not tightly secured within the disc, and thus current strategies are often
flawed by reherniation around the implant or migration of the implant itself.
This project is developing injectable hydrogels to secure disc repair implants,
effectively preventing migration of the implants and herniation of disc
material. In pre-clinical studies, hydrogels used with other devices prevented
herniation and largely restored native intervertebral disc mechanical
properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.