* 1935293
* Conference: 63rd International Conference on Electron, Ion, and Photon Beam Technologies and Nanofabrication (EIPBN); Minneapolis, Minnesota; May 28-31, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Clifford Henderson, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2020
* USD 18,000.00

This award is for the partial support of the International Conference on
Electron, Ion and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication (EIPBN) to be held
May 28-31, 2019, in Minneapolis, Minnesota. The conference includes
presentations, exchange of ideas, and extended discussions and interactions
among international participants, academics, industry leaders and government
stakeholders in the areas of nanofabrication and nanomanufacturing. This forum
is instrumental in the generation and incubation of breakthrough and
transformative ideas in many scientific areas in nanotechnology and advanced
manufacturing. This award supports the participation of graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and early career faculty members. Women and under-
represented minority students are targeted to attend and participate in the
conference activities. The requested NSF funds provide support for the
attendance of about 36 students. This international conference is a key
mechanism for linking basic science with engineering towards the development of
useful nano-enabled products, which benefit the US economy and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIPBN is a major international conference, which
provides a single forum for discussion of the latest developments in the
synthesis, fabrication, manufacturing, imaging, measurement and characterization
of small-scale or nano-scale structures, multi-layered devices and integrated
multi-scale systems. Regular meetings of the key researchers, developers and
users in the advanced nano manufacturing field are necessary for the exchange of
ideas, information, and knowledge to enable and accelerate advances and
breakthroughs in nanofabrication and nanomanufacturing. This conference offers a
platform for the open exchange of new and previously unpublished scientific
research and ideas. It fosters education and workforce development through
presentations, lectures, short courses, and other student-oriented
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.