* 1935351
* In the belly of the whale: endobionts inhabit the world's largest bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Jake Bailey, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 797,663.00

Mitochondria and chloroplasts, the organelles that provide energy to the
eukaryotic cell, are thought to have evolved more than two billion years ago
from symbiotic bacteria that lived within a microbe. Despite their potential to
help in the understanding of eukaryote evolution, examples of bacteria that host
other bacteria are very rare. The principal investigators recently discovered a
population of giant bacteria that host dense populations of bacteria within
their cells. The investigators will study the community of bacteria associated
with the giant bacteria, determine how certain bacteria enter the host cells,
and explore the interactions among the intracellular bacteria and the giant host
cell. This system provides a unique opportunity to gain an understanding of this
host bacterium-bacteria symbioses. In addition to exploring basic aspects of
eukaryotic evolution and microbial interactions, the investigators will provide
field and laboratory experiences for U.S. military veteran students, U.S. high
school students, and students from Namibia, bringing the students together in a
novel exchange program. This international partnership will not only help train
U.S. student veterans in STEM fields, and high school students from
underrepresented groups, but also help to expand the research capabilities of
sub-Saharan Africa by training students in cutting-edge approaches to studying
fundamental cell processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endosymbiotic relationships
involving prokaryotic host cells and other prokaryotes are extremely rare and
not well understood. The investigators recently discovered a population of
metabolically active giant sulfur bacteria cells, Thiomargarita spp., that
contain dense populations of intracellular bacteria. Some of these bacteria are
related to known animal endosymbionts but the structure and ecology of these
intracellular bacterial communities is still incomplete. To better understand
the host bacterium-bacteria symbioses, the investigators are (1) investigating
the microbial community structure associated with different phylotypes of
Thiomargarita spp., 2) identifying the potential mechanism(s) by which cells
enter Thiomargarita spp., and 3) studying ecological and physiological
interactions between the endobiont bacteria and Thiomargarita spp. In order to
investigate potential interactions between host Thiomargarita spp. cells and
their endobionts, as well as to characterize the community compositions, a set
of diverse techniques, such as metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and
fluorescence in situ hybridization, are being employed. In addition, infection
challenge experiments are being performed to elucidate the potential mechanisms
by which the endobiont(s) becomes internalized within the host cell. This
research has the potential to provide insights into eukaryotic evolution and the
interactions that underlie the host prokaryote-endosymbiotic prokaryotes
symbioses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.