* 1935813
* Proposal for Workshop on 'Developing Skills for Grant Writing and Peer Review'; to be conducted Spring 2020; Washington, DC
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Eben Lindsey, Society for Advancement of Chicanos & Native Americans in Sci
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,779.00

A diverse scientific workforce is crucial for the development of a strong
national scientific workforce. This project will support at least 30 early
career scientists from underrepresented groups to attend a workshop on
"developing skills for grant writing and peer review". The workshop is intended
to increase the participation in the grant review process by scientists from
underrepresented groups and increase the probability that they themselves will
successfully obtain grants for their research. The workshop provides a two-day
hands-on event to be held in the Washington D.C. area in spring or summer 2020.
As an outcome of the workshop, participants will obtain the knowledge and
competencies in reviewing grant proposals and will increase their participation
in the grant review process. Over the course of the workshop, participants will
learn to critique grant proposal drafts as well as develop their own drafts with
the guidance of peers and mentors from funding agencies. Participants will be
selected based on their interest in learning the peer review process and the
potential impact of the workshop on their career. Faculty and early career
scientists at HBCUs, TCUs, HSIs, and other minority-serving institutions are
especially encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop uses a novel
approach of bringing together representatives of funding agencies to provide a
broad set of perspectives for early career scientists interested in both grant
writing and the grant review process. The project will train early career
scientists who will be provided with strategies for effective networking. As a
result, it is expected that participants will support each other, form a
cohesive cohort group, and practice what they learned at the workshop.
Successfully securing grant funding is critical to the professional development
of early career scientists, and yet professionals from historically
underrepresented and marginalized communities receive grant funding at rates
lower than their majority colleagues. At the workshop, participants will learn
how to effectively communicate their research ideas in a written format
(proposal), become aware of how proposals are reviewed, learn the criteria used
in a review, and become increasingly confident of their ability to write a
competitive proposal and provide useful critical review of other proposals. This
project is supported by the Divisions of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate
for Biological Sciences) and Human Resource Development (Education and Human
Resources Directorate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.