* 1935915
* Hybrid mmWave mMIMO Transceiver Design for Doubly-Selective Channels
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Liuqing Yang, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 01/31/2021
* USD 344,483.00

Our era is witnessing the emergence of innumerable new wireless applications.
Examples include autonomous driving via connected vehicles, high-definition live
streaming, pervasive information showers, internet of things (IoT), and
terrestrial-satellite cooperation, just to name a few. However, today's wireless
solutions are lagging behind in supporting these applications. For example, the
stereoscopic high-dynamic range 360-degree video for live streaming requires
2-20 Gbps data rate. This far exceeds the capability of our current wireless
networks. mm-wave radios with multi-gigahertz bandwidth and massive antenna
arrays have the potential to bring many wireless applications from dream to
reality. However, their potentials come with formidable challenges. On the one
hand, mm-wave experiences complicated and time-varying electromagnetic
propagation effects that are distinct from current wireless systems. On the
other hand, the mm-wave system design is subject to the unique hybrid digital
and analog structures due to cost considerations. This project develops
paradigm-shifting solutions to these unprecedented challenges and paves the road
towards widespread deployment of mm-wave technology in both static and mobile
scenarios. The research outcomes are expected to advance the state-of-the-art
wireless technologies and improve the readiness of hybrid mm-wave massive MIMO
deployment with a massive number of mobile users. The project has an integrated
education plan to prepare workforce for future challenges in wireless
communications and sensing.

The research consists of pioneering efforts dedicated to the design and
optimization of mm-wave massive MIMO transceivers with a hybrid structure, under
challenging doubly-selective channel propagation, and with multiple user devices
that may be equipped with ultra-low-complexity structures. First, a hybrid
doubly-selective mm-wave massive MIMO channel estimator will be developed by
exploiting the double sparsity of the channel. Based on the estimated channel,
an inherently wideband approach will be adopted to design the multi-user hybrid
transceivers. These transceivers will be further optimized to exploit the
spatial multiplexing gain, despite the very small number of radio-frequency (RF)
chains at the hybrid transceivers. On top of all these, efforts will also be
made to address extreme system design and optimization challenges associated
with ultra-low-complexity hybrid transceivers with ultra-low-bit-depth analog-
to-digital converters and/or ultra-low-bit-count analog phase shifter networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.