* 1935956
* Mid-scale RI:1 (M1:IP): A world-class Neutron Spin Echo Spectrometer for the Nation:  UD-NIST-UMD Consortium
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Norman Wagner, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2024
* USD 11,802,857.00

This award from the Midscale Research Instrumentation -1 program supports the
acquisition, implementation and commissioning of a world-class neutron spin echo
spectrometer for the nation. The University of Delaware's Center for Neutron
Science working together with the National Institute of Standards and
Technology's Center for Neutron Research and the University of Maryland are
creating a world-class neutron spin echo spectrometer to strengthen U.S.
research infrastructure with substantial benefit to the soft matter, biological
sciences, and engineering research communities. Upon completion, the instrument
will be a key part of the NSF-NIST funded Center for High Resolution Neutron
Scattering, a national user facility, and enable US scientists to measure
materials and their dynamics of direct importance to humanity, e.g. proteins
used as biopharmaceuticals, biomembranes and transport across such membranes in
living cells, advanced nanocomposites with superior water purification
properties and more powerful, longer-life batteries. The instrument uniquely
provides these and additional measurement capabilities by closing a critical gap
in US research instrumentation infrastructure, with significant demand from
academia and industry alike. The project also educates an advanced workforce to
make efficient and effective use of this national
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Delaware's Center for Neutron
Science (CNS) together with the National Institute of Standards and Technology
Center for Neutron Research (NCNR) and the University of Maryland (UMD) are
building a world-class neutron spin echo spectrometer capable of measuring
dynamical processes that occur on the timescale of 100s of nanoseconds and
longer in soft matter and biological systems. With more than double the
accessible time scale and an order of magnitude increase in effective intensity
at shorter wavelength, this instrument enables fundamentally new scientific
investigations into the dynamical properties of soft matter and biological
materials, i.e. structure-function investigations of nanoscale dynamics on the
nano-to-micro second timescales, heretofore impossible in the U.S. The
instrument is a central component of the NSF-NIST Center for High Resolution
Neutron Scattering (CHRNS). To ensure a broad scientific application, education
and outreach initiatives promote its effective scientific use as well as
identify new scientific problems and user communities. The project also educates
an advanced workforce to make efficient and effective use of this national
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.