* 1935939
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Leveling the Playing Field, Strategic Equity Initiatives at Murray State University
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Paula Waddill, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Murray State University (MSU) ADVANCE Adaptation project, will improve
equity for STEM faculty at MSU, which is a regional comprehensive and primarily
undergraduate public university in rural western Kentucky. MSU serves a region
that has been historically underserved in STEM education. The MSU Adaptation
project will adapt programs from the University of New Hampshire (UNH),
University of Washington (UW), and Jackson State University (JSU). MSU LEARN
will adapt UNH's interactive theatre program to reduce implicit bias on search,
tenure and promotion committees. MSU GROW will address retention and leadership
development by adapting JSU's writing retreats and UW's faculty workshops and
continuing Murray State's peer mentoring circles. MSU LIVE will address
work/life balance by creating a President's Work-Life Task Force, educating the
MSU community about existing policies, and creating/revising policies regarding
workplace flexibility and spousal accommodation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds on a successful ADVANCE Catalyst award by continuing the
Mentoring Circle program and continue annual data collection. This Adaptation
project will also complement and contribute to MSU's long-term Strategic
Initiatives Plan to recruit, retain and engage a diverse faculty. MSU-LEARN will
contribute to hiring of diverse candidates and removing bias from tenure and
promotion processes; MSU-GROW will provide professional development and
mentoring opportunities for both early-career and mid-career faculty; and MSU-
LIVE will make MSU a family-friendlier workplace. The project is designed to
ultimately benefit all faculty at MSU. Finally, this project has the potential
to inform all institutions of higher education in Kentucky through a diversity
plan required to be reported to the state Council on Postsecondary Education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of
evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit institution of higher
education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.