* 1935596
* RUI: Control of Proteasomal Unfolding Ability by Substrate Ubiquitination
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Daniel Kraut, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 11/30/2024
* USD 579,508.00

The proteasome is a molecular machine inside eukaryotic cells that removes
unwanted or unneeded proteins by unfolding them, feeding them into a central
chamber, and then chopping them up into small pieces that can be recycled.
Proteins destined for destruction are tagged with a chain composed of multiple
copies of a small protein called ubiquitin. In this project, the principal
investigator, together with undergraduate and master's students, will
investigate how ubiquitin chains affect the ability of the proteasome to unfold
the attached target protein. The proteasome is a central player in many aspects
of cellular function, so better understanding of its mechanism, and why some
proteins are degraded and others are spared, will benefit many scientists who
study these cellular processes. Many undergraduate and master's students will
work on this project, and, through their intellectual investment, will increase
their critical thinking and scientific inquiry skills, which will serve them
well as they go on to careers in medicine, industry, academia or other fields.
The PI will work with Villanova's Academic Advancement program to excite
underrepresented students about doing research while in college. The PI will
also work to disseminate a project-based course for biochemistry majors that
gives students a taste of real research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proteasome is
a macromolecular machine inside every eukaryotic cell that unfolds and degrades
proteins destined for disposition. The proteasome therefore, impacts nearly all
biological processes by controlling the concentration of hundreds of proteins in
a cell, and so is foundational to understanding cellular biology. Despite the
proteasomeâ€™s centrality, questions remain concerning proteasome function. The
overall goal of the research conducted in the principal investigator's
laboratory is to understand the molecular determinants of the proteasome's
ability to unfold proteins. It is generally thought that if a protein is
targeted to the proteasome via polyubiquitination, that protein is degraded.
However, sometimes proteins are incompletely degraded, leading to protein
fragments with new or even toxic functions. It is not fully understood when or
why incomplete degradation occurs. In earlier NSF-funded research, the PI showed
that the polyubiquitin chain attached to a substrate protein increases the
ability of the proteasome to unfold the substrate protein and that proteasomal
ubiquitin receptors mediate this activation. However, the mechanism remains
unknown. In this project, the PI will determine (1) how the ubiquitin chain
architecture affects the proteasome's ability to unfold a substrate, (2) how
proteasome-associated proteins, in combination with ubiquitin receptors,
influence the proteasome's unfolding ability and (3) how binding to ubiquitin
receptors is communicated to the proteasomal motor
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.