* 1935801
* Collaborative Research: A Social Programmable Robot: Fostering Rapport to Improve Computer Science Skills and Attitudes
* EDU,DRL
* 08/20/2018,02/29/2024
* Erin Walker, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,006,710.00

This Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will research the educational impact of social robots in informal
learning environments, with applications to how social robots can improve
participation and engagement of middle-school girls in out-of-school computer
science programs in under-resourced rural and urban areas. The use of robots to
improve STEM outcomes has focused on having learners program robots as tools to
accomplish tasks (e.g., play soccer). An alternate approach views robots as
social actors that can respond intelligently to users. By designing a
programmable robot with social characteristics, the project aims to create a
culturally-responsive curriculum for Latina, African American, and Native
American girls who have been excluded by approaches that separate technical
skill and social interaction. The knowledge produced by this project related to
the use and benefits of social programmable robots has the potential to impact
the many after-school and weekend programs that attempt to engage learners in
STEM ideas using programmable robot curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
robot, named Cozmo, will be programmed using a visual programming language and
will convey emotion with facial expressions, sounds, and movements. Middle
school girls will engage in programming activities, collaborative reflection,
and interact with college women mentors trained to facilitate the course. The
project will investigate whether the socially expressive Cozmo improves computer
science outcomes such as attitudes, self-efficacy, and knowledge among the
middle school female participants differently than the non-social version. The
project will also investigate whether adding rapport-building dialogue to Cozmo
enhances these outcomes (e.g., when a learner succeeds in getting Cozmo to move,
Cozmo can celebrate, saying "I can move! You're amazing!"). These questions will
be examined research conducted with participants in multi-session after-school
courses facilitated by Girl Scout troops in Arizona. The project will
disseminate project research and resources widely by sharing research findings
in educational and learning science journals; creating a website with open
source code for programming social robots; and making project curriculum and
related guidelines available to Girl Scouts and other educational
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.