* 1935393
* I-Corps: Microalgae Building Enclosures
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Fan Lu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
building energy efficiency. This technology enables conventional building
enclosures to integrate biological techniques to promote building sustainability
and improve air quality. The project is configured to maximize daylighting
penetration, thereby reducing the artificial lighting load. The technology
provides natural ventilation and removal of carbon dioxide from the air, which
can reduce the operation of active ventilation equipment, improving air quality
in the building. The project can provide effective insulation and the dynamic
shading efficacy can minimize year-round energy transfer between outdoor and
indoor spaces, thus reducing energy consumption by heating and air conditioning
equipment. This technology can be applied and transferred to different building
sectors in various building locations, such as commercial buildings, residential
buildings, and industry facilities.

This I-Corps project integrates a photobioreactor within a building enclosure
system that utilizes microalgae to use light energy to convert water and carbon
dioxide into biomass by photosynthesis. The outcomes of this technology include
production of both biomass and heat. The renewable fuel stocks (biomass or
biofuel) generated by the system can offset building energy consumption, and the
heat energy from the photobioreactor could be used to cover the heat demand of
the building for space heating and hot water. The project could also be utilized
as a cost effective on-site wastewater treatment system. The current prototype
has two major components: 1) a photobioreactor integrated with a vision-glazed
panel attached to metal frames, and 2) a microalgae-growing apparatus and
mechanical system housed in metal frames. The photobioreactor is configured to
encourage microalgae growth in a nutrient-rich liquid, while the vision-glazed
panel allows daylighting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.