* 1935490
* EAGER: Constraining the Y-axis: Towards Quantitative Constraints for Precipitation and Temperature Using Speleothem Isotope and Trace Element Data
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Yemane Asmerom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 81,517.00

This project uses funds, under the auspices of the EArly Concept Grant For
Exploratory Research (EAGER) program, to focus on ways to take advantage of
recent advances in mass spectrometry and data analysis in order to produce
quantitative measures of temperature and precipitation from the paleoclimate
record.

An initial analytical finding suggests that the 88Strontium/86Strontium ratio in
carbonates is sensitive to changes in temperature. This ideal relationship has
been found to be complicated by limited experimental data that suggest that
other factors, such as growth kinetics may play a role in this value. The
researcher made some initial measurements using high temperature and low
temperature carbonates and the data are encouraging to the extent that there
seems to be a strong relationship between 88Strontium/86Strontium and
temperature. There is no data on hand, however, to convincingly demonstrate
temperature dependence in the range of temperature relevant for paleoclimate.

Recent advances in thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) coupled with the
"double spike" method could allow enough accuracy and precision to test the
idea. In addition, stalagmites from Fort Stanton Cave that grew through the full
climate swings that took place from the Last Glacial to the Early Holocene are
ideal for analysis and are in-hand. The Strontium isotopic work will be
attempted in a laboratory that houses a new generation of amplifier that would
make it possible to obtain very accurate and precise 88Strontium/86Strontium
ratios, sufficient to resolve potential changes in temperature at a scale
relevant for paleoclimate. The researcher will also work on the design of a
sample chamber that can accommodate long stalagmite samples.

Another aspect of the project that holds promise is the combined technical
achievements in high-throughput and high-quality elemental data using newer
excimer lasers coupled to inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)
instruments and new ways to look at data using machine learning. Initial results
by the researcher show that some trace elements, especially alkali and alkali-
earth elements, may coherently vary with stable isotopes, thus providing the
multidimensional data needed for machine learning applications.

The activities are scientifically important and fit well into the potentially
transformative, high-risk but potential high payoff research attributes of the
EAGER program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.