* 1935089
* DnaA-mediated loading of the DnaB-DnaC complex in replication initiation in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jon Kaguni, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 820,000.00

DnaA-mediated loading of the DnaB-DnaC complex in replication initiation in
Escherichia coli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacting our daily lives in a multitude
of ways, some bacterial species are well known to imperil health, but others
play critical beneficial roles. Well-known examples are found in the dairy
products industry, the growth of food crops by aiding in nitrogen fixation, and
the treatment of municipal wastewater. On an individual level, the species of
bacteria and their relative abundance determine a person's microbiome, which
varies with age and health. However, fundamental gaps in our understanding of
how bacteria duplicate their chromosomes, which is directly correlated with cell
growth, limit our ability to manipulate them to improve human health,
agriculture, and also the water quality of our environment. To gain insight into
the fundamental cellular processes of bacterial DNA replication and its
regulation, this project synergizes the unique but complementary skills of three
laboratories. The work focuses on the crucial processes required at the stage of
initiation of DNA replication in the model organism, Escherichia coli. Students
at the graduate and undergraduate level, and a postdoc, including those in
underrepresented groups, will receive interdisciplinary research training by
participating in the work. Project participants will share the findings with
non-scientists through presentations and workshops, and will inform them about
how the research contributes to our understanding of DNA replication in free-
living organisms to benefit mankind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
the specific step of helicase loading at the stage of replication initiation.
Studies of the helicase loading process in E. coli show that domain 1 of DnaA is
required to load DnaB complexed to DnaC at the E. coli replication origin.
Molecular analysis of a nucleoprotein complex formed at a DnaA box, which may be
analogous with a sub-complex formed at bacterial replication origins, suggests a
conserved mechanism of helicase loading. The research tests this model. Using
the experimental approaches of cryo-electron microscopy and hydrogen/deuterium
exchange analysis combined with biochemical and genetic methods, a high-
resolution structure of a nucleoprotein complex at the replication initiation
stage that contains DnaA, DnaB and DnaC assembled at a DnaA box sequence will be
obtained. The study will address critical questions about the mechanism of
replication initiation. Specifically, how does DnaA direct the loading of DnaB
complexed to DnaC at a specific site in DNA? Does DnaC play a direct role in
helicase loading? Is the conformation of each DnaB protomer suitable for
interaction with primase? The findings may explain how one of the two helicases
loads at a replication origin in other bacteria. At present, this process is
poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.