* 1935816
* Collaborative Research: Mercury Dynamics from the Holocene to the Anthropocene: Tracking Aleutian Mercury in Ocean Species important to Native Alaskan Diets
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Nicole Misarti, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 03/31/2025
* USD 2,389,066.00

Mercury is one of the top 10 contaminants of concern for human health. The
global processes that concentrate mercury in the Polar regions make coastal
Arctic communities especially vulnerable to the effects of mercury
contamination. Pacific cod, Northern fur seals, and Steller sea lions are marine
species important to Alaskan coastal communities. These species are critical for
subsistence, cultural, and commercial purposes. Due to their vital roles as
predator and prey in the Aleutian food web, these three species are considered
Ecosystem Sentinels. This study provides new information about patterns and
potential sources of mercury pre- and post-industrial revolution. It also has
critical implications for Indigenous peoples’ traditional food ways and the
economic well-being of communities in the Aleutian Region. Importantly, mercury
contamination also has global economic implications for the region’s commercial
cod fishery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The historical dynamics of mercury in top
predators across the Aleutian Islands provides the basis for understanding
contaminant progression across the Arctic. This research evaluates hypotheses
regarding natural and anthropogenic sources of mercury contamination and the
timing of that contamination over the past three millennia. This project uses
modern, historical, and archaeological bone to examine changes in mercury
concentrations and trophic position in these marine species over the last 3000
years in three Ecosystem Sentinels. This sampling method clarifies the timing
and sources of mercury dynamics in the Aleutians. This project supports graduate
and undergraduate students, including students from Native and Rural
communities. Community outreach includes fixed and traveling museum exhibits
developed for rural Alaska communities and education events for elementary, high
school, and community members that increases science literacy in environmental
contaminants and the health benefits of traditional
foods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.