* 1935507
* IIBR Multidisciplinary: Locating and counting terrestrial wildlife with an open source, automated acoustic survey platform
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Justin Kitzes, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 643,272.00

An award is made to the University of Pittsburgh to develop an automated
acoustic platform for locating and counting terrestrial wildlife. Accurate
estimates of wildlife populations are central to research on the effects of
global change on biodiversity. Historically, population-level data has been
time-consuming and difficult to collect, limiting the number of species and
habitats that can be evaluated. Acoustic recorders have the potential to
inexpensively gather large-scale data on sound-producing species, including
birds, bats, amphibians, and insects. However, most current acoustic surveys are
only able to detect the presence or absence of a species and cannot count
individual organisms in order to estimate population sizes. This award will
support the initial development of an automated, open source acoustic platform
to survey terrestrial wildlife populations, with the goal of gathering data at
larger scales and with better accuracy than human observers. It will also
support the training of at least two graduate students and an educational
project that targets undergraduate STEM educator professional development at the
interface of biology and data science. The creation of this platform and its
release under open source licenses will enable professional ecologists, citizen
scientists, and large biodiversity monitoring programs to better detect declines
in species populations over time, track shifts in species distributions due to
climate change, understand the interacting drivers of biodiversity changes,
predict future extinction risks, and develop conservation strategies to protect
threatened species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acoustic survey platform will use
GPS time-synchronized recorders to localize sounds in coordinate space. These
sound locations will then be used to distinguish and count individual organisms
within species. Although applicable to a wide variety of species, the platform
will be initially designed for breeding songbirds of the eastern United States.
The specific objectives of the award, involving both hardware and software
development, include (1) designing an open source, inexpensive field recorder
that can collect time-synchronized recordings, (2) developing and training an
object-detecting convolutional neural network to identify the boundaries of
distinct bird songs in time and frequency, (3) creating a detection-informed
time difference of arrival algorithm that localizes each identified bird song in
coordinate space and uses this data to count individual birds within species,
and (4) completing performance and user testing to evaluate the integrated
hardware and software platform. The platform will be evaluated specifically on
its ability to estimate breeding bird populations more accurately and precisely
than human observers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.