* 1935961
* Collaborative Research: Workshop: Engaging students in science for international decision making: Colorado, October 2019/ Chile, December 2019
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Elisabeth Gilmore, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2021
* USD 33,790.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The intersection of environmental sciences and culture is a
core element of environmental sustainability. Understanding the geographical
context of a particular society also provides insights into that society's
position on international borders and cross border issues such as large-scale
environmental issues. Engaging students in viewing science through a societal
and multicultural lens is a critical part of workforce development and more
specifically, important in creating student leaders in global environmental
science. This workshop will help address needed approaches for communication
upskilling and generate opportunities for students to work in multicultural and
multi-institutional teams with an eye towards broadening their views on the
application of environmental science to local communities and cultures.
Presenting research in an international context also provides students with
cross-cultural experiences as they move into professional
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;Communicating science to decision
makers is a critical part of preparing graduate students and early career
researchers. This proposal outlines a unique learning experience for students,
and particularly students interested in multicultural perspectives on global
environmental issues with a background in environmental science and are
interested in the intersection of environmental science and decision-making.
While there is strong interest in experiential and multidisciplinary learning,
it is more difficult to institute in practice for environmental research in
international negotiations due to lack of suitable opportunities, especially for
students from smaller institutions or without the economic means to travel to
international settings. The proposed workshop focuses on: (1) building a sense
of community for diverse students and others in advance of international
professional experiences; (2) providing a platform for students to actively
participate through their presentations to a global audience on environmental
issues; (3) generating student-led posters and presentations at professional
societies such as American Geological Union (AGU) and Ecological Society of
America (ESA) as part of the student professional development; and (4) providing
a social cohort and shared experience for diversity and first-generation
students to experience international professional meetings. Importantly,
workshop will address a common issue among institutions that students attending
international science meetings are ill-prepared to grasp the complexity of fast-
paced negotiations. Students will benefit greatly from advanced guidance and
shared experiences through multi-institutional teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.