* 1935840
* International Council for Exploration of the Sea: Travel Support for Academic Participants, 2019-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Michael Neubert, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2024
* USD 317,716.00

The International Council for Exploration of the Sea (ICES) was founded in 1902.
It is a prominent intergovernmental organization that conducts science and
provides management advice on marine resources in the North Atlantic and
neighboring seas. The United States has been a member of ICES since 1912. The US
role in ICES has become more important as global concerns related to
overfishing, effects of climate change, loss of biodiversity, ocean
acidification, harmful algal blooms, and effects of aquaculture on ecosystems
have become international in scale and requiring coordinated research programs.
Annual Science Conference, its Working Groups and Workshops, Symposia, Theme
Sessions, and Training Programs. Applications by young and established
scientists will be considered to assure strong representation by the U.S.
academic community in ICES activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support is provided
for U.S. academic scientists to participate ICES activities. ICES is the leading
intergovernmental organization conducting and coordinating marine science in the
North Atlantic region. ICES is a network of more than 5,000 scientists from over
700 marine institutes in 20-member countries. Its mission is to advance and
share scientific understanding of marine ecosystems and the services they
provide and to use this knowledge to generate state-of-the-art advice for
meeting conservation, management, and sustainability goals. Their work focuses
on the North Atlantic, but also includes the Arctic, Mediterranean Sea and the
Black Sea. The participation of U.S. academic scientists in ICES activities will
advance our ability to develop and harness new techniques and technologies for
observing marine ecosystems; and advance our understanding of their structure,
function, and dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.