* 1935921
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Clark Barrett, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

Formal Methods in Computer Aided Design (FMCAD) 2019 is the ninteenth in a
series of conferences on the theory and applications of formal methods in
hardware and system verification. It provides a leading forum to researchers in
academia and industry for presenting and discussing ground-breaking methods,
technologies, theoretical results, and tools for reasoning formally about
computing systems. This grant will help support conference travel for up to 15
students enrolled in US institutions to attend FMCAD in San Jose, California
October 23-25th 2019. The students will get the opportunity to present at the
Student Forum, which is a platform for graduate students at any career stage to
introduce their research to the wider Formal Methods community, and solicit
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formal methods is being rapidly deployed in a
variety of areas both in academic research as well as in industrial systems.
Thus the broader significance and importance includes fostering the next
generation of researchers in this research area, as well as providing
international experiences to build a globally-aware workforce. In particular,
students will have the opportunity to present at the Student Forum, learn state-
of-the-art methodologies, be exposed to novel techniques, and interact with
senior researchers in their areas of expertise. The organizers will give
priority to students from under-represented groups and from small universities
without a formal methods program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.