* 1935839
* Network-scale streamflow intermittence controls on dissolved organic carbon concentrations and processes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Rebecca Hale, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,999.00

Streams are important in the cycling of carbon. Almost half of the carbon in
watersheds enter streams and rivers where it is converted to a carbon gas or
transported downstream. Understanding of these processes come largely from
studying continually flowing streams and rivers. Nearly 60% of streams in the
United States are intermittent or ephemeral, and all stream and river networks
have intermittent streamflow in their contributing networks. Yet little is known
about the role that these periodically dry streams play in the processing and
movement of carbon through the stream network. This award will address the
question of how and when do spatial and temporal patterns of intermittence
affect carbon concentrations and characteristics. The researchers will explore
flow intermittence effects on dissolved organic carbon and the relative
influence of legacy effects of drying during conditions when instream processes
control dissolved organic carbon (e.g., growing season) and via connectivity to
terrestrial sources during conditions when dissolved organic carbon is typically
controlled by flow (e.g., high flows). The broader impacts include training of
students, working with local watershed managers, coordinating with research
networks, and producing a museum exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network scale
approaches to understanding stream carbon cycling often make assumptions that
are not appropriate for intermittent networks (e.g., homogeneous instream
processing rates), and continental and global assessments of stream carbon
cycling ignore the role of these streams, potentially missing a major component
of the global carbon cycle. This award will transform approaches to thinking
about streamflow intermittence and its effects on carbon cycling and transport
by integrating network thinking and intermittency effects on biogeochemistry.
This award will develop the conceptual and empirical basis for understanding
when, where, and how streamflow intermittence affects instream process rates,
connectivity to upstream carbon sources, and carbon concentrations and export.
The research has two specific aims: Aim 1: Assess spatial and temporal effects
of streamflow intermittence on spatial patterns of dissolved organic carbon.
This will be accomplished through combining spatially extensive continuous flow
presence/absence monitoring with detailed synoptic characterization of dissolved
organic carbon concentrations and characteristics across an intermittent stream
network. Aim 2: Assess how and when intermittence affects instream process rates
and instream process controls on dissolved organic carbon concentrations. The
researchers will use high-frequency monitoring of streamflow, dissolved organic
carbon concentrations, and instream metabolism. The research will lay the
groundwork for integrating heterogeneity into network models of stream carbon
cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.