* 1935321
* RCN: Community-based educational infrastructure for numerical simulation in the Earth Sciences: a reactive transport use case
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Katharine Maher, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,823.00

Across the physical sciences, many systems manifest as the result of a coupled
and codependent set of chemical, mechanical and biological processes which are
too complex to be solved without the assistance of numerical modeling
techniques. Now more than ever, the accurate prediction of physiochemical
processes such as those dictating the health of soil, the growth of crops and
the quality of water is paramount to sustaining our increasing global
population. Fortunately, modern advancements in computational capability are
extraordinary, and recent transitions to more open-source computing platforms
mean that the next decade of research will develop, employ and evaluate models
faster than ever before. Thus, enhancing model literacy across all career stages
is critical. Such training may indeed stand as a critical limiting step in our
ability to harness the latest technological advances to address societally
relevant problems, ranging from resource sustainability to the discovery of new
materials. The present RCN will use the geosciences as a test bed for developing
a framework for open-loop learning: the idea that education can and should be a
continuous process rather than the result of having attended a University or a
topical short course. In order to support a continuous educational platform for
the use, development and stewardship of models, proponents will create a novel,
open framework consisting of Modeling Abilities and Rubrics (MAR). The abilities
and the associated rubrics will allow individuals to match and leverage
resources afforded by their home institutions, those available through on-line
learning and those provided by community efforts, to strengthen and expand their
particular skill set and knowledge level. In addition to accelerating the
adoption and use of geoscience models, the platform proponents will create can
be widely generalized by other communities in the physical sciences that rely on
numerical models and the associated scientific workflows to foster model
literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical Reactive Transport Models (RTMs) have
become a key tool for advancing knowledge across a broad swath of the
geosciences, from early diagenesis and continental weathering to contaminant
fate and transport and nuclear waste storage. However, the early developers of
such software have been few in comparison to the broad variety of applications
and interested users, such that educational opportunities for students are
unfortunately rare. This disparity also means that it is difficult for the
existing community of users to stay abreast of the rapid advances in both
computational approaches and workflows. To address these needs, the objective of
this project is to develop a community-based educational model to enable the
geoscience community to embed Reactive Transport Models (RTMs) in their
scientific and educational workflows. This effort spans universities and
national laboratories, all of whom are motivated to develop an integrated
training platform to address a growing gap between model capabilities and the
user base who can apply them. To accomplish this, proponents will serve as a
platform for training and as a repository and community resource for new
advancements in model frameworks. This will be accomplished through a series of
activities: (1) development of an RTM-Hub that will collect and meaningfully
organize materials and opportunities and present an abilities-based pedagogical
framework to support an open-loop educational model, (2) development of a novel
framework outlining the Modeling Abilities and Rubrics (MAR) to serve as a
roadmap for personalized education, (3) enhance the educational infrastructure
by leveraging existing and newly developed on-line materials, as well as a
curriculum that is common across most universities, and (4) organize and foster
a self-sustaining summer RTM Institute. This RCN proposal is specifically
intended to change the user-software landscape by creating a community-based and
flexible education framework that is designed to enable to grow the educational
platform beyond what one could otherwise achieve individually, or even as a
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.