* 1935248
* Next Generation Colloidal Origami: Assembly of Directionally-Interacting Microcubes
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 03/31/2024
* USD 449,000.00

This project involves the assembly of colloidal particles and aims to expand
fundamental understanding in the making of reconfigurable and active "colloidal
origami" structures. The team will establish the principles underlying the
magnetic-field-driven assembly of microscopic cube-shaped units whose sequence
encodes their function, capability and utility. The scientific knowledge gained
could enable future fabrication of soft, shape-changing and stimuli-responsive
materials based on origami particle networks. The broader fundamental
understanding of these emerging active systems will make possible the design of
new materials that could find application in microrobotic manipulators, soft
actuators, devices for harvesting and redirecting energy on the microscale, and
biomedical applications such as magnetically-stimulated bioscaffolds. The
project will also assist in educating a new generation of undergraduate and
graduate students in multidisciplinary topics ranging from classical chemical
engineering to the emerging areas of active and reconfigurable materials. The
research team's high school and community outreach activities will be enhanced
through exciting hands-on demonstrations with visually-attractive models of
magnetic microbots and origami. The broad range of educational and outreach
activities will be aimed towards middle and high school students, undergraduates
with diverse backgrounds and graduate students, especially those from
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance fundamental science by establishing the principles that govern how a new
class of engineered materials - magnetically-polarizable, cube-shaped
microparticles - interact, assemble, reconfigure and propel in response to
external magnetic and electric fields. The microscale metallo-dielectric units
that will be assembled possess a unique combination of exciting features: they
can (1) interact in a directionally-specific and controlled way, (2) store
energy from a magnetic field, (3) release magnetic energy through re-
configuration, and (4) use external electric energy as a source of self-
propulsion, making them "active" particles. A combination of experiment and
modeling of the assembly processes will make it possible to understand and
control the formation of micro-origami components for novel smart materials and
gels with on-demand reversible phase transitions. The first objective of the
project is to establish the fundamental principles of interaction-driven
assembly for two classes of microcubes. The team will investigate the types of
phases formed, their structures, connectivity, and ability to re-configure on
demand. The second objective is to explore how adding particle motility modifies
the structure and properties of the assembled phases. The hypothesis is that the
dynamic motility of the active particles could be used to produce new types of
highly interconnected structures. The third objective is to embed the responsive
and reconfigurable "origami" structures into soft matter media, thereby
demonstrating new field-responsive materials with unusual properties that can be
useful for real-world applications. The project will assist in the
multidisciplinary education efforts of the researchers and will enhance their
outreach activities by developing of hands-on demonstration
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.