* 1935767
* Improvement of Modeling Predictions in Friction Stir Welding by More Accurate Measurement of Heat Transfer Between Tooling and Workpiece
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Troy Munro, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 12/31/2023
* USD 412,402.00

Friction stir welding is a solid-state joining method that is finding increased
application in joining aluminum alloys that are very difficult to join by
conventional fusion welding processes. Industrial sectors that will directly
benefit from better quality welded assemblies include core American industries
such as aerospace, light rail, marine, and automotive. However, most friction
stir welding development is done by experimental trial-and-error, limiting its
impact, and slowing its introduction into potential weight-saving applications.
Numerical simulation of friction stir welding began about 20 years ago, with
advances made in predicting key process conditions (welding temperatures,
material flow) and mechanical joint properties. Unfortunately, the predictive
value of these models is limited because order of magnitude variations exist in
reported friction and heat transfer coefficient model input values. This
research aims to utilize thermal wave techniques to measure heat transfer
coefficients more accurately than previously achievable. A better understanding
and measurement of heat transfer, leading to improvements in modeling
predictions, will speed development of friction stir welding, enabling the
production of lighter vehicle structures, safer pressure vessels, and more
durable nuclear waste canisters, among others. If successful, the technique can
also be applied to conventional machining processes where prior thermal
measurement efforts with thermocouples have been indirect and approximate at
best. In addition to the technical aspects, this project will engage graduate
and undergraduates in research and will provide them with opportunities to
interact with industrial users, thus increasing their workforce preparedness.
Outreach activities are aimed at the university’s Women in Engineering group, a
local technical college’s welding program, and local high school agriculture and
technology teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this work is
to determine the feasibility of utilizing thermal waves to measure heat transfer
coefficients under dynamic processing conditions. Thermal waves are temperature
variations in a material that are created by modulating the intensity of an
incident laser heat source and are measured as a modulated change in the optical
reflectance of the polished surface of the tool (or baseplate). In this system,
the waves penetrate from inside the tool into the workpiece, and the magnitude
of the thermal resistance between the two parts changes the measured amplitude
and phase of the thermal wave. Heat transfer coefficient values will be obtained
by fitting the resulting phase to a multi-layered thermal quadrupole model. To
verify this novel metrology technique, a dual fiber optic probe will be designed
and placed inside the tool and baseplate to create and detect thermal waves
during the welding process. The ability of the probe to accurately measure heat
transfer coefficients will be verified by static compression tests between discs
of H13 steel and aluminum alloys. The measured values will also be compared to
well-established analytical models that predict thermal contact resistances of
materials with known surface roughness values and static contact pressures. The
measured parameters will then be used as inputs in friction stir welding finite
element models to demonstrate how improved input parameter values can advance
the predictions of loads, temperatures, and material flow for a range of
conditions and tool designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.