* 1935233
* I-Corps: Sterile Connection Interface Technology
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Ibrahim Yekinni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
improvement of sterility in industrial scenarios where fluids are transferred
between tubing. Possible application areas include food and beverage
manufacturing, pharmaceutical manufacturing, and healthcare settings involving
procedures like peritoneal dialysis, colostomy, or central catheterization.
Specifically with peritoneal dialysis for end stage renal disease, this
technology will help to reduce the risk of peritonitis which is a major barrier
to the more widespread adoption of this dialysis modality. The American
healthcare system could save between $7 - $10 billion annually if all end stage
renal disease patients utilized this dialysis method. Beyond dialysis in end
stage renal disease, the device will also reduce the amount of antibiotics given
for empirical infection treatment and will help in the fight towards prevention
of antibiotic resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further
develops a connection interface technology that allows sterile connection of
tubing, requiring limited handling. By utilizing magnetic attractive forces,
capped tubes can be uncapped, connected, disconnected and recapped away from
possible contamination through touch, respiratory droplets or environmental
contaminants. While most connection interfaces for sterile fluid transfer focus
on modifying the tubing being connected to prevent contamination, this
technology focuses on the environment where connection occurs instead. It
provides a sterile environment through the enclosure and maintains sterility
with physical barriers and by replacing the need for human manipulation with
magnetically controlled movements. This limits handling and subsequently reduces
the likelihood of contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.