* 1935792
* Isolation and Identification of Heterogeneous Circulating Tumor Cells Using a Microchip with Hyperuniform Patterns
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Wei Li, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 01/31/2024
* USD 431,999.00

Cancer metastasis, the leading cause of cancer-related death, involves the
spreading of malignant tumor cells from the primary tumor to form tumors in
other organs. Counting circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in blood can measure
cancer progression and evaluate the effectiveness of a cancer treatment.
However, CTCs are highly diversified and only specific CTC subtypes are
responsible for cancer metastasis, while current CTC-counting technologies do
not distinguish between subpopulations. In this project, CTC subpopulations will
be isolated and identified using a microchip containing novel structures
(arrangements of posts with different spacings and diameters) that can control
local flow patterns. The different flow patterns enable the capture of subtypes
in different chip locations. This chip will permit CTCs to be analyzed where
they are captured to ensure that the analyses reflect the true characteristics
of these cells. Transformative knowledge obtained from this work will guide
application of CTC technologies in assisting cancer diagnosis, predicting tumor
progression, and monitoring therapeutic efficacy. If successful, the approach
can be adapted to similarly separate subpopulations of immune cells or stem
cells for curing cancers or other diseases. The proposed education and outreach
plan will enhance the Biomedical Engineering curriculum and program at TTU and
introduce undergraduate and graduate students to modern bioengineering
techniques. Outreach activities will coordinate with existing TTU programs for
junior-high and high school girls and are armed at sparking their interest in
science and engineering. In addition, since TTU is a Hispanic Serving
Institution, efforts will be made to include more underrepresented minorities
into the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand
the metastatic potential of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) through label-free
fractionation and profiling of CTC subpopulations. A microchip with hyperuniform
structure will be used to isolate, in-situ identify, and selectively separate
CTCs. Hyperuniformity (HU) is an emerging concept of a packing pattern that
contains local heterogeneity or randomness and global regularity or homogeneity.
The concept of hyperuniformity will be integrated into affinity-based
microfluidic devices for CTC isolation. Due to the controlled differences in
local flow patterns induced by the hyperuniform structure, cell arrest in
different locations on the microchip are expected to require different adhesive
strengths. Further, this adhesive strength is anticipated to be related to the
types and densities of surface markers on the captured CTCs and therefore, their
metastatic character. To maximize capture efficiency, microchip coatings will be
modified with tumor specific antibodies. Separation of individual CTC groups
will be achieved by selective degradation of biodegradable nanofilm between the
captured cells and the surface of the microposts. In order to correlate of CTC
heterogeneity profile with metastatic status, downstream characterization and
preliminary in vivo validation will be performed. The Research Plan is organized
under three objectives. The FiRST Objective is to design and characterize HU
structured microchip for CTC capture and analyze flow pattern and adhesion force
in the device. The local fluidic pattern will be studied through experiments and
modeling to determine the potential "pockets" where cancer cells accumulate and
to correlate the presence of a cell within a given pocket with a characteristic
surface adhesion. The SECOND Objective is to capture and identify subpopulations
of single cell and mixed cancer cell lines with variable expression of surface
markers using a HU microchip. A prototype microchip will be used for studying
subpopulations in PC3 (human prostate cancer line) with cells with different
sizes, culture conditions and cell cycles and for distinguishing subpopulations
in mixed prostate cancer cell lines (PC3, and LNCaP (human prostate
adenocarcinoma line)). The THIRD Objective is to develop selective release of
subpopulations of cancer cells from a HU microchip and perform downstream
characterization and preliminary in vivo validation. Selective release of a
captured cancer cell mixture (PC3 and LNCaP) on a HU microchip will be conducted
by degrading the nanoflm between cells and micropost surfaces and controlled
local mechanical agitation. To study the progression of metastasis, a primary
human prostrate cancel cell line (CP3TX), will be transplanted into the femurs
of mice and blood samples will be collected at different time points and run
through HU microchips to capture CTCs that can be used as metastasis indicators.
Indicator profiles are expected to correlate with prostate cancer
metastasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.