* 1935023
* SCISIPBIO: Collaborative: Financing the Biomedical Research Enterprise
* SBE,SMA
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Alexandra Graddy-Reed, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 11/30/2023
* USD 283,700.00

The scientific workforce is at the core of the biomedical industry and their
research provides the basis for public benefits in the identification of
diseases and in the discovery of treatments and cures. Realizing these life-
saving benefits involves investment and collaboration between pharmaceutical and
biotech companies, government funding agencies, and nonprofit organizations. Yet
each funder has varying objectives that reflect their changing priorities and
have the potential to affect the research conducted. While the federal
government has traditionally funded basic research, the National Institutes of
Health (NIH), the largest federal funder of academic biomedical research, has
increasingly emphasized translational research. Industry funding of academic
research, while remaining at steady levels, often comes with secrecy
requirements that have the potential to impede broad technological advances.
Further, both federal and industry funders have become more risk averse in their
investments, exacerbating a funding gap between invention and commercialization.
In response, philanthropic funding--donations and investments made by nonprofit
organizations such as private foundations--is increasing. Philanthropic funders
are experimenting with new models to catalyze collaborations across players at
different points in the drug development process. This project assesses how
these different funders and their varying strategies spur biomedical innovation
so that future investments can be optimized for society's benefit. In addition,
this project examines how a funder's strategy impacts the type of research
conducted between basic, translational, and applied, as well as how it affects a
scientist's career path. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding landscape of
biomedical research is changing with federal funding in flux, industry funding
growing more risk-averse, and nonprofit funding on the rise but employing
different terms of sponsored research agreements. To better understand the
differences in how these funding strategies are implemented and their subsequent
impact on innovation, this project builds an extensive scientist-level database
of biomedical projects and outcomes. The database uses university administrative
records to merge together individual data with sponsored-research proposals and
awards, as well as scientific outcomes. Outcomes include peer-reviewed
publication activity and technology transfer data on inventions, disclosures,
and spin-out firms. Using econometric analysis, these data are used to assess
how different funder's strategies impact biomedical innovation, the pipeline of
science studied by academics, and the impacts of these choices on the
scientists' careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.