* 1935555
* SiTS NSF-UKRI: Large Area Distributed Real Time Soil (DiRTS) Monitoring
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Eric Miller, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

This award was made through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a
collaborative partnership between the National Science Foundation, the United
States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(USDA NIFA) and the following United Kingdom Research and Innovation (UKRI)
research councils: 1) The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), 2) the
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), 3) the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), and the Science and
Technology Facilities Council (STFC). The research project is a collaboration
between Tufts University in the U.S. and the U.K. institutions of Keele
University and the University of Birmingham. Advancing our understanding of the
soil ecosystem, especially the dynamics of nitrogen-containing species, such as
ammonium and nitrate, is critical to improving soil fertility, increasing crop
productivity, managing greenhouse gas fluxes, and protecting the water and
environment. The researchers will development a next generation, integrated
sensing system for in-field, large area, high resolution monitoring of nitrogen
species, soil moisture, potassium, and salinity. The wireless Distributed Real
Time Soil (DiRTS) monitoring network is comprised of (1) soil sensor nodes that
mimic plant root-like water intake, (2) robust sensors for soil ammonium,
nitrate, potassium, moisture, and salinity levels (3) ultra-low power circuit
architectures for readout and digitization, (4) long range wireless data
communication, and (5) advanced algorithms for mapping of soil nitrogen,
potassium, salinity, and moisture levels. The platform will address fundamental
weaknesses in our understanding and control of nitrogen species in both
unmanaged (e.g. forest) and managed (e.g. agriculture) soils. Beyond the
technical impact, the proposed research effort will offer education and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students through new curricula.
Farmers and other soil management practitioners will benefit through publicly-
available training modules on the design and deployment of the wireless
Distributed Real Time Soil (DiRTS) monitoring platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DiRTS platform will make several notable scientific
contributions: (1) Continuous capillary-driven sampling of the target soil
nutrients mimicking the natural water intake by roots and transpiration through
aboveground plant parts; (2) Ion-sensitive electrodes utilizing embedded
desalination to improve selectivity, and utilizing redundancy and Bayesian
calibration to improve sensitivity; (3) Circuits for readout and digitization
operating below 0.5 V power supply and nanowatt level power dissipation; (4)
Event-driven sampling and wireless communication using probabilistic sensor
scheduling based on available power and data importance; and (5) State of the
art statistical machine learning-based approaches for generating high resolution
spatio-temporal chemical maps from irregularly sampled data. All technology will
be validated using in-situ measurements in an experimental forest. Specifically,
experiments will be performed to quantify nitrous oxide fluxes via a greenhouse
gas analyzer and mapping using the DiRTS sensor network. This research project
brings together experts in engineering, biogeosciences, and chemistry from the
U.S. and U.K., with strong backgrounds and expertise in relevant areas of
sensing, electronics, microfluidics, biogeochemistry, signal processing, and
sensor networks. The DiRTS platform will advance our understanding of soil
nitrogen dynamics and provide a method to help manage these dynamics for more
economic and environmentally-sustainable agriculture
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.