* 1935708
* Developing and Analyzing a Modular, Online Mechatronics Curriculum with Hands-on Laboratories to Prepare the Skilled Manufacturing Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Michael Mattson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,844,172.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers
and technicians in production engineering. It will do so by supporting the
design, development, and evaluation of online courses in mechatronics. The
project team includes educators at Oregon State University and Clackamas
Community College, as well as partnerships with industry and other
organizations. The overall goal is to develop a set of online course modules
that include in-person labs. Each module will build competence in a specific
mechatronics concept. The in-person, hands-on labs will use a "lab-in-a-box"
approach, which will give students the option of conducting labs at Oregon State
University or at community colleges close to their own location. The course
modules will be organized into four groupings that can be stacked within a
mechatronics curriculum. These groupings will enable students at two-year and
four-year institutions, as well as working professionals, to obtain
certifications in mechatronics. The project will investigate how modular courses
and remote labs influence student learning and success. The results of this
analysis will contribute to understanding best practices for delivering a high-
quality online education that meets the professional goals of students, as well
as the needs of mechatronics and manufacturing industries. The project will help
make mechatronics education more accessible to a wider range of students across
the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to improve
the preparation of current and prospective engineers and technicians in key
fields that are important for production engineering. The project will pursue
five objectives: 1) Identify and confirm essential content areas and learning
objectives in mechatronics; 2) Develop a modular online program for
certification or re-certification in current areas of mechatronics; 3) Expand
educational opportunities beyond professional certification for community
college and university students, and for open-education delivery; 4) Research
and evaluate student learning outcomes resulting from the modular course
delivery and remote laboratories; and 5) Distribute course materials,
performance analysis methods, and anonymized data for subsequent users. The
course modules will be structured and vertically integrated to offer a
Mechatronics Career Pathway Certificate or a Mechatronics Engineering
Certificate. Data about students' interaction with course components will be
collected and analyzed, and will include site navigation workflows, student
progress via predictive analytics, and learner engagement. Specific variables of
interest will include: time and rate of completion; overall achievement; learner
satisfaction; and employer satisfaction. Demographic variables will be explored
to identify for whom the proposed hybrid online approach works best. Student
performance in remote labs will be compared to that of students in traditional
labs, to determine whether the remote options are equivalent and viable
alternatives. The research will provide greater insights into how different
learners achieve success within the modularized curriculum. Project results will
be made available through faculty training, conference presentations, peer-
reviewed publications, and a one-day workshop to scale the program beyond the
state of Oregon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by NSF's EHR Core
Research: Production Engineering Education and Research (ECR: PEER) program,
which seeks to improve the education of future and current professionals in
production engineering. It also aims to study the effectiveness of the
innovative educational strategies adopted by these
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.