* 1935076
* CUE Ethics: Collaborative Research: Open Collaborative Experiential Learning (OCEL.AI): Bridging Digital Divides in Undergraduate Education of Data Science
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Alexis Petri, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 370,000.00

The University of Missouri-Kansas City, in partnership with Eastern Michigan
University, Essex County College, and University of Florida, proposes the Open
Collaborative Experiential Learning (OCEL.AI) project, an Open Knowledge Network
(OKN), that supports postsecondary instructors who teach underserved populations
Computer Science (CS)+Journalism and Strategic Communication within their
existing institutional structure. Recent advances in artificial intelligence
(AI), and specifically deep learning (DL) have improved the state-of-the-art
results of the data-driven approaches and tools in a wide range of domains. To
build the future talent ecosystem, there is an urgent need to create a qualified
data science workforce that can perform critical functions in a variety of
domains and aspects of human society, such as journalism, health communication,
and advertising. To address this need, the intelligent cloud-based collaborative
tool will provide to the AI and data-driven research and education communities
what GitHub and code repositories provide to the software engineering and open-
source communities. In this OKN, minority students will feel empowered and
motivated to study data science since they can share, reuse, reproduce, deploy,
discuss, learn, and apply data and AI models in real time. It is expected that
students taking these CS+Journalism and Strategic Communication courses will see
increased interest, self-efficacy, and motivation in studying data science among
both CS majors and non-majors - in particular among black, female, and Hispanic
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organized as a Networked Improvement Community,
the project will focus on three major tasks: 1) launching an online faculty
professional development program on OCEL.AI that has been developed by the
researcher's lab; 2) launching a student learning interface on OCEL.AI to offer
engaging learning experiences to CS+Journalism and Strategic Communication
students but also providing infrastructure that can be extended to CS+X programs
for a range of other Xs such as business and health care; and 3) sparking
critical thinking of data science ethics. To make data science more relevant to
minority students, the project will highlight minority experiences in the United
States by incorporating critical thinking around digital divides and data
science ethics into the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.