* 1935545
* The Inclusive Engineering Consortium Stakeholders' Workshop
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2020
* John Kelly, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2020
* USD 99,999.00

The Inclusive Engineering Consortium (IEC) is planning a workshop for its
stakeholders from Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and
Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) to be held at the Oregon Intel Campus in
July 2019. IEC represents a collection of 20+ Electrical and Computer
Engineering (ECE) programs whose overall vision is to be a collaboration of
Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) Working as One to Advance the ECE
Enterprise. It is organized as a virtual super department with broadly based
strengths in education, scholarship and service. Collectively, IEC can function
as the equal of any ECE program, accomplish more and have a greater impact on
its students, faculty and staff through access to resources and opportunities
not available individually. It is the earliest of days for IEC and essential
that all stakeholders fully participate in creating the organizational support
structure and initial activities necessary to realize IEC's grand vision. This
workshop will begin IEC's efforts to more fully engage MSIs in the US education
and research enterprise; graduate more and better prepared minority engineers;
increase efficiency and productivity at MSIs; and develop a sustainable and
effective infrastructure to support minority students, faculty and staff at all
universities. In time, the IEC group will grow and the model being developed can
be replicated and implemented for other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
the last 6 years, a collaboration of 13 HBCU ECE programs has been working
together to implement Experiment Centric Pedagogy (ECP) to improve the student
learning experience at all partner institutions. The lessons learned and best
practices of this effort encouraged the 13 partners to expand the scope of their
collaboration to address the full learning and working experience of students,
faculty and staff and to expand the group to include other minority serving
institutions with ECE and similar programs. Recently, the group has expanded to
include two additional HBCUs and two HSIs and is in discussions to add several
more. Key to the success of this collaboration is the development of a solid
virtual working community of practice through regular meetings including weekly
video conferencing and workshops usually held at one of the partner
institutions; online resource sharing, and highly collaborative
publication/dissemination of results, notably at ASEE conferences. While the
original 13 partners continue to solidify and sustain the impact of ECP on
improving the learning experiences of their students and the newly augmented
group is developing new technical research collaborations, a leadership working
group is exploring how to realize the most effective working infrastructure for
the evolving consortium. By identifying the primary barriers to future success,
it has become clear that a new support organization is necessary if MSI
collaborations, like ECP, are to work together as one. With the assistance of
the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads Association (ECEDHA),
the group has created a new Inclusive Engineering Consortium, consisting of a
core group of collaborators and a much larger group of affiliated members from
other universities, industry and professional societies. The first face-to-face
meeting of the IEC in July 2019 will be organized in coordination with the Intel
(IEC's first founding partner) HBCU Consortium Meeting. Planned sessions include
Broad Appeal Programs; Investment in Leaders/Future Leaders; Strategic
Connections; Infrastructure; and Building IEC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.