* 1935653
* Workshop: Leading Arctic Convergence Research with the Social and Behavioral Sciences: Irvine, CA - Fall 2019
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Holly Hapke, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2021
* USD 99,997.00

The goal of this project is to develop and execute a workshop that will enhance
capacity among natural, physical, engineering, and social scientists to develop
transdisciplinary, convergence research projects related to the Arctic that are
deeply engaged with social and behavioral science. The University of California,
Irvine convenes scholars from diverse STEM fields across the United States who
wish to undertake convergence research related to environmental change in the
Arctic as envisioned in NSF's Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) Big Idea. The
workshop offers training activities to enhance their capacity to do so in a
manner that deeply integrates the social and behavioral sciences and engages
local and indigenous communities in equitable collaborations for the co-
production of knowledge. In so doing, the project expands understanding of
interdisciplinary integration in convergence research in ways that will broadly
enhance convergence research theory and practice as it relates to the Arctic. An
intended outcome of the workshop will be an enhancement of capacity to prepare
social and behavioral science-led proposals that align with and robustly advance
the goals and objectives of NSF's NNA Big Idea. Participants includes scholars
who both have and have not previously conducted research in the Arctic. The
workshop focuses on stimulating research on the impact of the changing Arctic on
the rest of the globe outside the Arctic as well as on the impact of the
changing Arctic on people who live in the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing
body of literature points to the need for deep integration of the social,
natural/physical, and engineering sciences in research frameworks to address
increasingly complex, "wicked" problems associated with global environmental
change. Yet, such integration is often difficult to accomplish, and obstacles to
interdisciplinary integration in research remain. The proposed workshop
addresses three key objectives: 1) How to integrate social and behavioral
science theory and develop rigorous social science methodologies in Arctic
convergence research; 2) How to engage and work with local communities,
including indigenous communities, and integrate traditional/indigenous
ecological knowledge into Arctic environmental change research; 3) How to
incorporate best practices and processes for designing convergence research
frameworks in the planning and execution of Arctic research projects, including
strategies of cross-disciplinary knowledge integration, university-community
partnerships for co- production and utilization of knowledge, and
(cyber)research infrastructure needed to work with and integrate different kinds
of data and analysis. Project funds will support the onsite participation of
approximately 55 individuals, including up to 10 speakers/facilitators, and the
workshop sessions will be webcast via Zoom to facilitate the virtual
participation of others who may be unable to travel to Irvine. Workshop
proceedings will be recorded, and transcriptions will be made broadly available
along with a workshop report, and other resource materials generated via two
public digital platforms, the NSF Arctic Data Center and the Platform for
Experimental and Collaborative Ethnography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.