* 1935181
* Force Pathway to Synaptic Vesicle Clustering in Embryonic Fruit Fly Neuro Muscular Junctions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mei Shen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 09/30/2023
* USD 737,193.00

Memory and learning in animals are achieved by neurotransmission at neuron-
neuron or neuro-muscular junctions called synapses. These synapses are formed at
the end of long cable-like extensions of neurons, called axons. The axonal part
of the junction is called the pre-synaptic terminal. It hosts small (~50 nm)
vesicles containing neurotransmitters. Some of the vesicles are at the active
site close to the wall of the synapse, ready to release their contents. Others
are clustered within the synapse as a reserve pool. When the neuron fires, an
electric signal, known as the action potential, arrives at the synapse. Some of
the vesicles at the active site release their neurotransmitters and stimulate
the post synaptic terminal. Thus, a signal is transmitted. New vesicle from the
reserve pool join the active site. Clearly, to achieve neurotransmission,
neurons must cluster reserve-pool vesicles at the synapse against diffusion, and
yet provide them directed mobility to replace the released ones at the active
site. In spite of decades of research, the mechanism of this duality remains
elusive. This project attempts to resolve this paradox by linking a mechanical
property of the axon, namely its contractility or mechanical tension, with
vesicle clustering, dynamics and release. Prior work of the PI on embryonic
Drosophila (fruit fly) revealed that vesicle clustering at the neuromuscular
presynaptic terminal depends on mechanical tension of the axons. The findings of
this research will be disseminated to the broader audience by developing a short
drama with high school students, in collaboration with a drama teacher, to
represent neurotransmission -- with characters mimicking vesicles, ions, actin
and synapsin-I. The research will also be integrated with education through
involvement of undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in research,
exhibition modules at the local Children's Museum, and teaching biophysics to
high school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on the
hypothesis that axons of motor neurons forming neuro-muscular junctions in
embryonic flies have an contractile acto-myosin network along their entire
length, including the synapse. This force continuity results in a stable F-actin
architecture at the synapse. Ion sensitive adhesion proteins, e,g., synapsin I,
attach (glue) vesicles to synaptic F-actin, thus clustering and immobilizing
them against diffusion. During an action potential, synaptic Calcium ion
concentration increases, and the adhesion proteins release the vesicles. They
are then moved by motor proteins to and away from the active sites along the
F-actin fibers. Thus, synaptic F-actin architecture serves as a scaffold for
vesicles to cluster, as well as a double-lane highway for their directed
mobility. This hypothesis will be tested by studying the neuro-muscular junction
of embryonic Drosophila in three steps. First, to test whether acto-myosin
machinery is involved in contractile force generation along the entire length of
the axon including synapse. Second, to test whether there exists an F-actin
architecture at the synapse stabilized by the axonal contractile force, and
whether it serves as a scaffold for the vesicles to adhere, as well as a highway
for their transport. Finally, to test whether axonal force modulates
neurotransmission. Novel nano-mechanical force sensors, micro-fluidics, high
resolution microscopy (Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy, STORM),
nano-probe and cyclic voltammetry will be used to test the
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.