* 1935302
* Networks for CS Teacher Development: Building Robust Location Based Models of Teacher Learning and Community
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Tom McKlin, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,093,322.00

The State University of New York (SUNY) at Albany and the Computer Science
Teachers Association (CSTA) propose a project to build the capacity of local
CSTA chapters to create robust communities of teachers with increased sense of
professional identity as computer science (CS) teachers. Currently, CSTA
coordinates a network of over 70 local chapters in 39 states and Puerto Rico,
with requests to start new chapters arriving every quarter. The expectation is
that these chapters are teacher-led communities supporting their members'
professional development. In practice though, local chapter leadership often
struggles to create a vision for their work, leaving many chapters without
defined goals or a sense of ownership of their work, and many CS teachers
without a pathway to evidence-based ongoing professional learning. The goal of
this project is to provide local chapters with the support they need to create
robust communities that meet the professional needs of their members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create a "Chapter in a Box" toolkit for
defining chapter visions and goals, host an annual summit to develop volunteer
chapter leadership, nurture a professional learning community among local
chapter leadership, and provide support to local chapters in developing
evidence-based professional development that meets the needs of local teachers.
It will investigate two research questions. The first question focuses at the
chapter level: How do the CSTA activities support the chapters in building
capacity and ownership for their local chapter development? The second, two-part
question, focuses at the teacher level: What kind of professional identity do
CSTA teacher members bring to their CS teaching practice? and How does the local
CSTA chapter influence teachers' perceptions of their professional identity and
their use of evidence-based CS programs in the classroom? Outcomes of this
project will be measured through the growth of CSTA chapter capacity and CSTA
members' CS teacher professional identity, the implementation of evidence based
professional development programs in the chapter regions, and connections
between teachers of computer science and local CSforAll movements. The
improvements resulting from this project have the potential to reach tens of
thousands of CS teachers nationwide and to build our knowledge on how best to
support teachers as they switch into CS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.