* 1935462
* 2019 NSF Student Poster Competition at the ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (ASME-IMECE); Salt Lake City, Utah; November 8-14, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Po-Hao Huang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,930.00

This grant provides support for 40 students who are currently working with
Principal Investigators through NSF funding from the Directorate for Engineering
(ENG) or Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) programs to attend the
2019 ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (ASME-
IMECE) and participate in a student poster competition. The travel awardees will
be selected based on application including a brief resume, a one-page statement
of why they want to attend the conference and a statement of support from their
faculty advisor. Consideration in the selection process will be given to
inclusion of members of underrepresented groups, diversity of institutions that
the students represent, and diversity of programs within engineering. We have a
target representation of 50 percent female and minority awardees for travel
grants. This project also provides support for poster competition awards. The
competition is divided into the topics of (1) NSF-funded research
grants/programs and (2) Research Experience for Undergraduates (REUs). Both
topics will be held simultaneous at the same venue to encourage networking and
sharing of information by the participants. Awards will be presented to
recognize and rank the outstanding posters and presenters. Judging of the
posters will be made on-site. This award will benefit the nation through the
education of a skilled and diverse engineering workforce better prepared to
provide transformative solutions the challenges of their chosen
fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This participation support is expected to benefit
students' professional, scientific and technical development as they present
their NSF funded research projects to the broad Mechanical Engineering
community. Attendance at the conference will provide the students a wonderful
opportunity to learn about the engineering profession and state-of-the-art
research in their fields via access to technical and professional development
talks by domestic and international speakers. Students will enhance their
communication skills via lively discussions of their work with the top
researchers in their fields during the society-wide Poster Symposium. They will
also have an opportunity to attend many technical presentations, join the
keynote and plenary sessions featuring technological pioneers, and network with
potential mentors, colleagues, and employers. This interactive experience will
significantly broaden their education, increase their enthusiasm for their
research topic, acquaint them with expectations for scientific careers, and
expose them to new avenues for innovative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.