* 1935723
* INSPIRE: Engineering Sustainable Bio-adhesives from Algae for the Built Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 04/26/2019,11/30/2023
* Elham Fini, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2023
* USD 813,497.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the CMMI and CBET Divisions in the ENG
Directorate, OISE, and the Office of Integrative Activities. This INSPIRE
research studies the merits of using suitably balanced combinations of bio-mass
sources to produce construction bio-adhesive. The biomass sources to be used are
mostly algae cultivated in sewage and wastewater treatment plant facilities,
woody biomass, and animal manure. The project simultaneously integrates
environmental sustainability metrics into the bio-adhesive design process to
enable sustainable developments focusing on the built environment. Considering
the significant shortage of petroleum-based adhesives, the most accessible
market for such bio-adhesives is envisioned to be the built environment such as
building, roads and bridges. It should be noted that the price of petroleum-
based adhesives such as bitumen often used in the built environment has been
increasing dramatically within the last decade as its supplies have been
shrinking significantly. Accordingly, bio-adhesives which are being developed in
the EU and US could be a solution to reduce dependence of the construction
industry on petroleum-based adhesives such as bitumen. In addition, production
of bio-adhesives as proposed in this INSPIRE project can be a means of
sequestering carbon from bio-mass waste which will be otherwise released back to
the atmosphere as bio-mass decays. Therefore, in contrast to natural decay of
bio-mass which is typically considered to be carbon neutral, the bio-adhesive
process is carbon negative because more than 60% of carbon from bio-mass will be
trapped in the bio-adhesive. Bio-adhesives will be produced from an array of
molecular species found in bio-mass resources specially algae grown and
harvested in wastewater treatment plants while simultaneously integrating
environmental sustainability metrics as well as health and safety aspects. A
thermochemical liquefaction process will be used, followed by solvent
extraction, filtration and vacuum distillation to extract an array of molecular
structures from a suitably balanced biomass feedstock. Density functional theory
and molecular dynamics simulations along with multi-scale experimental
characterization will be used to inform synthesis and engineering of bio-
adhesive with desirable performance. Molecular level insights will provide in-
depth understanding of structure-property relationship to tailor bio-adhesives'
performance for the sustainable built environment while promoting bio-economy
and resource conservation.