* 1935947
* DarkSide-20k - URANIA Project
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Cristiano Galbiati, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

Gravitational effects that cannot be explained by visible matter are well-
documented, though their source remains unknown. A well-motivated explanation
for these observations is the existence of an as-yet-undiscovered elementary
Weakly Interacting Massive Particle (WIMP). The motion of galactic halo WIMPs
relative to a detector on Earth could result in WIMP-nucleus elastic collisions
detectable by a low-background, low-threshold detector capable of unambiguously
identifying a small number of nuclear recoils over the course of a very large
exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the DarkSide-20k (DS-20k)
detector, a liquid argon time projection chamber designed to achieve leading
sensitivity to high-mass (above 30 GeV/c2) WIMP dark matter, by providing
funding for the URANIA plant, in Cortez, CO, for the high-volume extraction of
low-radioactivity argon gas from an underground source (UAr). The funds will be
used for pieces of infrastructure that are the direct responsibility of the US
NSF-funded groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific broader impacts of the
project include the discovery of a novel, commercially viable helium source that
today supplies 15% of the US production and the production of hundreds of tonnes
of low-radioactivity UAr for DS-20k. The extraction facility could continue to
produce underground argon for other interested particle physics experiments that
require UAr to achieve their scientific objectives, as well as for other
technical uses including nuclear test ban verification and radiometric
dating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constructing DS-20k will require that large amounts
of UAr be procured in timely fashion. This will be accomplished by URANIA, an
argon extraction and purification plant capable of extracting 250 kg/day of UAr.
The URANIA plant itself is funded by the Italian Agency (INFN) and will be built
by a contracted vendor following specifications established by the URANIA
Project team. The preparation of the extraction facility site, as well as the
installation and commissioning of the plant, falls under the responsibility of
the NSF-supported groups and is funded by this award. These are the critical
components of the project that require the technical expertise of the U.S.
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.