* 1935548
* SitS NSF-UKRI: Rapid Deployment of Multi-Functional Modular Sensing Systems in the Soil
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* J. David Frost, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 799,995.00

Soil is a global resource that supports most of our urban infrastructure, acts
as a conduit for groundwater and is the dominant material in many of the world's
geohazards. Understanding the in-situ state of soil (stress level, stiffness,
strength, permeability) is essential to inform effective and efficient decisions
about how humans should interact with soil deposits. Most current geotechnical
measuring instruments involve vertical penetration of a probe into the soil to a
shallow depth (up to a few hundred meters). Usually, the probe records only one
type of data at a time (e.g. a displacement, a moisture content or a thermal
gradient), in a very localized area. Consequently, the ground models used in
decision-making rely on interpolation between relatively sporadic data points
and consider relevant parameters (mechanical, hydraulic, thermal) separately.
The Burrowing Robot with Integrated Sensing System (BRISS) builds on insight
gained in designing Cone Penetration Test modifications and the more recent
development of small prototype burrowing robots at the Georgia Institute of
Technology (GT). The research objectives are to: (i) design, build and deploy a
burrowing robotized sensor delivery system; (ii) sense mechanical and physical
signals during the burrowing process and use machine-learning to adapt the
burrowing process and the sensing strategy; (iii) interpret soil signals using
particulate mechanics, tribology, large deformation continuum mechanics models
and feature selection algorithms. The research group at GT, in collaboration
with the research group at Imperial College London (ICL) in the UK, will
collaborate to achieve the research objectives and to co-advise a cohort of
graduate students and post-doctoral researchers. The BRISS will achieve a
paradigm shift in soil exploration and site characterization. Both the sensor
modules and the propulsion sections of the BRISS will be stackable, so that
probes can be built up with different combinations of modules or the same
modules but in different configurations. The BRISS will be minimally wired, thus
the project findings will pave the way towards wireless, remotely controlled,
multi-directional subsurface sensing. Such technologies will ultimately enable
deep sediment characterization and extra-terrestrial exploration. The long-term
deployment of multi-sensing probes could be used to detect variations of soil
properties that are independent from localized probe stimuli, such as pH change
consequent to mining activities or pore pressure change consequent to repeated
droughts. The PIs will use GT and ICL institutional organizations to recruit
students from under-represented minorities. They will engage with the ALERT
Geomaterials network and GT Society of Women Engineers to attract female
students. The lead-PI will participate in outreach activities for promoting the
inclusion of the LGBTQ community in engineering and will facilitate Safe Space
training for all the project team members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Challenges
associated with obtaining undisturbed samples mean that probes that can measure
these properties in-situ are incredibly useful. Informed by recent prototyping
work at GT, the team will develop a novel multi-sensor system, BRISS, which will
incorporate several major advances: (a) the use of soft robot and micro-controls
to enable probes to navigate in any orientation in the subsurface; (b) the
ability of these probes to self-propel through the soil using peristaltic
motion; (c) the incorporation of multiple micro-sensors in these semi-autonomous
probes; and (d) the leveraging of machine learning algorithms into the data
analysis and soil model development. Recently developed experimental techniques
will be used to refine and optimize the propulsion mechanism; these include
novel textures, bio-inspired anchors, soil ablation mechanisms and self-
lubrication processes. Innovative sensor systems will be designed and evaluated
to optimize the set of measurements, with a particular focus on stress, stress
wave velocity and acoustic emissions. Novel deep reinforcement machine learning
algorithms will be used to refine the burrowing trajectory and adapt the
frequency at which in situ measures are taken. Feature selection algorithms will
be enhanced to handle large data sets for interpreting stress, pore pressure,
geophysical and acoustic signals. This project will also provide fundamental
understanding of the physical and mechanical response of dry and water-saturated
sand during the penetration of the self-propelled BRISS. For the first time,
multi-scale numerical models will decipher burrowing mechanics, by combining
discrete element models that will include peristaltic boundary conditions,
particle interaction and multi-scale tribological models that will shed light on
the robot/soil interface rheology, and large-deformation finite element hydro-
mechanical elasto-plastic models that will be applicable to predict soil
behavior at larger scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was awarded through
the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that
involves the United States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food
and Agriculture (USDA NIFA) and the following United Kingdom Research and
Innovation (UKRI) research councils: 1) The Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC), 2) the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC),
3) the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), and the
Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.