* 1935476
* I-Corps: Software-based approach enabling faster magnetic resonance imaging  scans
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Madhur Srivastava, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to reduce
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan-times and improve patient throughput,
which will be beneficial for patients as well as healthcare providers. MRI is
widely used as a clinical diagnostic tool. Over 30 million MRI scans are
conducted each year in the US. However, patients in need of MRI scans often face
long wait-times, a root cause being the per-patient scan-time which is a
fundamental bottleneck that limits daily throughput. This project develops a
software-based approach to reduce MRI scan-times. Shorter scan-times will
improve patient comfort. Improved throughput will increase accessibility, allow
patients to receive MRI scans in a timely manner with less wait-time, and
contribute to better healthcare outcomes. For healthcare providers and imaging
facilities, shorter scans and better throughput will increase operational
efficiency, revenue potential, as well as patient satisfaction. In addition to
application in MRI, this technology can potentially be adapted for deployment in
other applications that require robust signal denoising, such as video streaming
and oil and gas exploration.

This I-Corps project explores the commercial potential of a software-based
approach to reduce MRI scan-time and increase patient throughput. The technology
is leveraged to process MRI data in a more efficient way and can be integrated
with existing instrumentation without requiring any hardware modifications. In
MRI, image quality is dependent on the signal-to-noise ratio, which is governed
by the number of signal averages/acquisitions (number of times each datapoint is
measured). The presence of noise from tissue and the scanner requires repeated
measurements in order to cancel out the noise to yield a high-quality image. If
noise can be removed through signal processing instead of repeated measurements,
the scan-time can be reduced while maintaining image quality. Compared to
conventional signal processing methods such as time averaging, filtering, and
other denoising methods, the method developed here can process noisy signals
without the limitations of removing either too much or too little noise, thereby
minimizing the number of measurements needed to maintain image quality which
ultimately reduces the overall scan-time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.