* 1935324
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Control of Local Curvature and Buckling for Multifunctional Textile-Based Robots
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* C. Harnett, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project envisions a new class of soft robotics technology that will enable
new multifunctional soft robots with reconfigurable actuation and shapes. The
key to the proposed technology is the ability to change the mechanical
properties of a thin-walled structure by changing its local curvature. For
example, curving a flat sheet of paper along one direction greatly increases its
stiffness in the other two directions. Exploiting the coupling between curvature
and mechanical behavior in planar materials will enable the design, modeling,
and control of reconfigurable soft robots. This can be used to realize robot
arms with joints that can be created and configured at will to match desired
task dynamics and constraint geometries. Soft robotics technology has the
potential to transform the way our society utilizes and interacts with robots,
because soft robots are inherently safe for interaction with humans. This
project promotes the progress of science by advancing understanding of how to
utilize materials and geometry to create active, assistive, robotic devices.
Furthermore, the topics of this proposal are uniquely suited to outreach
activities for K-12 students. Parallel outreach activities will be run across
the collaborating sites to maximally inform the public and the nation?s youth
about this new type of soft robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop modeling, control, and design methods for a new class of robots formed
from soft planar materials and called Soft Curved Reconfigurable Anisotropic
Mechanisms (SCRAMs). These robots will be manufactured through planar
fabrication methods (sewing, lamination, and 3D printing) and local, embedded
actuators and sensors to realize soft, curved, reconfigurable, anisotropic
mechanisms for reconfigurable joints with controllable curvature. The
collaborative research plan features the following tasks: 1) identify geometric
and manufacturing representations that can unify element design &amp; will
enable modeling, system simulation, and control, 2) establish and study
canonical soft continuum elements, sensors, and actuators using experimental
techniques and finite element modeling to understand SCRAM mechanics and
dynamics towards a library of modular elements for building soft continuum
systems. The project will 3) formulate new modeling, simulation, and geometric
control methods for optimal control of SCRAM robots in multi-modal environments,
4) which will be validated on two SCRAM platforms to study issues in
manipulation and locomotion as well as to demonstrate the potential of SCRAM-
based soft-robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.