* 1935446
* Non-Hermitian nanophotonics for efficient thermophotovoltaic energy conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Gururaj Naik, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 316,000.00

Meeting the rising global energy need with clean and efficient energy systems is
one of the greatest technological challenges of our time. Efficient conversion
of heat and light to electricity is crucial in overcoming this challenge.
Thermophotovoltaics is a promising technique for efficiently converting heat to
electricity via light without any moving parts. The heat generated from
industrial processes, nuclear fission reaction, automobile exhaust or absorption
of sunlight results in thermal light radiating from hot surfaces. Photovoltaic
conversion of this thermal light to electricity as in solar cells is called
thermophotovoltaic conversion. The theoretical efficiency limit of
thermophotovoltaic systems can be as high as 80%, though experimental
demonstrations lie far below this number. The primary reason for low efficiency
is the broadband nature of thermal light radiating from hot surfaces. Squeezing
thermal light into a narrow band of frequencies is a challenging task especially
when operating at high temperatures. This project aims to develop novel
strategies to confine thermal light to a narrow band of frequencies and
demonstrate efficient conversion of heat to light. Successful implementation of
the project will result in discovering new tools to achieve extreme control on
the flow of light and heat, educate and train next-generation scientists, and
develop an efficient heat-to-electricity conversion technology for energy
generation and storage applications. Given that the on-grid industrial waste
heat alone is nearly 20% of the total industrial energy consumption, efficient
thermophotovoltaic systems can make a huge impact in meeting the clean energy
needs of the planet.&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Thermal radiation from hot
surfaces is typically broadband in nature and limit the overall efficiency of
thermophotovoltaic conversion. Confining thermal radiation to a narrow spectral
band is the key to this problem. Previous attempts have investigated various
nanophotonic principles to design narrowband thermal emitters or selective
emitters, though their performance is still inadequate. All nanostructured
optical materials degrade at high temperatures. Their optical losses
significantly increase with temperature and limit the maximum possible spectral
selectivity. Calculations show that a spectral contrast of at least 20 dB is
required for efficient thermophotovoltaic conversion. Such high contrast over
broad infrared wavelengths is not possible by conventional approach due to high
optical losses in the constituent materials. Here in this project, an unorthodox
approach using non-Hermitian physics or quantum optical description of resonant
emitters is adopted to design thermal emitters. Unlike the conventional
approach, non-Hermitian design exploits high optical losses in materials to
simultaneously achieve high contrast and high emissivity. Further, a quantum
optical description of the selective emitter allows its design as a system of
coupled multiple nanoscale resonators. Such an approach is a paradigm shift in
the design of selective emitters allowing novel many-body physical phenomena to
be observed in thermal emission. As a result, new design tools such as symmetry,
topology and internal phase of resonators present an unprecedented opportunity
to extreme-engineer thermal emitters. This project aims to investigate the
effect of these new design tools on the spatial and spectral properties of
thermal radiation, build selective emitters with high contrast, directionality,
and brightness, and demonstrate high-efficiency thermophotovoltaic
conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.