* 1935252
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Micron-scale Morphing Soft-Robots for Interfacing With Biological Systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Nicholas Abbott, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 10/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

Under this project, a multidisciplinary team of physicists, chemical engineers,
roboticists, and electrical engineers will create a new class of cell-sized
robots that incorporate on-board chemical sensors, photovoltaics, and electronic
logic. The robots will be powered by an external light source, where changes in
the color of the light can be used to trigger different sets of actions. The
robots will be fabricated as a flat sheet, using the same scalable processes
that are used to manufacture computer chips. Precisely designed cuts and
actuated hinges will enable the robot to stretch and bend into arbitrarily
shaped two-dimensional surfaces. The result will be a fully functional
autonomous robot, capable of moving and changing shape in response to external
stimuli, such as chemical gradients in the environment. Ultimately such robots
may be used to navigate through the body and interact with targeted tissues and
organs. The result may be new approaches for treatment of disease, or mitigation
of harmful bacterial biofilms. The project includes activities to broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research and advance engineering and
science education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This grant will support development of
micrometer-scale robotic metamaterial surfaces that can reversibly transform
into arbitrary three-dimensional shapes for microscale locomotion towards a soft
tissue analogue secreting biochemical signals, wrap around it and polymerize to
encapsulate the tissue analogue. The robot design is predicated on the idea that
controlling the local expansion or contraction of a surface makes possible the
transformation of a planar sheet into any two-dimensional surface. This design
principle will be achieved by lithographically fabricating a micrometer-scale
metamaterial sheet with negative Poisson ratio consisting of panels and
connecting actuating hinges. The negative Poisson ratio will enable the sheet to
locally expand, change its Gaussian curvature, and adopt a variety of shapes.
Mature fabrication technologies will be used to equip the panels with chemical
sensors and distributed control circuits that will control hinge actuation.
Collectively, the ability to process chemical signals into electronic actuation
and locomotion modes that allow the robot to move, wrap, and polymerize around
the chemical source will substantially expand the frontiers of soft
microrobotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.