* 1935892
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:DP): Consortium Proposal for CMB-S4 Design Development
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Julian Borrill, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 12/31/2023
* USD 5,850,551.00

The search for primordial gravitational waves as direct evidence for cosmic
Inflation is one of the most important goals of fundamental physics and
cosmology today. This goal has long been recognized as a top research priority
for the astrophysics community, as recommended by the NRC's "Quarks to the
Cosmos" report (2003), the Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey (2010), and
the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel (P5), Building for Discovery:
Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context (2014). The
cosmic microwave background (CMB) research is also selected as one of the
strategic priorities for Antarctic Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMB Stage
4 (CMB-S4) program represents a coming-together of almost the entire U.S.
community of CMB researchers. This program is built on decades of CMB
measurements from the ground, and it will be a major thrust of the CMB community
for the next two decades. CMB-S4 will use the technologies developed from the
considerable investment made in CMB science to date, extending them to far
larger scales, both to cross critical science thresholds in our understanding of
the Universe and to provide a powerful and unique millimeter-wave survey
covering 80% of the sky at high cadence over seven years to serve the worldwide
astronomical community in the era in which multi-wavelength and multi- messenger
astrophysics is a path to new understanding and
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support an Interim Project
Office (IPO) tasked with developing the CMB-S4 program through the MREFC-scale
"Preliminary Design Phase". The CMB-S4 "Strawperson Concept" was accepted by the
Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics Advisory Committee that advises NSF, DOE, and NASA.
The award's results will be reviewed by the joint NSF/DOE panel for readiness to
move forward to the equivalent of the "Final Design Phase" as an NSF/MREFC and
DOE/MIE project. CMB-S4 telescopes will be deployed at the South Pole Station
(Antarctica) and the Atacama Plateau (Chile). With its large increase in
sensitivity, CMB-S4 will transform understanding of the origin and evolution of
the Universe and the underlying physical laws that govern it. The CMB-S4 program
will cross critical thresholds in testing the theory of Inflation, determining
the number and total masses of neutrinos, constraining possible new light relic
particles, providing precise constraints on the nature of Dark Energy, and
testing General Relativity on large scales. This award addresses and advances
the science objectives and goals of the NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era
of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" program. This award is supported by the
Foundation-wide Mid-scale Research Infrastructure program and will be managed by
the Office of Polar Programs within the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.