* 1935363
* A Fundamental Study Toward Innovative Plasma-Based Anti-/De-icing Strategies for Aircraft Icing Mitigation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Hui Hu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2024
* USD 375,000.00

Aircraft icing is one of the most serious weather hazards to aircraft operation
in cold weathers. Ice accretion over airframe surfaces can make the aircraft to
roll or pitch uncontrollably, and even cause crashes. While a number of systems
have been developed for aircraft icing mitigation, current anti-/de-icing
strategies suffer from various drawbacks, including being too complex, too heavy
or draw too much power to be effective. One promising method to resolve these
issues is to utilize plasma actuation for aircraft anti-/de-icing operation. The
principal aim of this project is to investigate the underlying physics of plasma
discharges interacting with different substances (i.e., air, water and ice)
associated with ice accretion process for the development of a new class of
strategies for aircraft icing mitigation. The project will also encompass
significant educational activities, including a multi-year
graduate/undergraduate research program, development of new teaching modules,
and an outreach program for local K-12 students, especially those from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields, to inspire them to participate in science and
engineering studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposed research is
to conduct a fundamental study to characterize the effects of Dielectric-
Barrier-Discharge (DBD) plasma actuation on the coupled unsteady heat and mass
transfer during the dynamic ice accretion process. The research tasks include:
1) conduct a fundamental study to characterize the thermodynamic characteristics
of DBD plasma actuations under frozen-cold ambient temperatures pertinent to
aircraft icing phenomena; 2) examine dynamic interactions between DBD plasma
discharges with liquid water and solid ice to gain further insights into the
fundamental mechanisms; 3) characterize the effects of the DBD plasma actuation
on the coupled unsteady heat and mass transfer over ice accreting airfoil/wing
surfaces; 4) explore/optimize design paradigms for the development of
innovative, effective, DBD-plasma-based anti-/de-icing strategies for aircraft
icing mitigation. In comparison with conventional anti-/de-icing methods, DBD-
plasma-based anti-/de-icing approach could have significant advantages,
including i) more efficient heating mechanism; ii) faster response time; and
iii) lower operation power consumption for anti-/de-icing operation. The
research would significantly improve our understanding about the important
micro-physical thermal/mass transport processes, which could lead to the
development of a new class of DBD-plasma-based, anti-/de-icing strategies to
ensure safer and more efficient aircraft operation in cold
weathers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.