* 1935984
* Mid-Scale RI-1: SAGE: A Software-Defined Sensor Network
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Eugene Kelly, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 9,026,927.00

Distributed, intelligent sensor networks that can collect and analyze data are
essential to scientists seeking to understand the impacts of global
urbanization, natural disasters such as flooding and wildfires, and climate
change on natural ecosystems and city infrastructure. Sage is a pilot project
that assembles sensor nodes to support machine learning frameworks and deploy
them for rigorous testing in environmental testbeds in California, Colorado, and
Kansas and in urban environments in Illinois and Texas. The reusable
cyberinfrastructure running on these testbeds will give climate, traffic, and
ecosystem scientists new data for building models to study these coupled
systems. The software components developed in Sage are open source and provide
an open architecture that will enable scientists from a wide range of fields to
build their own intelligent sensor networks. The toolkit also extends the
current educational curriculum used in Chicago and will inspire young people -
with an emphasis on women and minorities -- to pursue science, technology, and
mathematics careers by providing a platform for students to explore measurement-
based science questions related to the natural and built environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sage project designs and builds new reusable software
components and cyberinfrastructure services to enable deployment of intelligent
environmental sensors. Geographically distributed sensor systems that include
cameras, microphones, and weather and air quality stations can generate such
large volumes of data that fast and efficient analysis is best performed by an
embedded computer connected directly to the sensor. This project explores new
techniques for applying machine learning algorithms to data from such
intelligent sensors and builds reusable software that can run programs within
the embedded computer and transmit the results over the network to central
computer servers. The Sage project maintains links to computer source code, open
hardware design documents, and sensor specifications, as well as both the raw
and calibrated sensor data collected from all the testbed nodes at the website
http://wa8.gl. The data is also be hosted in the cloud to facilitate easy data
analysis. All project data is maintained for five years after the project
ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.