* 1935278
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Model-Based Design and Control of Power-Dense Soft Hydraulic Robots for Demanding and Uncertain Environments
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Eric Barth, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,999,872.00

This project will create improved methods of dynamic modeling for highly
deformable structures. It will show how miniature hydraulic systems can be
customized for power transmission in challenging soft robotic applications, and
how textiles and elastic rubbers can be combined to manufacture novel fluid-
powered soft actuators. It will demonstrate the use of embedded fiber optic
sensors to measure soft robot shape. These advances will be integrated into a
design framework for a new class of soft robots that can safely work with and
around people, and that can reconfigure themselves to adapt to a changing
environment. This project will be a significant advance towards realizing the
transformative potential of soft robots in healthcare, manufacturing,
agriculture, exploration, environmental monitoring, and national security. Two
experimental testbeds representing the diversity of applications will validate
the results of the project -- a soft tentacle-like robot will perform simulated
orthopedic surgery and a soft eel-like robot will demonstrate swimming and
climbing for navigating and exploring challenging environments. Outreach
activities at the participating universities will encourage local communities to
see, touch, and learn about the most recent scientific developments in soft
robotics, reaching an estimated 10,000 people annually in Nashville, Knoxville,
and Tallahassee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For soft robots to fulfil their enormous
promise, fundamental research is needed in modeling, sensing, actuating, and
controlling soft robots that are underactuated, have infinite degrees of
freedom, and are highly influenced by interaction with humans, other robots, the
environment, and even themselves. The intellectual contribution of this research
in modeling, estimation, and control will extend dynamic Cosserat rod theory to
account for soft robot cross section deformations. In sensing, novel fiber optic
shape sensor technology will reveal new fundamental knowledge of soft robot
shape and interaction in real-time and without line-of-sight restrictions. In
design, new manufacturing methods that use a 2D fabrication approach with
multifunctional and task-specific material layers will create complex scalable
3D structures, and high power-density miniature hydraulic power systems will be
developed as the future of actuation and power transmission for soft
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.