* 1935763
* I-Corps:  Additive Laser Metal Deposition onto Silicon for Enhanced Electronics Cooling
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Scott Schiffres, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a reduction
of the microprocessor operating temperature and an increase in computer chip
performance. The heat generated by electronic devices has been rising
dramatically, posing a significant challenge to microprocessor performance. In
particular, the thermal interface materials, the glue that thermally connects
the electronic chip to the heat sink, is a bottleneck. The proposed additive
manufacturing technology circumvents this bottleneck by directly printing the
heat sink onto the chip. With this technology, thermal management components can
be directly printed onto the electronic package without using traditional
thermal interface materials. The proposed thermal solution will enable
significant increases in heat flux, enabling faster and more efficient
computation. This technology will enable the elimination of thermal interface
materials and can potentially lead to cooler operating temperature and overall
energy savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on bonding
metal onto silicon for electronic cooling by laser processing. Many important
applications require bonding of dissimilar materials, yet there are relatively
limited studies of additive manufacturing onto dissimilar substrates. Laser-
based additive manufacturing of heat removal device enables the rapid formation
of silicides at the silicon-metal interface and the manufacture of small
features onto silicon. This research builds on conventional low-temperature
bonding of metal alloys onto semiconductor and ceramic substrates by using
reactive elements, and overcomes the timescale limitations observed in
conventional brazing. Silicide formation during selective laser melting occurs
several orders of magnitude faster than conventional bonding techniques. The
material also melts at a low temperature, which minimizes the thermal stress
after solidification. By employing selective laser melting, a low-temperature
alloy can rapidly bond onto silicon to form heat removal devices with robust
mechanical properties and low thermal resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.