* 1935550
* ISN2: Disrupting Opioid Supply Chains through Policing: A Mathematical Modeling Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* GABRIEL ZAYAS-CABAN, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 536,849.00

This award will enhance the national health, prosperity, and welfare by
contributing to our understanding of an effective public safety response to the
nationwide opioid crisis in resource-constrained environments. According to the
CDC, drug overdose deaths have more than quadrupled since 1999, resulting in
more than 70,000 deaths in the US in 2017, with nearly 70 percent of these
deaths related to opioids. The economic and social costs to US communities have
been enormous. These costs are particularly acute for police agencies. Recently,
some police departments have initiated programs that seek to divert opioid users
from the criminal justice system to treatment. Focus on reducing the demand-side
of the supply network necessitates a paradigm shift in police operations,
requiring new workflows and training for police officers. This award supports a
fundamental understanding of dynamic, data-driven police scheduling and response
policies that more efficiently use limited police resources to help support
community health. The project uses unique data sets that integrate community-
sourced policing and medical data from Dane County, Wisconsin, which serves as a
project test bed. The research will be performed in collaboration with local law
enforcement agencies, public safety experts, and medical doctors. The
educational plan aims to broaden interest and participation in engineering
through K12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will formulate a
mathematical modeling framework to prescribe innovative, dynamic police
schedules and response policies that disrupt illicit drug supply chains,
efficiently use limited police resources, and lead to better health outcomes for
opioid users and the community. The framework will capture the movement of
opioid users and police officers in a community. This framework will serve as
the basis for studying how to disrupt the supply and demand of illicit opioid
networks by leveraging and extending state-of-the-art techniques from stochastic
programming, network interdiction models, and causal inference. This project
will formulate new stochastic programming models for studying how to divert drug
users to treatment rather than the criminal justice system as well as new
hierarchical facility location games and network interdiction models for
studying how to interdict the supply of illicit opioids across multiple supply
networks. The project will produce an analysis of model features, efficient
model formulations, proofs of the existence of Nash equilibria, bounds on the
price of stability, and the development of new algorithmic techniques for
solving large-scale problem instances and recovering Nash equilibria in large-
scale network games. This project will provide new insights for cost-effectively
using police resources to reduce opioid usage, disrupt illicit opioid supply
chains, and improve community health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.