* 1935698
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 33rd Annual IFIP WG 11.3 Conference on Data and Applications Security and Privacy 2019 (DBSec'19)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Csilla Farkas, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 12/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The annual IFIP WG 11.3 Conference on Data and Applications Security and Privacy
(DBSec) is one of the oldest conferences in cyber security and privacy research.
It was established in 1986 as a working conference with the goal of developing
and advancing security and privacy technologies primarily in database management
systems. A unique aspect of this conference is that it is structured so that
participants have ample time to discuss their work, provide comments and
feedback on others' and share research ideas. The 2019 DBSec Conference will
consist of approximately 20 technical papers across a wide spectrum of data and
applications security and privacy domains. The conference invites leading
researchers every year for keynote talks. Participation in the conference is a
valuable opportunity to students and is an important part of graduate education
in cyber-security.

This award provides travel support to students from universities and colleges in
the South Eastern USA states, including South Carolina and Tennessee's
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU), to attend the 33rd Annual
IFIP WG 11.3 Conference on Data and Applications Security and Privacy. Criteria
for selection include evidence of a serious interest in the field as
demonstrated by statement of research, CV showing research output, coursework
and/or project experience, and a statement on how participation in the
conference would benefit the student's research and education. Organizers
encourage participation of women and students from other under-represented
groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.