* 1935746
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference (IEEE GLOBECOM 2019)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Rose Qingyang Hu, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2020
* USD 19,200.00

The 2019 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM 2019) will be held in Waikoloa on the Big
Island, Hawaii, USA, during 9 -13 December 2019. This preeminent technical
conference is one of the two flagship conferences of the IEEE Communications
Society, and a primary venue for presenting new research results in the area of
communications and networking. It is widely attended by researchers and
practitioners in the field. Attending conferences such as Globecom is of
paramount importance for the development of graduate and undergraduate students.
Participants have the opportunity to present their work, attend panel and
keynote sessions, and interact with hundreds of other leading-edge researchers
in the field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal provides travel support for
approximately sixteen graduate and undergraduate students in the United States
to attend this premiere conference. The travel awards will give priority
considerations to first-time attendees and under-represented minority students,
since attending conferences is an important part of their educational
experience, and they often have limited travel funds. The research community and
the Engineering workforce benefit from the improvement of students in the
pipeline, and the introduction of new researcher
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.