* 1935389
* Reinforcement Learning and Kullback-Leibler Stochastic Optimal Control for Complex Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Sean Meyn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 380,000.00

Natural and man-made networked systems are all around us. The power grid and the
Internet are two examples of apparently complex interconnected systems, in which
millions of "agents" are eager to extract value in the form of energy or
bandwidth. While these systems are complex when measured in graph-theoretic
terms, the behavior of communication and energy systems appears simple and
highly predictable to the end users (in most of the world). This success is due
in part to distributed control loops that manage system-wide supply-demand
balance. An example of distributed control in the Internet is TCP/IP, and
automatic generation control (AGC) in most electric power grids. While
distributed control protocols are highly developed and widely accepted in
communication applications, this is less true in other networked systems such as
electric power and natural gas distribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to advance control theory for complex interconnected systems. The
application focus is on power systems, but the control techniques are general
and are likely to have far broader impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent control
innovations are highlighted in the project as building blocks in the
construction of algorithms for control, based on a combination of local decision
making and global management of the ensemble: &lt;br/&gt;1. Control techniques
for local decision making will be a theme of the project using a new Kullback-
Leibler-Quadratic optimal control approach introduced by the PI's group.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Reinforcement learning (RL) is the engine behind Google's recent
computer game successes and is a natural framework for control synthesis in an
uncertain complex environment. The Zap Q-learning algorithms introduced recently
by the PI and his colleagues are a new class of RL algorithms that are virtually
universally stable and have provably optimal convergence rate. &lt;br/&gt;3.
Mean field models have a long history in power systems (with roots in
statistical physics), they will be used to approximate aggregate behavior, and
as a foundation to construct algorithms to control the aggregate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithm design will be complemented with simulation
studies, focusing initially on applications to power systems. A course in smart
grid technologies will be augmented and the project will include participation
from undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.