* 1935602
* ISN2: Disrupting Human Trafficking via Needs Matching and Capacity Expansion
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Andrew Trapp, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 567,565.00

This award will contribute to the advancement of national health, prosperity and
welfare by studying the efficient allocation of resources over time to disrupt
human trafficking networks. A key, and largely understudied, means to disrupt
human trafficking is by reducing the supply of potential victims through a
better understanding of the critical role that housing plays in individual
vulnerability. In order to reduce the population at risk of being trafficked (or
re-trafficked), this project provides a need-based prevalence estimation of
homeless youth in New York City and an optimization-based approach to determine
the most efficient use of scarce shelter and service resources. Shelter and
associated rehabilitative services disrupt human trafficking networks by
decreasing future vulnerability and recidivism for those at-risk of trafficking.
This award will help guide a long-term, cost-effective intervention approach by
developing an optimal policy for deployment of marginal temporal housing and
services capacity. The interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of the project
team ensures that the results of this research will have a practical impact and
be disseminated widely within the broader anti-human trafficking research
community. The project provides an opportunity for a diverse team of doctoral
students in operations research, data science, and criminology to work together
on a pressing societal problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a
mixed-methods research approach that involves both data collection and
analytical model formulation to analyze capacity needed to reduce the supply of
potential human trafficking victims. The project will employ an innovative
capture-recapture sampling strategy to understand the importance of shelter in a
population of unstably housed youth at high risk for trafficking. Together with
data from their service providers, the project will establish a baseline
assessment of the collective needs of vulnerable populations. With this needs
assessment, a multiple multidimensional knapsack problem is formulated that
allows for time-dependent capacity expansion and allocation and incorporates
stochastic arrivals and length of stay. The project determines the marginal
deployment of limited shelter capacity to optimize the societal benefit-to-cost
ratio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.