* 1935224
* The 2019 NIMBioS Undergraduate Research Conference and a Workshop on Transitioning to Graduate School
* BIO,DBI
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Louis Gross, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 10/31/2020
* USD 20,150.00

The National Institute for Mathematical and Biological Synthesis will host the
annual Undergraduate Research Conference at the Interface of Mathematics and
Biology, 16 - 17 November 2019, in Knoxville, Tennessee. This conference
showcases undergraduate research in mathematical biology and gives students a
venue to network with others having similar interests. Two invited lectures by
leaders in research at the interface of mathematics and biology will share their
insights with students. About one hundred participants will attend the
conference, many from traditionally underrepresented groups in mathematics and
biology. All student participants will have the opportunity to present their
choice of a research talk or poster. Additionally, interested students will be
invited to attend a workshop on transitioning to graduate school, which will
include a presentation on data analysis, a panel discussion on applications and
career opportunities, a session on applying for graduate fellowships, and a
graduate school showcase. The conference will strengthen exchanges between the
mathematical and life sciences disciplines and will enable students to learn
more about the potential of mathematics to make exciting progress on biological
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the National Institute for
Mathematical and Biological Synthesis Undergraduate Research Conference at the
Interface of Mathematics and Biology is to provide opportunities for
undergraduates from across the country to share their research with peers and
faculty mentors. Between fifty and seventy student talks and posters on work
that uses mathematical, statistical, and computational approaches to address
challenging questions in molecular biology, biochemistry, epidemiology,
immunology, ecology, and other areas will be presented at the conference. Their
work comes from summer or academic year research experiences supported by a
variety of agencies, including NSF, the National Institutes of Health, the
National Security Agency or through their home institutions, thus allowing for
cross-pollination of ideas from different programs. Student abstracts will be
assembled into a program book and published on the conference website. As a side
benefit, the research programs of faculty mentors will be enriched by the
sharing of information about recent research and the formation of new
connections. The conference's secondary goal is to provide students with
information on careers and graduate school, as well as opportunities to network.
The conference will host a presentation on data analysis, a panel discussion on
career opportunities, a session on applying for graduate fellowships, a graduate
school showcase, and ample networking opportunities through shared meals,
frequent breaks, and organized breakout sessions. The combination of a venue for
presenting research with information on how to advance their careers in graduate
school will provide students a unique resource for personal and professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.