* 1935573
* EAGER: Collaborative: Machine-Learning based Side-Channel Attack and Hardware Countermeasures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Shreyas Sen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Digital Encryption is typically performed by specialized circuits to ensure
confidentiality and integrity of data. While encryption is mathematically
robust, the circuits encrypting data may leak information via the amount of the
power drawn from the supply, and the amount of electromagnetic (EM) radiation
that emanates from the circuit. This is known as side-channel leakage. An
attacker may be able to unravel the secret cryptographic information by
analyzing the side-channel leakage, thereby compromising security. Newer
analysis techniques based on machine-learning make the attack easier. This
proposal will study how these attacks are performed to develop means of
protection against such attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Machine learning (ML)
based side-channel attack (SCA) increases the attack surface of secure hardware,
as an attacker can potentially compromise a device using a few power and EM
traces. This proposal will provide a comprehensive analysis for new attack
models and countermeasures through: (1) analysis and development of the best
possible Deep Learning based SCA attack (on power and EM). (2) Design and
demonstrate low-overhead countermeasures to enable "critical" crypto signature
attenuation and reduce the signal-to-noise ratio by a factor of 500. The goal of
this proposal is to develop end-to-end models to build defense mechanisms for
both protected and unprotected Advanced Encryption Standard
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will be
disseminated through papers and articles, which will be made publicly available.
Results from this project will be incorporated into the courses taught by the
investigators. Investigators will seek to work with undergraduate students
providing hands-on experience on cryptography and side-channel attacks and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data generated from this project will be in
the form of simulation results and models, software tools and hardware
measurements. The developed models and benchmarking software will be uploaded to
GitHub at: https://github.com/anupamgolder/mlsca&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.