* 1935882
* I-Corps: Accelerating and optimizing biomanufacturing process development
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2019
* Athanasios Mantalaris, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
standardization, acceleration and optimization of process development in the
biopharmaceutical industry. Currently, the production of biological molecules
for human therapies is largely based on a non-standardized design of experiments
that are often time consuming, labor intensive and expensive. This project
develops an in-vitro / in-silico platform that standardizes the production
process design following a specific framework, applicable to a wide variety of
producer cell and product combinations. The in-silico mathematical model allows
to explore the whole design space reducing the number of in-vitro experiments
and the labor burden, and to apply model-based optimization techniques to select
the best production conditions for new drugs. The acceleration of the process
design has significant impact on reducing time-to-market for drugs that are
needed in the market as soon as possible, for example for FDA fast track
approval candidates. Additionally, the capital and operational cost reductions
can help new biomanufacturers to make their businesses technically and
economically feasible.

This I-Corps project responds to the need for novel biomanufacturing approaches,
including Quality by Design (QbD) principles and Process Analytical Technologies
(PAT), which allow fast and effective process development platforms that ensure
consistent product quality and reduced lot-to-lot variability. This platform
incorporates QbD and uses PATs. The central component of the tool is a
mathematical model that predicts dynamic nutrient uptake based on biochemical
reaction networks, to quantify and characterize cell metabolism. The in-vitro
component of the platform collects critical information to determine cell
type/product/clone-specific parameters. These parameters give high predictive
capability to the mathematical model to determine the specific media composition
and feeding strategy to optimize the volumetric productivity of cell cultures
producing biomolecules for human therapies. The precision of the media
composition and feeding strategy reduces raw materials and operational cost, the
increased volumetric productivity reduces equipment size and capital cost, and
the capability to feed the exact nutrients demand for cell proliferation,
maintenance and production, ensures product quality. This bioprocess optimizer
represents a flexible and efficient tool that transforms, improves and
accelerates conventional process development in biomanufacturing with wide
applications, including biologics, cell therapies and gene therapies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.