* 1935099
* CUE Ethics: Collaborative Research: Evaluating Frameworks for Incorporating Computing Across the Curriculum
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Ying Li, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 121,689.00

This award will test pathways for the delivery of computing across the
curriculum in the context of undergraduate degrees at residential liberal arts
colleges. The project will be organized as a Networked Improvement Community
(NIC) that includes faculty from three colleges representing 10 distinct
disciplines, as well as the heads of computer science and data science or data
analytics at all three institutions. The multi-institutional NIC will provide an
important opportunity for the project team to determine the most effective
methods for delivering computer science (CS) content and working with non-CS
faculty across a range of institutional governance and departmental structural
differences. This project addresses the national desire to prepare larger and
more diverse student populations for careers in both CS and non-CS fields,
including careers in scientific and non-scientific
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities are five-fold. First, the
project will identify a set of core computing concepts that should be learned by
every student today, particularly those students who are applying computing in
non-CS fields. Second, it will rigorously evaluate the relative effectiveness of
venues, including curriculum and course structure, for exposing students to the
core computing concepts. Third, the project will analyze the kind and extent of
preparation, guidance, and support necessary for non-CS faculty to incorporate
and teach computing concepts in their courses. Fourth, it will analyze the
extent to which the addition of computing concept material impacts student
acquisition of disciplinary knowledge in non-CS courses. Lastly, it will analyze
the impact on affiliated non-CS faculty with regard to their own teaching and
research as they learn more about computing, and work collaboratively with other
non-CS faculty on integration of computing into courses. By including fields
that are more demographically diverse than CS, the researchers expect to broaden
the pool of students who learn about computing and its applications. By
integrating ethical considerations into the teaching of core computing concepts
from the start, it is expected that students will learn to naturally ask ethical
questions as part of their computational problem solving instead of as an
afterthought. Finally, the project will develop a guiding document for similar
institutions on how to effectively infuse core computing concepts across an
institution in a "computing across the curriculum" approach. This IUSE: CUE
project is co-funded by the EHR/DUE and all CISE Directorates CNS, CCF, IIS, and
OAC, reflecting the project's alignment with the broader goals of the IUSE: EHR
program in DUE and complementary programs in CISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.