* 1935683
* Development, Deployment, and Evaluation of Instructional Modules for Current and Future Practitioners of Model-based Systems Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kerrie Douglas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,989,709.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers
and technicians in production engineering. It will do so by supporting the
design, deployment, and evaluation of online modular courses in model-based
systems engineering. Given the increasing complexity of manufactured products,
engineers with expertise in model-based systems engineering practices are
critical to maintain U.S. competitiveness in manufacturing and related
industries. Over three years, courses will be developed for three populations of
learners: two-year college students, four-year college students, and working
professionals. The project will be conducted by Purdue University in
collaboration with Ivy Tech Community College and several industry partners to
ensure that the courses are integrated across student levels and well aligned
with both students' degree programs and industry's needs. Course materials will
be divided into modules, allowing students and professionals to personalize
their learning by taking the modules most important to them. These learners will
also be able to certify competence in areas of their own choosing. The
instructional materials to be developed will advance technical education and
provide students with virtual experience in real-life settings. This project
will enable students to engage in the course materials remotely, making them
accessible to thousands of students and professionals across the country.
Moreover, educational techniques developed as part of this project might be
adapted for teaching other technical skills, expanding the benefits to other
U.S. industries and workforce members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to develop a set of effective, scalable online instructional
materials in model-based systems engineering. The materials will be based on
current research on student-centered education in authentic settings. There are
three specific aims. The first is to identify the key concepts students must
master in model-based systems engineering. The second is to develop pedagogies
for teaching the concepts effectively to students at two-year, four-year, and
professional levels. The third is to develop a process for assessing the
effectiveness of online technical instruction for students with different
experiential and demographic backgrounds. Social learning theory suggests that
students learn through engaging with each other and the course material in a
learner-centered approach. This approach has been demonstrated to improve
student learning and persistence in face-to-face technical courses, but little
is known about how it can be incorporated into online learning or what effect it
has. The project will investigate the effectiveness of the approach in an online
setting for diverse groups of students at different levels, from first year
college students to practicing engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by NSF's EHR Core Research: Production Engineering Education and Research
(ECR: PEER) program, which seeks to improve the education of future and current
professionals in production engineering. It also aims to study the effectiveness
of the innovative educational strategies adopted by these
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.