* 1935468
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Nature of Hinterland Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Jennifer Kahn, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 23,102.00

This award permits Mr. Nicholas Belluzzo to investigate a pre-contact hinterland
community on the island of Hawai'i. Researchers in Polynesia have long studied
chiefly society and processes of sociopolitical formation. Previous scholarship
has often focused on archaeological records of core, chiefly centers, with
models highlighting elite power strategies and authority. However, more recent
scholarship increasingly focuses on understanding the common, non-elite role and
agency in society. By virtue of their position beyond the margins of the royal
centers, even less is known about how hinterland communities conceived of
authority at both the local- and regional-scales or how this conception differed
from the royal centers. Given that hinterland communities are less well
represented in historical literature and ethnographic documentation,
archaeological approaches are well situated to augment a more spatially
comprehensive record of sociopolitical formation in Hawai'i. By deploying and
re-defining the concept of hinterland, this project focuses specific attention
on the agency, sources of authority, and social hierarchy of Hawaiian
communities at multiple scales. The study re-frames depictions of hinterland
communities from zones of resource extraction to intentional communities
agentively negotiating local and regional interactions. As a multi-disciplinary
effort, Mr. Belluzzo will collaborate with soil scientists, paleobotanists,
authorities in traditional Hawaiian knowledge systems, and State land managers
to develop a holistic research study while establishing cross-disciplinary
research relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research frames hinterlands as
neither frontiers nor borderlands, but locations situated between multiple
sources of power and authority. By moving beyond monolithic core-periphery
interactions, the research will investigate non-elite Hawaiian hinterland
communities in the southern Kau District of Hawai'i Island using a "bottom-up"
approach. This will highlight how agency and local authority created interactive
communities not wholly subordinate to elite centers or political cores. The
research will employ a landscape-based approach to assess the traditional
Hawaiian land division of Manuka, situated at the intersection of two larger
political districts in an environmentally uncertain region. This region will be
evaluated to identify variation in community, agency, and authority using
ethnographic, environmental, ecological, and archaeological data. Nick Belluzzo
and his research team will collect data through a combination of archaeological
survey, archival research, and test excavations to generate archaeological and
environmental datasets. Geostatistical analysis will elicit patterns of
authority and regional relationships in the archaic Hawaiian State.
Specifically, this research will compare records of change and regional
diversity in settlement and agricultural practices against expectations from
more agriculturally productive core regions under direct, centralized chiefly
rule. Both the results and syntheses of multiple novel methods will be broadly
applicable to modeling social complexity in complex societies world-
wide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.