* 1935773
* I-Corps: Novel Material System and Design for Thermal Management of Asphalt Pavements
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Huiming Yin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is create a new
material system of pavements for maintenance saving, safety enhancement, and
lifetime extension. The material system can be integrated into a wide range of
potential pavement applications from parking lots, to highway ramps, and
driveways. The potential customer includes general managers or ground service
managers of commercial and residential buildings with large parking lots,
officials at the Department of Transportation and Department of Public Works,
and even homeowners with driveways. The successful adoption of the technology
may result in reducing snow removal costs, reducing parking lots/roads/highways
maintenance costs, and lessening accident rates in snowy or icy conditions in
winter. The technology may also be used to potentially mitigate pavement
distresses due to high temperatures, thereby extending the lifespan of roads and
other infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is to identify
the market and establish the novel pavement technology for commercialization and
technology transfer. Inspired by human skin, the proposed asphalt pavement
system utilizes solar and geothermal energy to regulate the surface temperature,
at which the materials can exhibit the better performance. Asphalt pavements can
be damaged or degraded by various weather conditions. To address these
challenges, this project develops a multifunctional material system for self-
heating and cooling, performance monitoring, self-sensing, and self-healing of
asphalt pavements. The system consists of heat exchange loops buried in pavement
overlays, which will be heated or cooled using geothermal and solar energy via
circulating thermal fluids. The heat collected and stored underground in summer
will be used in winter. Carbon nanotube modified foamed asphalt has been
developed for better thermal conductivity and
strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.