* 1935926
* The mechanistic basis of sequence-dependent receptor recycling
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Manojkumar Puthenveedu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2021
* USD 415,825.00

Cells universally rely on receptor proteins, present on the cell surface, to
sense the environment and respond appropriately. Cells tune the strength and
specificity of responses by changing the number of receptors available on the
surface, by transporting them to and from compartments inside the cell.
Therefore, how receptor transport is regulated is a fundamental question that is
critical to understanding how cells respond and adapt to their environment. This
project addresses this question by integrating direct visualization of the
dynamics of receptor movement in living cells in real time, quantitative
modeling, and molecular genetics, to test a mechanistic model for how receptor
transport is regulated and how this regulation influences cellular responses.
Through its broader impacts, this project offers an opportunity to train
undergraduate and graduate students in using microscopy to address mechanistic
questions, and to iteratively integrate microscopy, quantitative data analysis,
and modeling to address cell biological questions. Further, to reach a broader
community and promote the use of quantitative imaging in education at an early
stage, the PI will actively introduce the tools developed and the information
obtained to both science-focused and general public forums, including among
students and teachers in high schools with underrepresented minorities, and in
lifelong learning centers, in the Pittsburgh area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
endosome serves as the primary sorting station for proteins, including signaling
receptors, that are internalized from the cell surface. Of the four main
pathways taken by internalized receptors in the endosome, three - bulk
recycling, degradation, and trafficking to the Golgi - have been extensively
studied, and the mechanisms identified have each defined major new directions in
cell biology. This project addresses the fourth and comparatively less studied
pathway - sequence-dependent recycling. Many signaling receptors are restricted
to this pathway, but how and why are not known. A major hurdle in studying this
process has been the lack of direct assays to visualize and analyze receptor
sorting in real time. Emerging data indicate that endosomal sorting relies on
kinetic principles, further emphasizing this. Therefore, the research goals of
this project are to develop and use quantitative live-cell imaging approaches to
directly visualize the sorting of B2AR, a member of the largest family of
signaling receptors, as a prototype for sequence-dependent recycling, and to
integrate the data obtained into quantitative models to test a mechanistic
hypothesis for receptor sorting. By using approaches from whole-cell to single-
event imaging, the project will test the hypotheses that signaling receptors are
actively restricted to sequence-dependent recycling by their interactions with
the putative endosomal complex identified, and that these interactions serve as
control points for signaling pathways to reprogram receptor trafficking and
signaling. The educational goal of this project is to promote quantitative
microscopy as a mechanistic tool and train graduate and undergraduate students
in methods in quantitative cell biology.