* 1935809
* NSF/FDA SIR: A Modeling Tool for Assessment of Radiological Workflow Prioritization Based on Computer-assisted Diagnosis
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2023
* David Shmoys, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Advances in machine learning (ML) algorithms support the diagnosis and detection
of various disease conditions within minutes of medical image acquisition. One
emerging application of these algorithms is as an aid in determining the
priority for (human) image review of a patient with an abnormal condition. Since
2018, the FDA has approved several of these ML-aided triage devices. The
patient/case-level output of these algorithms does not replace the
interpretation by a radiologist but it can inform the radiologist's
prioritization of case reviews and hence the radiologist's workflow. On one
hand, such ML algorithms can lead to better patient outcomes by increasing the
likelihood for earlier diagnosis and treatment of severe and time-sensitive
conditions. On the other hand, the radiologistâ€™s re-prioritization of work can
delay the review of cases that are incorrectly analyzed and missed or those not
in the scope of the ML algorithm. While the algorithms typically process the
images in minutes, the overall, risk-adjusted, patient waiting time-saving
benefits are difficult to discern due to the complexity of the clinician's
workflow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve the understanding of the interplay
between the ML-aided triage and the workflow into which it feeds, this project
develops flexible analytical and simulation models which accommodate various ML-
aided triage algorithms and workflow management rules in clinical reading. The
aim of the research is to provide regulators with a quantitative principled
approach to evaluate, in a workflow-relevant way, the prioritization performance
of these triage algorithms. The results of this project will enable developers
to identify optimal prioritization strategies, and let users have science-based
information about these devices so that they can make informed health care
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.