* 1935265
* Collaborative Research:  Bottom-up Construction of a Synthetic Neuron and Programmable Neuronal Network
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Allen Po-Chih Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,367,717.00

Building synthetic cells is an exciting area of synthetic biology with
opportunities to unravel basic design and organizational principles of cellular
life. Dr. Liu and his collaborative team have identified the neuron as a
potentially tractable cell to construct from the ground (bottom) up. Neurons
convert biochemical signals to electrical dynamics and back to biochemical
signals in animals. This project aims to construct a synthetic neuron with a
modular design and a programmable synthetic neuronal network capable of
recapitulating basic functions of a natural neuronal system. The team's design
approach is to take inspiration from what is already known in the make-up of
natural neurons, divide them into essential building blocks and construct each
building block through the incorporation of proteins and materials, and assemble
the established building blocks into functional subunits capable of performing
part of neuron or neuronal network functionality. To investigate public
perceptions of bottom-up synthetic biology and societal implications of the
synthetic neuron, the project will convene deliberative group discussions. The
research team is dedicated to breaking new ground in building synthetic cells,
co-training the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists, and fostering
an informed and participative public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
combines experimental and modeling approaches and will address three broad goals
of 1) reconstituting action potential and synapses in a single synthetic neuron;
2) engineering a synthetic multi-neuron system with defined network
organization; and 3) broadening public benefits and ensuring inclusion in
responsible research and innovation on the potentially high-benefit and high-
risk synthetic neuron project. Enabled by advances in synthetic biology along
with microfluidics, micromanipulation and engineering designs, synthetic neurons
will be constructed by incorporating native ion channels and/or engineered
proteins with defined molecular composition in vesicles with defined geometry.
The collective knowledge generated through this endeavor will advance
neuroscience through the elucidation of the minimal components to achieve
neuronal functions and how neuronal morphology governs neuronal functions. By
developing a de novo mechanism of synaptic communication using engineered
proteins and aided with modeling, important new insights will be gained into the
design principles of neuronal communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.