* 1935630
* ISN2: Mapping, Modeling, and Optimizing the Disruption of Illicit Gold Supply Chains in Peru
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Nicole Smith, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 673,754.00

This award will advance human health and well-being, contribute to national
security, and advance science through a better understanding of illicit mineral
supply chains and ways to disrupt them. Currently in Peru, a large portion of
the gold exports are illegal, and other materials central to mining activities
are also trafficked, including mercury, explosives, and equipment. However,
there are no organized transactional records of illicit activities related to
the gold supply chain in Peru, which presents a significant challenge in making
decisions to combat them and results in the loss of billions of dollars every
year. Furthermore, it is nearly impossible to address the conditions (e.g. child
labor and human trafficking) that can be associated with these illicit supply
networks and which often extend across international borders. Through an
examination of the various networks within and outside of Peru that comprise and
facilitate the illicit gold supply chain, this research will advance knowledge
of the illicit gold supply chain in Peru and expand the methodological toolbox
used to evaluate and understand mineral and other illicit supply chains
globally. This project will also train STEM graduate students in
interdisciplinary research methodologies and provide them with opportunities to
engage in research with societal impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
involves an interdisciplinary team of engineers, social scientists, and
attorneys and employs a systems theory approach. Under this approach, the
research will include qualitative analyses of legal documents and court cases,
as well as ethnographic field work to build a systems dynamics model that
captures the structure of the illicit gold supply chain, formalizes the
connections among the systems components, and highlights the chains of causal
links and feedback loops within the system. This analysis will be used to
identify the common pathways of materials (i.e. gold, mercury, explosives) and
people (i.e. miners, traders) in the illicit gold supply chain within Peru and
across Peru's borders and will provide an indication of the criticalities and
vulnerabilities within the system. Using the outputs of these analyses, a
mathematical optimization model of the supply chain will be formulated, and a
set of decisions will be prescribed to disrupt the illicit activities throughout
the supply chain. A sensitivity analysis will be conducted to test the behavior
of illicit activities under various disruption
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.