* 1935764
* EAGER: The Brittle and Extensional Origins of Structures on Silicic Lavas
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Graham Andrews, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2020
* USD 35,378.00

Understanding the duration and speed of lava flows is central to assessing the
risks associated with volcanic eruptions, especially for communities built on
the flanks of volcanoes. Years of observations at persistently erupting
volcanoes like Kilauea (Hawaii) have produced a sophisticated understanding of
fluidal, fast-moving basaltic lava flows; however, a similar level of
understanding is absent for other types of lava. Eruptions of highly viscous,
slow-flowing silicic lavas are common in the geological record but are
infrequent at human timescales, and therefore poorly understood. Most of our
understanding of silicic lava flow comes from studies of ancient lavas coupled
with simulations using analogous, viscous materials like corn syrup. Analog
models and analogous geological materials like ice (glaciers) and mud (mudflows)
predict that silicic lavas will flow away from the volcanic vent and therefore,
stretch and extend. This should be a primarily brittle process akin to the
formation of crevasses on glaciers. However, studies of ancient lavas report
compression and thickening of silicic lavas through ductile folding of the
lava's upper surface. The style of deformation is important in constraining the
internal temperature and gas content of the lava as brittle fracturing will
potentially release over-pressured gas and lava, causing explosive eruptions
throughout the duration of the lava's advance. Conversely, if lavas do indeed
fold then they must flow much faster than anticipated and will advance down the
volcano's flanks rapidly, endangering downslope communities. The results will be
applicable to future eruptions of silicic lavas in eastern California, Oregon,
at Yellowstone National Park, and elsewhere around the world. Several graduate
students will be supported with this award, and will gain important experience
in both field and modeling techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations at
several silicic lavas and review of literature challenge the existing
interpretation of silicic lava flows being folded during ductile flow. Silicic
lavas at Medicine Lake and Newberry volcanoes in the Cascade volcanic chain of
the western United States will be focus of the study. Lavas will be mapped to
understand the structural evolution of their upper surfaces, paying attention to
the presence or absence of folds and other structures associated with
compression. If, as expected, structures are dominantly extensional in nature,
for example fractures and crevasses, models associated with folding and
compression will be revised. A small unmanned aerial system (sUAS) will be used
to generate high-resolution maps of accessible parts of the upper surfaces and
to generate three-dimensional models of the structures that can measured further
in virtual reality. Structures such as folds and crevasses, and rock types will
be mapped on the new sUAS base to and establish the types, orientations and
magnitudes of deformation. The entire upper surfaces of the lavas will be mapped
using LiDAR and satellite imagery to examine the distribution of the structures
and deformation over larger areas, and to fill-in gaps between more detailed
mapping. Together these data will produce a comprehensive structural model that
describes the evolving flow of silicic lava from the vent to the margins, and
integrates understanding of ancient lavas from analog models and fundamental
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.