* 1935619
* I-Corps: Molybdenum Disulfide Oil-Water Separator
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Woo Hyoung Lee, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a Molybdenum
Disulfide Oil Water Separator (MDSOS) which, resembling a sponge, is a porous
material designed to absorb oil while simultaneously repelling water due to its
superhydrophobic properties. Unlike common methods of oil treatment/removal,
such as burning and the use of dispersants, the use of the Molybdenum Disulfide
sponges mitigates the environmental effects of these common methods. The
implementation of the system can be low-cost and have high durability in varying
aquatic conditions. The current laboratory prototype is suitable for small-scale
contaminations with markets relevant to those that transport or handle oil in
aquatic regions, such as boat owners and marinas. The design of MDSOS permits
adjustability in fabrication specific to the oil of desired absorption, allowing
compatibility with any type of oil. MDSOS could potentially be part of
remediation efforts for large-scale oil spills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project further develops a platform of superhydrophobic and
superoleophilic molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) sponge technology to improve oil-
water separation as well as other industrial applications. The platform has
unique combination of material properties and process advantages. This merit
comes from the combined attributes of; (1) low materials cost and weight due to
their extremely small thickness (ultimately down to a single layer of atoms) and
(2) their facile chemical synthesis which does not require cost-demanding
equipment/process. Thus, the technology platform can potentially be applied to
perform environmental bioremediation, oil spill cleaning, and oily wastewater
treatment. The project primarily enables the customer discovery to validate
potential customer segments and product-market fit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.