* 1935216
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Integration of Avian Flight Control Strategies with Self Adaptive Structures for Stable Flight in Unknown Flows
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Daniel Inman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alias Smith
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project will create flight control methods for a new class of unmanned
aerial vehicle (UAV) with feather-like appendages and shape-changing planform,
designed based on deep understanding of how birds maintain stability and respond
to flow disturbances while gliding in unpredictable environments. This project
includes the development of 3D printed artificial feathers, with integrated
sensing and actuation. The main purpose of the artificial feathers is to provide
a passive control component, by appropriately deflecting in response, for
example, to a wind gust. A larger but slower active control component is
supplied by an articulated support structure based on a bird wing, whose shape
can be changed depending on flight conditions and desired maneuvers. Avian
studies will explore the aerodynamic contributions of both passive feather
flexibility and active wing shape control. The resulting knowledge will be
translated to the UAV using distributed computing and control. The new
generation of UAVs resulting from this project will have increased mission
versatility and greater survivability in unknown turbulent environments. These
improved capabilities will be valuable for monitoring fires, delivering rescue
supplies, and accomplishing searching and rescue missions. The ability to remain
stable despite wind gusts and other environmental disturbances is also a key
element for safe flight as these platforms are increasingly deployed in crowded
urban environments. Outreach programs based on the wind tunnel experiments and
field studies associated with this grant will be used to inspire a diverse group
of young people to enter STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals
include modeling of passive and active mechanics of 3D printed materials with
embedded sensing and actuation capabilities for artificial feather-like
components and employing novel 3D printing methods to develop UAV structures
with elbow and wrist-type joints capable of implementing avian flight control
strategies. Piezoelectric materials will be used for sensing and fine-scale
control of the feather-like elements, while hydraulically amplified
electrostatic actuation will be used in the morphing planform. Detailed
nonlinear simulations will be used to capture the nonlinear fluid-structure
interactions including the highly deformable feather elements. A combination of
model-based and data-driven hierarchical control strategies will be used to
translate observed avian flight behaviors to the UAV. Experiments will capture
avian response to flow disturbances, including active (muscle-powered) and
passive (feather deflection) wing morphing, augmented by detailed measurement of
feather attachment, mechanical properties of feathers and wings, neuromorphic
computing, and deflection measurements in near-field flows. A compliant wing
test bed will complement the avian experiments in steady and unsteady loading
environments through wind tunnel testing over a range of flow
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the National
Science Foundation and the US Air Force Office of Scientific
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.