* 1935849
* In-situ Ultrasonically Sculpted Virtual Light Paths for Steerable Neural Imaging and Stimulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Maysamreza Chamanzar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Optical imaging of tissue is the gold standard of biomedical imaging, especially
in the central nervous system for high throughput structural and functional
imaging of brain activity. The key advantage of optical methods is that light
interacts with tissue non-invasively. Existing optical imaging techniques,
however, suffer from an inability to deliver and collect light deep into the
tissue with high spatial resolution. Scattering of light in tissue limits the
resolution and penetration depth, rendering such methods based on external
optics limited to the superficial layers of biological tissues. Additionally, in
the context of the central nervous system, which harbors widely distributed
neural circuits, system-wide interrogation would require either fast optical
beam-steering capability or simultaneous multi-site illumination. Recent
techniques based on patterning of light from outside the brain cannot reach deep
into the tissue, since as light propagates through tissue, it undergoes
diffraction, scattering, and absorption; as a result, the beam widens and the
intensity of light rapidly falls below the threshold of excitation of opsins and
optical reporters. The proposed project aims to address these shortcomings of
the optical methods by using high frequency sound waves (ultrasound) to form a
virtual relay lens in the tissue to access deep tissue for optical imaging. In
this technique, the tissue itself is turned into an optical lens that enables
imaging deeper structures. This ultrasonically defined lens can be moved around
without disturbing the tissue for steerable imaging. This multidisciplinary
project provides a unique educational and training environment for graduate and
undergraduate students to learn about contemporary concepts in photonics,
ultrasonics, and neural technologies for applications in functional and
structural imaging of brain. Students from underrepresented minority groups will
be trained through this research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
interdisciplinary project, the researchers will develop a non-invasive
alternative to endoscopic imaging of brain that usually involve implanting a
graded-index (GRIN) lens into the brain. Non-invasive ultrasonic waves will be
used to sculpt virtual optical relay lenses by confining and steering light deep
into the tissue without having to insert physical GRIN lenses. The result of the
proposed research on ultrasonic sculpting of virtual steerable optical lenses
within the brain tissue for relay imaging will be a significant breakthrough to
facilitate light-based methods for non-invasive imaging of brain tissue by
addressing two unmet needs, i.e., noninvasive deep penetration and beam
steering. This ultrasonically defined virtual lens can both deliver or collect
light through the depth of the tissue. A phased array of ultrasonic transducers
will be designed to form reconfigurable virtual relay lenses within the tissue.
A model system in which to test and develop this technology is the mouse brain
tissue. To further amplify the impact of the proposed project, the developed
acousto-optic imaging technique will also be provided to different neurobiology
labs for testing various neuroscience hypotheses using optical methods for brain
imaging and stimulation. The proposed project advances frontiers of optical
imaging by introducing a novel technique for non-invasive deep tissue
penetration and real-time optical beam steering to enable targeted imaging of
deep structures. This can potentially transform our ability to target specific
pathways within the brain tissue in animal models. The results will have
indirect clinical implications for humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.