* 1935864
* I-Corps: Non-invasive capsule for direct sampling of the gastrointestinal tract
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Samuel Prien, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will transform
the fields of gastrointestinal human and animal microbiology and vastly increase
our knowledge of their microbiome. Current sampling technology is limited to
degraded stool samples and to invasive endoscope sampling that, in humans,
cannot reach the distal small intestines. The technology developed here offers a
non-invasive system for sampling gastrointestinal microbiota in their localized
environment for discovery, characterization, medical research, diagnostics, and
treatment never before possible. There will potentially be a new paradigm in
human and animal health for microbiome research and commercial applications.
Initial application focus will be on the unmet needs of human gastroenterology
and the human microbiome.

This I-Corps project further develops a non-invasive ingestible, non-digestible
capsule used to sample digestive tract microbiome. It is placed inside an
immediate or delayed release outer capsule. When the outer capsule dissolves
according to its specifications, enteric fluid and content enters the sampling
capsule through its ports triggering a hydrophilic stop to release a pulling
force, closing the ports, capturing the sample, holding it sealed until it
completes passage through the digestive track, and recovered from the feces for
analysis. The novel capsule device has a competitive advantage because it can
take samples in their localized environment and it can access the restrictive
areas of the small intestines. The capsule technology has the potential to be a
disruptive technology for the field of gastrointestinal human and animal
microbiology and the microbiome.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.