* 1935289
* Volumetric Optical Integrated Circuit Elements (VOICE)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Paul Braun, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2022
* USD 507,999.00

The fundamental goal of this research project is to develop a route to form high
performance photonic devices within the volume of a silicon wafer rather than on
its surface, as is generally the case. Photonic devices are integral to many
important applications in telecommunications, computing, data storage and
transfer, and consumer electronics. Silicon photonics has enabled circuits that
are miniaturized and integrated. These technologies will dramatically improve in
speed, density, and energy efficiency if they can be successfully integrated at
a high enough density as a multi-plane photonic integrated circuit (PIC). Two
key projected societal impacts are (1) ultra-high speed data transfer within
next generation computers using channels that route light in 3D within a chip or
between chips and (2) advanced all-optical signal processing using a PIC that
has numerous planes for performing operations. The project also includes the
training of undergraduate and graduate researchers in photonic device/circuit
theory, microfabrication, metrology, and numerical simulation. Research and
teaching will be closely integrated through three of the PI's courses: Materials
in Nanotechnology, Integrated Optoelectronics, and Principles of Experimental
Research. Participation of students from underrepresented groups will be
broadened through undergrad research and by leveraging large existing K-12
outreach initiatives that will impact greater than a thousand
students.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose a proof-of-concept project to realize
multiple planes of interconnected micro-optic elements, waveguides, and passive
photonic devices within the volume of a silicon wafer. Subsurface gradient
refractive index (GRIN) devices will be fabricated within porous silicon (PSi)
or silica (PSiO2 = oxidized PSi) via two-photon lithography to selectively
polymerize photoresist within the porous host. This direct laser writing (DLW)
approach enables index control (nPSi = 1.4-1.9, nPSiO2 = 1.15-1.3) at each
voxel. Complex GRIN elements (e.g., compound apochromatic lenses, photonic
nanojet emitters, diffractive and photonic bandgap structures, spiral phase
plates, and index/mode matching bamboo-shaped tapers) plus conventional silicon
photonic elements (e.g., interferometers, gratings, and microring multiplexers
and filters) can all be fabricated in a self-aligned manner with &lt; 1 micron
critical dimensions across a 4" wafer. The research seeks to advance knowledge
in the fields of subsurface fabrication and photonic integration. The
interdisciplinary team of 2 PIs, 2 grad students, and 2 undergrad students will
leverage their experience and training in GRIN PSi and PSiO2 optics, DLW,
optical device/circuit theory and design, computational electromagnetics,
imaging, metrology, and nanomanufacturing to answer fundamental scientific
questions about the fabrication of complex optics by addressing five major
goals:&lt;br/&gt;1. Investigate and apply polymerization-based index control and
optical characteristics in mesoporous scaffold-enabled two-photon
lithography.&lt;br/&gt;2. Measure the spectral dependence of the refractive
index and absorption coefficient (400 - 1700 nm) as well as the 3D point spread
function of the writing process.&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop software tools to: (a)
optimize the 3D index profile to achieve a given optical functionality and (b)
determine the necessary two-photon lithography exposure conditions to realize
said profile.&lt;br/&gt;4. Design, fabricate, characterize, and model novel GRIN
elements and subsurface 3D waveguides.&lt;br/&gt;5. Demonstrate the
aforementioned monolithically integrated 8-plane PIC and optical
interposer.&lt;br/&gt;Demonstration of previously unachievable photonic
geometries and functionalities will not only create a new paradigm for future
PIC architectures but will also lead to new scientific applications such as lab-
in-chip, interferometry, metrology, imaging, and quantum
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.