* 1935382
* I-Corps: End-User Trained Augmentative/Alternative Communication Tablet for Speech-Impaired Patients
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Steven Durbin, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project stems from
exploiting the powerful image and pattern recognition abilities of artificial
intelligence (AI) to create a communication assistance device that does not
require the user to adapt to the inherent limitations of a new technology.
Instead, the device adapts to the user, within whatever limitations they
experience, for near-immediate uptake. Consequently, the significant barriers
associated with introducing unfamiliar technology are removed, and the user -
regardless of the underlying physical impairment to verbal communication - can
interact with others, their environment (through linked internet-of-things
enabled smart devices) and equipment or instrumentation interfaces. Particulary
for those with a condition permanently limiting verbal communication, a
practical, adaptive and viable approach to interacting with others can reduce
the reliance on caregivers, and enable them to more fully integrate in their
environment. A more detailed understanding of the practical obstacles to
introducing new communication devices will translate to related fields as well,
including situations characterizing medical, hazardous disposal, and harsh
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project builds upon the
successful demonstration of machine-learning ("artificial intelligence, or AI")
image processing techniques to create a viable alternative method for nonverbal
communication. The input device is a conventional tablet or smartphone, and the
typical user will interact with a single finger, although alternatives are
conceivable. The project originates from a study focused on development of next-
generation, environmentally-friendly, earth-abundant element semiconductors, in
which large amounts of video data needed to be processed in an automated
fashion. The underlying framework for the corresponding tool that was developed
was adapted to this new, but not unrelated, purpose, so that the communication
device adapts to the user and the user's limitations, and not the other way
around. We have established that is is feasible to process user-defined abstract
input essentially in real time by capitalizing on current generation hardware
adapted for AI-based applications. The user trains a neural network, which
becomes increasingly more accurate with use. The project will identify
meaningful success metrics for target markets so that the corresponding minimum
viable product can be compared to existing and competing technologies, as well
as identify the primary barriers to technology uptake that can come into
play.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.