* 1935594
* SitS NSF-UKRI: Phytoelectronic Soil Sensing
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Robert McLeod, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 815,354.00

The research objectives of this project at the University of Colorado,
University of Cambridge in the UK and USDA-ARS are to measure the state of the
soil accurately, densely and remotely using plants as in situ chemical
laboratories. Correlations between the state of the soil and the contents of the
major water-conducting tissue in plants, the xylem, are well-established. Xylem
contents will be analyzed in "interrogator plants" by implanting bioelectronic
sensors in plant stems, inducing xylem to form around them and remotely
communicating data from these sensors by low-power radio transmission. This
approach will avoid the complexity of sensing the soil directly by instead
detecting the chemical response of vascular fluids to chemical and biological
changes in the soil around the roots. These fluids, which are transported by the
woody xylem tissues, are under negative pressure and thus typically difficult to
access. The project will therefore investigate a number of regeneration
techniques for surgically implanted, small sensors such that these sensors
become associated with xylem tissue in graft junctions, much like the grafting
currently used routinely in fruit trees. The entire small sensor including
implanted electronics and regenerative coating will be screen-printed for very
low cost. Screen printing recipes and other enabling techniques will be shared
with the public through the Open Science Framework. Public use of these results
will be further fostered by funded kits distributed to teams through the
international BioMaker and OpenPlant programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will explore the new field of phytoelectronics, the convergence of botany for
biorecognition, bioelectronics for chemo-sensing, internet-of-things (IoT)
electronics for communication, and machine-learning for classification. The
goals of the research are to 1) create an inexpensive, potentially biodegradable
platform for multi-variate sensing of the soil utilizing the inherent robustness
of living plants to operate autonomously in variable conditions; 2) merge these
plants with the IoT in which buried roots extract and communicate soil state
chemically to embedded multi-analyte, electronic sensors that then digitize and
relay these data to servers for integration and machine learning; and 3) advance
understanding of the interaction of soil and the biosphere by selecting plants
specialized for specific chemical, pathogen or ecological signals and using them
as instruments. The team will accomplish these goals by 1) printing the multi-
analyte sensors based on arrays of organic electrochemical transistors
individually functionalized with ion specific membranes, 2) creating printable
drug-release coatings for the electronics that encourage regeneration of xylem
tissue near the surgically implanted sensor, and 3) connecting these "chipped
plants" to RFID or LoRA backscatter communication tags which are interrogated
remotely to retrieve digitized sensor response. At program end, the combination
of these studies should enable the soil nitrate concentration in a cornfield to
be monitored daily with resolution down to square
meters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was awarded through the "Signals in
the Soil (SitS)opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that involves the
ENG/CBET and BIO/IOS divisions of the National Science Foundation (NSF), the
United States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and
Agriculture (USDA NIFA) and the following United Kingdom Research and Innovation
(UKRI) research councils: 1) The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), 2)
the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), 3) the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), and the Science and
Technology Facilities Council (STFC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.