* 1935968
* CBET-EPSRC: Dynamic Wetting &amp; Interfacial Transitions in Three Dimensions: Theory vs Experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Satish Kumar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project was awarded through the "Special Guidelines for Submitting
Collaborative Proposals under the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems, the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation, and the Division of Electrical, Communications and
Cyber Systems - the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (ENG-
EPSRC) Lead Agency Activity" opportunity. The maximum speed at which a liquid
can spread stably over a solid surface is the key factor to determining the
outcomes of numerous natural and technological processes. The instability that
emerges when this maximum speed of dynamic wetting is exceeded creates complex
three-dimensional flows that are typically undesirable. For example, undesirable
air bubbles can be entrained into the liquid while applying a coating, severely
limiting the rate of manufacture of a wide range of products. Improved
understanding of this instability is essential for developing strategies to
increase the maximum speed of dynamic wetting, which will benefit many practical
applications. This project uses a combination of experimental analysis and
computational modelling to significantly advance fundamental understanding of
the complex three-dimensional flows that arise when the maximum speed of dynamic
wetting is exceeded. User-friendly software will be developed that others can
apply to understand numerous other problems involving dynamic wetting that arise
in areas such as climate science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research at
the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, in collaboration with researchers at
the University of Warwick, will make significant progress in resolving
longstanding issues in the area of dynamic wetting by (i) development of a user-
friendly multiscale computational framework capable of capturing 3D phenomena,
(ii) use of both analysis and computational modelling to characterize and
understand the stability of dynamic wetting lines, and (iii) use of both
computational capabilities and experimental investigations to characterize and
understand interfacial instabilities governing the dynamics of droplets. The key
advance of the computational modeling will be the development of a dynamic mesh
generation capability for finite-element methods that can accurately resolve
three-dimensional time-dependent flows. The experiments will be conducted in a
custom-made coating apparatus, and will involve measurements of the maximum
speed of dynamic wetting and instability wavelength by flow visualization, as
well as measurements of the thickness of entrained air films by interferometry.
The knowledge generated from this project is expected to stimulate new
directions of fundamental research and to benefit numerous natural and
technological processes in which dynamic wetting plays a key
role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.