* 1935400
* Isostatic Elasticity in a Biomolecular Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Deborah Fygenson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2024
* USD 462,481.00

This research program will investigate how the mechanical properties of soft,
networked materials arise from the nanoscale structure and stiffness of their
junctions and strands. Soft, networked materials are ubiquitous in biology and
technology; examples include the cytoskeleton of living cells, elastomers, and
hydrogels. Historically, the dominant model for explaining these materials'
mechanical properties was the rubber model of elasticity. This model views
network strands as entropic springs and predicts that the material's stiffness
depends only on strand concentration and temperature—notably, it does not take
any other aspect of network structure into account. However, classical mechanics
tells us that the rigidity of a macroscopic network is strongly affected by the
network's valence (the number of beams emanating from a joint). This insight,
formalized by Maxwell, is known as the isostatic criterion: Networks of rigid
beams connected by pin joints, at which beams freely rotate, must have a valence
of 6 or more to be rigid, while networks of lower valence are floppy. By
investigating how (valence-independent) rubber elasticity and (valence-
dependent) isostaticity interact to create a soft, networked material's key
mechanical properties, like deformability and failure, this work will produce a
precision data set that will catalyze the development of constitutive models of
isostatic deformation and failure, thus enabling rational prediction of material
behavior in an engineering context. This research is imbued with a strong
educational component: research projects will be offered to undergraduates for
summer internships and research results will be integrated into classroom
teaching. These activities, along with the involvement of graduate students,
ensure that the project will significantly contribute to training the next
generation of researchers in this growing field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of the research is to discover the relationship by which junction
valence, rotational freedom, and strand stiffness determine both linear and non-
linear network mechanics. This will be pursued experimentally by rheological
measurements of nanoscopically-defined networked materials formed from self-
assembled DNA particles. The use of DNA offers (i) diminished entropic effects
due to DNA’s semi-rigid structure; (ii) design control over joint and strand
structure via DNA hybridization; and, (iii) dynamic control of the same via
light-switchable moieties that alter the local stability of DNA hybridization.
This project will advance the knowledge base at the intersection of mechanical
engineering and material science and demonstrate unprecedented access to and
control over the extreme mechanical properties enabled in networked
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.