* 1935228
* Active emulsions: Magneto-capillary dynamics of particles at curved interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Kyle Bishop, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2023
* USD 368,423.00

Oil and water donâ€™t mix; however, by stabilizing the interface between them,
small droplets of one can be dispersed in the other. These so-called emulsions
are commonly found in foods, cosmetics, and pharmaceuticals where mixtures of
oil-loving and water-loving molecules must work together to function properly.
Surface-active molecules and particles - termed surfactants - adsorb at oil-
water interfaces to stabilize emulsions and prevent unmixing. This project aims
to create magnet surfactants that use external magnetic fields to power dynamic
functions such as mixing and propulsion at the level of individual emulsion
droplets. The project will investigate the magnetically driven motions of
particles adsorbed at curved interfaces and their use in pumping fluids at the
micron-scale. The resulting active emulsions are potentially important for
accelerating and/or controlling the rates of drug delivery or chemical reactions
within complex fluids. In addition to research training for graduate and
undergraduate students, the project will provide educational outreach to middle
and high school students from diverse backgrounds. In collaboration with the
Inside Engineering initiative, the researchers will develop and implement a
laboratory visit curriculum for students from nearby schools in Manhattan and
the Bronx. Through hands-on demonstrations and active learning strategies, the
program aims to get students excited about the processes of scientific inquiry
and engineering design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid particle motions in uniform
fields are made possible by coupling magnetic torques to capillary forces at
curved interfaces. Building on recent demonstrations of these magneto-capillary
dynamics, the project will investigate how time-varying magnetic fields can
drive complex particle motions and interfacial flows within and around liquid
droplets. The project aims (1) to understand how the waveform of the driving
field and the properties of the magnetic particles direct their dynamic motions
on curved interfaces; (2) to quantify the transient fluid flows within and
around emulsion droplets induced by particle motions; and (3) to identify
specific particle types and driving protocols optimized for desired functions
such as enhancing mass transfer and propelling droplet motions. These aims will
be achieved through a combination of experiments on particle/emulsion systems
and modeling of magneto-capillary particle dynamics and fluid flows. The project
will examine how these field induced flows can be harnessed for enhancing mass
transfer and for propelling drop motions. In contrast to bulk processing of
macroscopic emulsions, distributed actuation within active emulsions will enable
new strategies for engineering reaction kinetics, mass transport, and
separations within multiphase fluids. In pursuit of these functions, automated
tools for Bayesian inference, experimental design, and optimization will be
developed and deployed to enable the efficient exploration of possible driving
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.