* 1935069
* CUE Ethics: Collaborative Research: An inclusive and In-Depth Computing Curriculum to help Non-majors Learn Small Patterns to Solve Big Problem
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* RoxAnn Stalvey, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 49,989.00

This project proposes to form a Networked Improvement Community (NIC) to design,
deploy and evaluate a computing curriculum designed for non-computer science
majors across a diverse range of academic partnership institutions. It is
organized as a partnership of four institutions: California Polytechnic State
University (Cal Poly); University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB);
University of Colorado at Colorado Springs (UCCS); and College of Charleston.
The project is structured around two goals: (a) increasing exposure to computing
and computational thinking among all students, and better preparing these
students for professional careers in fields requiring a certain level of
computing, and (b) diversifying the population of students enrolled in computer
science courses. The project reframes computer science around human-centric
learning goals in fifteen modules that will be implemented across the
collaborating institutions. The project is grounded in the complementary and
unique academic histories of the partnering organizations. The project addresses
the need to develop a strong, diverse, national computing-literate workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NIC's objective is to build a series of modules, each
targeting a specific aspect or a group of related aspects of computational
thinking, tightly coupled with multiple domain examples. Each module will
include an ethics perspective on the material. Project activities include
emphasize flexibility to adapt to the context of participating organizations and
to reach a variety of major disciplines through domain-specific examples and
assignments, as well as broadening participation and ethical concerns. Partner
institutions will organize these modules into coursework that best matches
individual institution?s context, and take into consideration variations such as
term length, local strengths and campus synergies, and typical number of contact
hours in a course. The organizations will work jointly on offering, testing, and
evaluating the sequence of computational thinking modules. In addition to a
commitment to work together digitally, the NIC includes two in-person workshops
for intensive shared time, testing, and evaluation. The project will evaluate
the curriculum both locally and globally for factors that impact
underrepresented students and overall program efficacy compared to a control
group. This project has the potential to serve as a model of a networked
improvement community in the area of CS education for non-CS majors. It focuses
on the need to develop a large, diverse workforce able to address computing
problems across a wide range of disciplinary and interdisciplinary problem
domains. This IUSE: CUE project is co-funded by EHR/DUE and CISE Directorates
CNS, CCF, IIS, and OAC, reflecting the project's alignment with the broader
goals of the IUSE: EHR program in DUE and complementary programs in
CISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.