* 1935576
* A Workshop to Plan The Future of the Teen Science Cafe Network
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Janice Mokros, Science Education Solutions Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 07/31/2020
* USD 73,602.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Teen Science Cafe Network is an adaptation
for teens, of the popular adult science cafe model, which brings people together
in a social setting to have an animated conversation with a scientist on some
interesting and timely topic. Since its inception in 2012, the Network has grown
at a rapid rate: it is now in 130 sites in 45 states, the District of Columbia,
and British Columbia. Multiple evaluations have documented its impact. Teens are
shown to have increased STEM literacy, a more realistic picture of scientists as
real people leading interesting lives, and a better understanding of the nature
of science. This two-and-a-half-day conference is designed to review the state
of this model of teen engagement in science and science communication.
Participants will examine lessons learned from this and similar networks to
consider the features needed to expand this model to other audiences (e.g.,
rural teens, teenage college students, teenagers on military bases, and teens
served by local chapters of professional societies based on ethnicity and
gender).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leaders of the Teen Science Cafe Network, along
with an advisory committee comprised of individuals who are successfully
managing networks, will explore these fundamental questions: 1) How can the
field best take advantage of this large and growing network? 2) How can the
current community of practice be leveraged for growth? 3) What are some of the
most effective strategies for achieving and maintaining effective, long-term
partnerships with organizations such as 4-H, science centers, networks of
afterschool providers, science festivals, professional societies, and libraries?
4) What are possible outcomes for promoting discipline-specific cafes in areas
such as ocean science, astrophysics, geoscience, and polar science? Outputs from
the conference include a refined set of guiding principles for the current
network and a white paper describing the features of strong and effective
networks and recommendations for scaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.