* 1935045
* CUE: Collaborative Research: Effective Peer Teaching Across Computing Pathways
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Maya Israel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 87,070.00

This four-institution collaborative grant aims to recruit and prepare
undergraduate near-peers as Peer Teaching Fellows (PTFs) to provide scalable,
high-quality support for students across computing pathways. It builds on a
Google-funded grant that created a software environment to monitor in-person
office hour interactions and online discussion forums. This effort aims to
identify and support student help-seeking patterns specifically with respect to
debugging practices across computing pathways. It will investigate the ways in
which diverse students seek help in-person or online, increase the effectiveness
of help-seeking interactions that focus on debugging, and create Peer Teacher
development materials that support effective debugging help-seeking
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to design
interventions that support debugging help-seeking interactions through PTF
Development. The project team plans to utilize and refine existing data
collection frameworks to gather data through office hours and discussion forums.
It will create PTF development materials in a variety of contexts to help teach
debugging skills, and analyze the impact of these materials and professional
development. The researchers intend to build a Networked Improvement Community
(NIC) of researchers and practitioners who advance the state of knowledge and
practice on recruiting and preparing PTFs to support diverse students across a
spectrum of computing pathways to develop skills critical to independence and
self-efficacy. The team will host a Peer Teaching Summit to disseminate
development materials and other findings. Monthly team meetings will provide
opportunities to discuss the data collected and develop common metrics and
approaches for data analysis, in order to increase understanding of how and why
interdisciplinary students seek help and how students approach debugging
activities. Lastly, the PTF NIC and progress toward meeting project goals will
be evaluated through frequent meetings with the advisory board. The project has
the potential to advance the state of knowledge and practice around recruiting
and preparing undergraduate near-peers as Peer Teaching Fellows to scale student
support across computing pathways. It addresses the need to build a strong and
diverse computing arm of the nation's STEM workforce. This IUSE: CUE project is
co-funded by EHR/DUE and CISE Directorates CNS, CCF, IIS, and OAC, reflecting
the project's alignment with the broader goals of the IUSE: EHR program in DUE
and complementary programs in CISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.