* 1935137
* Nonlinear Dynamical Interactions in Multistable Metastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Andres Arrieta Diaz, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 309,660.00

This project will support fundamental research uncovering new dynamic behaviors
in structures, which will promote both the progress of science and technological
advance in the field of materials and structures. Metamaterials are engineered
systems that exhibit properties not commonly found in conventional materials,
which can enhance the control of sound, vibrations and mechanical waves beyond
what current technology can produce. Despite recent progress in metamaterial
research, fundamental performance limits exist; the effective working
frequencies are too high and narrow for many useful structural applications.
This project supports fundamental investigations into new dynamical interactions
addressing these operational limitations, thereby accelerating the
implementation of metamaterials into structural applications. Specifically, the
derived theory will yield a new class of dynamical interactions allowing the
manipulation of low frequency vibrations, relevant for applications in civil,
aerospace, automotive and medical industries, such as constructing resilient
infrastructure, vibration attenuation and providing local power to the internet
of things. The uncovered new physics and potential applications will positively
impact the U.S. technological and scientific edge, ultimately benefiting its
economy and society. This research involves multiple disciplines including
engineering, physics and applied mathematics, which will allow for leveraging
the obtained results to promote Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics education. Furthermore, the educational activities will support the
participation of underrepresented groups in research, contributing to broadening
diversity in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metamaterials exhibit
effective, unconventional properties by engineering unit cells at the micrometer
or millimeter scales. However, these properties are strongly dependent on the
size of the unit cells, restricting the effective behavior to narrow, high
frequency bands or resulting in large arrangements. Thus, there is a need to
discover mechanisms allowing to obtain unit-cell size independent, broadband
metamaterials. This research investigates a mechanism enabling low frequency,
broadband behavior exploiting new types of nonlinear interactions involving
transition waves in multistable metastructures. Concretely, this effort will
establish physics-based models capturing the excitation of metastructural
vibration modes by transition waves, and vice versa. Theoretical and numerical
analyses will reveal the dynamical regimes and metastructures' parameters for
which such interactions occur. Experiments are planned using 3D-printed
multistable metastructures to validate the key physics of such nonlinear
interactions. These activities will test the hypothesis stating that transition
waves allow for low frequency, broadband dynamical behavior enabling
unconventional manipulation of vibrations in structural applications. The
overall outcome is a mathematical framework for designing and analyzing
metastructural nonlinear interactions, thereby enabling the implementation of
metamaterials in structural applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.