* 1935255
* Characterization of onset of dynamic stall for low Mach number flows
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Baskar Ganapathysubramanian, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 372,607.00

Dynamic stall is a common occurrence in maneuvering aerodynamic bodies (e.g.,
insect/bird wings, helicopter/wind turbine blades, aircraft wings) which is
characterized by large increases in unsteady aerodynamic loads. Such loads can
lead to catastrophic and fatigue failure of aircraft wings and rotor blades in
helicopters and wind turbines. The flow physics affecting the onset of dynamic
stall remains unclear and is highly dependent on a large parameter space
consisting of geometry, type of maneuver, pitch rate, and Reynolds and Mach
numbers. The project will utilize a combination of novel data analysis
techniques with high fidelity simulations to understand dynamic stall onset. A
clear understanding and characterization of stall onset will pave the way for
effective strategies to control and mitigate dynamic stall. The project has
transformative implications for a broad range of applications including fixed-
wing aircraft and rotating machinery. In addition, broader impacts are expected
through curricular enhancements and recruiting women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand and
characterize the onset of dynamic stall using efficient fluid simulations with
data-driven analysis methods and experimental validation. The specific
objectives are: (1) identify a universal parameter/marker of stall onset through
characterization of stall incipience using a suite of physics-based, data-
driven, and machine learning approaches, (2) use novel simulation strategies to
effectively explore the large parameter space by employing a novel 4-D, space-
time framework to remove transients and significantly reduce computation time
and by efficiently exploring the parameter space using an adaptive,
asynchronous, Bayesian sampling strategy, and 3) validate the universal
parameter using experimental data and additional simulations, and investigate
the role of acoustic radiation on stall onset. The proposed work consists of
intellectual advances in identifying the underlying physical phenomenon that
triggers dynamic stall onset, developing an innovative approach to efficiently
remove flow transients, and investigating the effect of acoustics on laminar
separation bubble dynamics. The project will leverage outreach and workforce
development activities ongoing at Iowa State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.