* 1935646
* Developing Integrative Manufacturing and Production Engineering Curricula That Leverage Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sagar Kamarthi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,999,927.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers
and technicians in production engineering. It will do so by developing modular
courses in data science for production engineering. These courses will be
developed by Northeastern University in collaboration with MassBay Community
College, four Manufacturing USA institutes, and three industry partners. The
overall goal of the project is to design, develop, and deploy sustainable,
online courses and curricula that bridge the production engineering-oriented
data science skills gap of incumbent professional engineers and entering
engineers and technicians. The program will address four groups of learners:
working professionals who need to upgrade their data science skills; career-
transitioning learners without manufacturing backgrounds; undergraduates who
wish to minor in data science for production engineering; and two-year community
college students preparing for either entering the workforce or a four-year
college program. The project plans to develop: 1. A modular production
engineering-oriented data science curriculum with seven courses that, in turn,
are comprised of modules; 2. An online course/module recommendation system to
help students determine which course or module best meets their needs and
current skillset; 3. Credentials including certificates and a minor in data
science for production engineering. The project aims to address the production
engineering-oriented data science skills gap, thus helping to meet the demand
for workers in manufacturing, which is estimated to have at least two million
unfilled positions between 2018 and 2028.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
the following objectives: 1. Identify the data science skills gap of current and
future production engineering workforce; 2. Develop modular courses enabled by
interactive multimedia content with active learning via on-line labs; 3. Develop
a course-module recommender system; 4. Deploy developed courses through the Open
edX platform and Jupyter Notebooks; 5. Study the effectiveness of online courses
using theories and tools of learning science; and 6. Rigorously evaluate program
objectives and outcomes via the expertise of an external evaluator. The project
will address research questions that align with the project objectives, such as
whether learners? prior knowledge helps or hinders learning and what mechanisms
best help learners acquire self-directed learning skills. The research component
of the project will include a Design Based Research approach, which includes
iterative formative assessment that drives ongoing curricular improvements.
Research data will include results from assessments of the fidelity of the
courses/curricula in meeting industry needs, student performance data, and data
from surveys and psychometric assessments. The curriculum will be designed to
accommodate students with differing needs by providing multiple credentialing
opportunities from course auditing, certificates in data science for production
engineering and applied data science for production engineering, and a college-
level minor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by NSF's EHR Core
Research: Production Engineering Education and Research (ECR: PEER) program,
which seeks to improve the education of future and current professionals in
production engineering. It also aims to study the effectiveness of the
innovative educational strategies adopted by these
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.