* 1935444
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO:   Synthetic Biology: Engineering an algal pyrenoid into higher plants to enhance yields
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Martin Jonikas, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2023
* USD 749,997.00

This project aims to lay the foundations for significant increases in global
crop yields by improving the efficiency of carbon uptake in a plant. The
research plan involves transferring key components of pyrenoids found in algae,
into a plant, Arabidopsis, in order to improve photosynthesis. Pyrenoids are
sub-cellular microcompartments that are found in the chloroplast of several
algae and are involved in carbon fixation. The project consists of three aims
that are each targeted at engineering one of the key components of the pyrenoid
into Arabidopsis, and one computational aim that develops a quantitative model
of pyrenoid function to support the other three aims. These four aims synergize
to produce a minimal, functional pyrenoid in Arabidopsis. The work contributes
to meeting the 2050 global food demand with minimal ecological impacts. The
project trains high school, undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral scientists
in each of two principal participating laboratories and launches them onto the
next stages of their careers. The project team is engaging industry and
philanthropic organizations to facilitate translation of advances to crops. The
team is sharing their research with the general public through outreach talks to
general audiences at venues such as science caf's, through social media such as
Twitter, and by improving Wikipedia pages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a key step
towards enhancing crop yields, this project aims to enhance CO2 uptake of the
model plant Arabidopsis by engineering it with a minimal synthetic CO2 uptake
mechanism derived from components of the pyrenoid from green algae. The project
consists of three aims, each targeted at engineering one of the key components
of the pyrenoid into Arabidopsis. The research plan involves (a) reconstituting
a pyrenoid matrix in higher plants, (b) placing the Rubisco matrix around
thylakoids containing bicarbonate transporters and (c) placing the pyrenoidal
carbonic anhydrase into the thylakoid lumen. Computational methods are used
throughout the project to develop a quantitative model of pyrenoid function that
would drive further investigations. To support the plant engineering efforts,
the investigators perform targeted research in algae and in vitro. The project
benefits from an outstanding international team with a strong track record of
collaboration in advancing both basic knowledge of the pyrenoid and the ability
to engineer algal components into higher plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science Foundation
and the UKRI Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.