* 1935798
* I-Corps: Solid-State Devices for Thermal Management and Power Generation
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Saniya LeBlanc, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
significant change it enables for devices which can directly convert heat to
electricity or locally heat/cool a surface. The new method, laser additive
manufacturing of thermoelectric materials, is a transformational manufacturing
approach, and this technology would solve device engineering and manufacturing
challenges prevalent in existing thermoelectric generator and thermoelectric
cooler technologies. This new approach could reduce material waste and enable
innovative geometries: the result would be higher-performing and more cost-
effective thermoelectric devices. This technique also impacts the additive
manufacturing field. The approach makes additive manufacturing relevant for a
broader set of industries and applications by advancing laser additive
manufacturing's applicability to new classes of semiconductor thermoelectric
materials. This I-Corps project will explore implementation and
commercialization opportunities of additive manufacturing for thermoelectric
devices, providing the potential to impact numerous industries and technologies
in aerospace, defense, automotive, electronics, and telecommunications
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on a new
technology that solves critical production problems facing the thermoelectrics
industry. Thermoelectric devices are currently manufactured using bulk material
processing with machining, assembly, and integration steps which lead to
performance degradation, high costs, material waste, and limited applications.
The new technique is significantly different from the traditional manufacturing
method and greatly simplifies the manufacturing process. Laser additive
manufacturing eliminates the need for assembly and improves interface
integration by production and placement of all the thermoelectric legs in one
process. This results in a high-performance, cost-effective solution to replace
the current manufacturing techniques. The platform developed here generates
three-dimensional structures which cannot be achieved through traditional
machining, and these freeform geometries would increase the applicability of
thermoelectric devices in a broader set of markets. The new approach has been
shown to work on thermoelectric materials and used to create novel
thermoelectric part geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.