* 1935305
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Studies of recovery from bleaching in Acropora hyacinthus: epigenetic shifts, impacts on reproductive biology and carry-over effects
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 123,319.00

Coral reefs provide strong economic and ecological benefits, yet they are
declining worldwide largely due to extreme heat events that cause bleaching, a
disturbance of the essential relationship between the algae that live inside the
coral and the coral. There is currently a mass coral bleaching event in Moorea,
French Polynesia where up to 90% of corals show some level of bleaching in
response to heat stress. This location is ideal to study adaptation and
acclimation thanks to the facilities and sampling of the Moorea Coral Reef (MCR)
Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site. This project explores how strong
natural disaster events shape genetic differences in populations through time.
By using historical environmental data it may be possible to identify
modifications of the genome linked to past bleaching events. This knowledge will
help establish models to predict reef recovery after disturbance and will be
useful for choosing colonies with the best chance of survival in restoration
efforts. This project also investigates how the bleaching history of the parents
impacts characteristics of the next generations, such as reproductive output,
larval, survival and heat tolerance. This project will provide training and
involvement in research for three senior PhD students and at least five
undergraduates. Coral restoration efforts rely on understanding how corals might
adapt to environmental stress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mass coral bleaching
event currently occurring in French Polynesia (April 2019) offers an opportunity
to test hypotheses regarding mechanisms of rapid response to large scale
disturbances. This project investigates potential epigenetic and genetic
mechanisms involved in either resisting stress or recovering from bleaching. The
research leverages the Moorea Coral Reef (MCR) LTER, which integrates the high
resolution oceanographic metrics and data on long-term community dynamics into
the study of rapid adaptation of Acropora hyacinthus. Genetic and epigenetic
signatures of a natural selection event (bleaching) are tracked in the field to
test the impact of bleaching history on reproductive and carry-over effects in
larval and juvenile corals. Both physiological and molecular methods, such as
2bRAD genotyping and reduced representation bisulfite sequencing, are employed
to investigate correlations between phenotypes and genetic and epigenetic
differences in the genome. This work explores associations between selection on
genetic variation and epigenetic variation as well as the potential role of DNA
methylation in phenotypic change across a generation in association with coral
bleaching. In this era of global change, there is mounting evidence that rapid
evolutionary processes are occurring at time scales relevant to ecological
processes. Therefore, capitalizing on a system with rich long-term ecological
data, such as that associated with the MCR LTER, is ideal to investigate
mechanisms of rapid adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.