* 1935641
* Collaborative Research: Micro-Electro-Mechanical Neural Integrated Sensing and Computing Units for Wearable Device Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Fadi Alsaleem, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 391,532.00

As wearable devices gain traction in the consumer market, unobtrusive and
continuous monitoring of health and behavior directly translate to improving
wellness and quality of life. These platforms provide new opportunities to
detect the early onset of a disease, assess human performance, or enhance
productivity, among many other potential applications. The principal challenge
with these devices, however, is their battery life. Due to stringent space
requirements, the batteries within such devices are small and can be quickly
drained by performing sophisticated algorithms (e.g. machine learning) and heavy
wireless communications. This, in turn, forces users to charge them more
frequently and discourages widespread adoption of these devices. To overcome
this challenge, the goal of the proposed project is to highlight the
computational potential of micro-electro-mechanical-systems (MEMS) devices as
hybrid sensing and computing elements to enable wearable devices to efficiently
perform sophisticated algorithms while preserving their battery power. This
project has tremendous potential to impact US industry by bringing forward a
new, highly-intelligent computing unit technology that can be powered by a
permanent battery and can be incorporated into many medical applications.
Bringing together three institutions including the University Nebraska-Lincoln,
the University of Texas at Dallas, and Texas A&amp;M University. The results of
this project will also be adopted into various courses being taught at all three
institutions. It will also be used in a NanoBridge summer camp beginning in 2020
to promote engineering interest among high school students from underrepresented
groups through educational activities in MEMS and
nanoengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop an ultra-
power computing unit for wearable devices to locally perform machine-learning
algorithms. The algorithms will be coded in the mechanical responses of MEMS
that also simultaneously capture the measurement of interest, such as
acceleration. Wearable devices equipped with machine learning algorithms hold
great potential for saving lives, for example, by automatically detecting falls.
However, due to stringent space requirements, the batteries within such devices
are small and are quickly drained, for the most part, by multiple MEMS sensors
read-out circuity, wireless communication, and microprocessors. This contributes
directly to nonadherence as users must charge their devices frequently and may
have trouble with false alarms caused by the less accurate algorithms that must
be used due to limited local computing power. To overcome these challenges, a
novel approach is proposed that moves some of the computing to the sensing
physical layer. This approach builds on the fact that the sensing element of a
MEMS device requires very little power, and its mechanical response coupled with
other sensing elements can be tuned to naturally perform machine learning
algorithms from their own measurements. Thus, rather than producing row
measurement signals that need to be amplified, conditioned, and converted from
analog to digital to be read and processed by a microprocessor, the response of
the multiple sensing elements will collectively encode high-level information.
This approach will enable wearable devices to locally perform advanced
algorithms while consuming two orders of magnitude less power than present
state-of-the-art technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.