* 1935205
* 2-Dimensional Zeolite Nanosheet Tiled Ion Separators for Approaching Ideal Performance in Redox Flow Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Junhang Dong, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2023
* USD 305,460.00

Redox flow batteries (RFBs) are large-scale energy storage systems that enable
the use of intermittent renewable energy resources, such as solar and wind
power, which may not always be available when energy is being consumed. Unlike
other battery technologies, RFBs can store significant amounts of energy in
fluids in large reservoirs. The fluids are then flowed through cells to insert
(i.e. charging) or to extract energy (i.e. discharging) from the system.
Significant improvements in energy storage capacity, power output and material
costs are necessary to enable wide-scale deployment of this technology. This
fundamental research project will help solve these needs by addressing key
barriers in the ion separation membrane component whose performance impacts
overall energy efficiency and system lifetime for power generation and energy
storage. The existing ion separators are polymer-based, which have inherent
shortcomings of inadequate selectivity and material instability that reduce the
RFB efficiency and operation life. Similarly, membranes based on inorganic
oxides such as ceramics have issues with durability and efficiency. This project
aims to demonstrate a new zeolite nanomaterial-based membrane that can approach
ideal performance as an ion separator and help unlock the potential of aqueous
RFBs for cost-effective energy storage. The findings of this basic research
project will advance knowledge on nanomaterial synthesis and ion transport
behavior in the new membranes. The multidisciplinary research activities of this
program will offer excellent opportunities for training next generation
scientists and engineers in the frontiers of emerging energy technologies and
critical material development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on a
new 2-dimensional zeolite nanosheet tiled ion separation membrane (ZNTM). This
project will yield fundamental knowledge on 2D nanomaterial synthesis and ion
transport behavior in the new structure of subnanometer-pore 2D nanosheet
membranes. Defect-free zeolite membranes, e.g. single crystals, are
theoretically capable of conducting protons with high selectivity and
exceptional material stability in RFB operations. However, these favorable
properties cannot be effectively realized by the conventional mixed matrix
zeolite membrane structures because of excessive metal ion crossover through
shortcutting intercrystalline spaces and high resistance from a relatively large
thickness of membrane. The project will address the chief challenges in
synthesizing and property tailoring of 2D ionic sieve crystals and effectively
utilize their unique properties by the novel ZNTM structure. Fundamental studies
are directed to identify the conditions for synthesizing nanometer-thick zeolite
nanosheets with controlled surface chemistry, geometric and dimensional
properties (i.e. adequately large width-to-thickness aspect ratios), and channel
orientation in preferable direction. Systematic experiments will be carried out
to establish an effective methodology for fabricating the ultrathin 2D ZNTM ion
separators. The ion selectivity, conductivity, and material stability of the ion
separators will be extensively examined to understand their dependences on the
microstructure and surface chemistry of the zeolite nanosheets and ZNTM. The
ZNTM with verified ion selectivity and minimized electric resistance will be
evaluated for full cell RFB operation including performance in battery energy
efficiency, power density, thermal stability, and lifetime. The evaluations of
the new membranes will be concentrated on the industrially important all-
vanadium and ion-chromium RFB chemistries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.