* 1935635
* ANT LIA Collaborative Research: Interrogating Molecular and Physiological Adaptations in Antarctic Marine Animals.
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Scott Santagata, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 05/31/2024
* USD 152,204.00

The Antarctic benthic marine invertebrate communities are currently experiencing
rapid environmental change due to the combined effects of global warming, ocean
acidification, and the potential for ice-shelf collapse. Colonial invertebrate
animals called bryozoans create specialized ‘reef-like’ habitats that are
reminiscent of the coral reefs found in tropical marine environments. In the
Antarctic, these bryozoan communities occupy significant portions of the shallow
and deep seafloor, and provide habitat for other marine animals. The bryozoan
lineages that make up these communities have undergone dramatic genetic and
physiological changes in response to the unique environmental conditions found
in Antarctica. Comparison of the DNA data from multiple Antarctic bryozoans to
those of related warm-water species will help researchers identify unique and
shared adaptations characteristic of bryozoans and other marine organisms that
have adapted to the Antarctic environment. Additionally, direct experimental
tests of catalytic-related genes (enzymes) will shed light on potential cold-
adaption in various cell processes. Workshops will train diverse groups of
scientists using computational tools to identify genetic modifications of
organisms from disparate environments. Public outreach activities to students,
social media, and science journalists are designed to raise awareness and
appreciation of the spectacular marine life in the Antarctic and the hidden
beauty of bryozoan biology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the genomic
changes underlying adaptations to polar environments is critical for predicting
how ecological changes will affect life in these fragile environments.
Accomplishing these goals requires looking in detail at genome-scale data across
a wide array of organisms in a phylogenetic framework. This study combines
multifaceted computational and functional approaches that involves analyzing in
the genic evolution of invertebrate organisms, known as the bryozoans or
ectoprocts. In addition, the commonality of bryozoan results with those of other
taxa will be tested by comparing newly generated data to that produced in
previous workshops. The specific aims of this study include: 1) identifying
genes involved in adaptation to Antarctic marine environments using
transcriptomic and genomic data from bryozoans to test for positively selected
genes in a phylogenetic framework, 2) experimentally testing identified
candidate enzymes (especially those involved in calcium signaling, glycolysis,
the citric acid cycle, and the cytoskeleton) for evidence of cold adaption, and
3) conducting computational workshops aimed at training scientists in techniques
for the identification of genetic adaptations to polar and other disparate
environments. The proposed work provides critical insights into the molecular
rules of life in rapidly changing Antarctic environments, and provides important
information for understanding how Antarctic taxa will respond to future
environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.