* 1935777
* Collaborative Research: A Virtual Community of Practice to Promote LGBTQ Inclusion in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Kelly Cross, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2021
* USD 98,504.00

Recent research on the experiences of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
queer (LGBTQ) individuals in engineering has shown that the climate can be
unfriendly (or "chilly") for both students and professionals. This project aims
to increase the inclusion of LGBTQ students and professionals in engineering. It
will provide support for new approaches to foster inclusion and research on how
to enable faculty and staff to become change agents. The project will identify
issues faced by LGBTQ students and professionals in engineering, identify and
implement strategies to create more welcoming engineering environments, and
disseminate those strategies so that they can be expanded to a national level.
Successful completion of this project will result in the implementation of
policies and practices in engineering environments to increase inclusion and
participation of LGBTQ students and professionals. In addition, it will
determine the usefulness of a Virtual Community of Practice model for efforts
such as this to address other societal issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A chilly
climate for LGBTQ individual can be found in every sector of STEM professions,
where cultural norms and professional ideologies make it difficult to recognize
and rectify exclusionary practices. One negative consequence of this chilly
environment is difficulty in recruiting and retaining talented LGBTQ individuals
into the engineering profession. This project uses qualitative research to
generate new knowledge about the processes of developing a community of practice
to promote LGBTQ inclusion in engineering, how the members of the community
develop into change agents, and what strategies are effective in reshaping norms
and increasing LGBTQ inclusion in engineering departments. The results will be
translated into practice through the iterative refinement of Virtual Community
of Practice activities and implementation of promising practices to advance
LGBTQ inclusion in engineering departments. In addition, the research will be
the basis of systematic development and formative refinement of an online
SafeZone course to provide inclusion training to engineering students and
professionals nationwide. The impact of this project will extend beyond the
boundaries of engineering to STEM more broadly, as the Virtual Community of
Practice members will include members from the various STEM fields.