* 1935466
* I-Corps: Fall prediction and prevention by an artificial compound eye camera system
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Hongrui Jiang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to predict
and avert falls and fall-related injuries/deaths of older adults with high risks
of fall due to various age-related chronic diseases such as diabetes,
Alzheimer's disease, and other dementias, Parkinson's disease and heart failure.
Falls are a leading cause of unintentional injuries and seventh leading cause of
mortality among older people aged 65 and over, which leads to approximately 3
million emergency department visits per year in U.S. alone. Prevention of falls
will not only improve the overall health outcomes and save lives, but also will
benefit society by reducing the expenses in medical treatment and emergency
department visits. Specifically, the successful commercialization of the
proposed technology could provide value to all senior care stakeholders such as
hospitals, caregivers including long-term care facilities and family members,
government and private insurers and age-related academic institutions and
assisted device manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will
further develop an artificial compound eye camera (ACECam) system that can
extract clinically-relevant gait and mobility data, such as gait speed and sit-
to-stand time, from the daily life of older adults who can have higher risk of
falls. By integration of innovative compound eye optics with off-the-shelf image
sensors, the ACECam technology can significantly reduce the computational costs
of motion tracking and action recognition with the algorithms for clinical-
relevant gait and mobility data developed based on convolutional neural network.
Additionally, ACECam is unobtrusive for the daily life of older adults by not
requiring wearable sensor systems that are commonly applied in current
gait/motion tracking wearables. The raw data acquired by ACECam contains limited
visual information and so will protect visual privacy of the
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.