* 1935387
* I-Corps: Non-invasive DNA testing of chromosomal markers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Mark Hauber, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to use a
combination of novel and non-invasive DNA testing methods to identify
chromosomal markers in reptiles. The main goal of this approach is to generate a
practical and commercial solution for veterinarians, zoos, and wildlife
researchers to identify individual reptiles' genetic traits, which are critical
for health-treatment delivery, captive breeding, and population structure
analyses. This proposal specifically explores an unmet service functionality
within the captive and wild reptilian veterinary and propagation sectors to
increase accuracy, efficiency, and success of treatment and to generate a better
informed and more consistent customer basis. The proposed product will allow
veterinarians and others to use a non-invasive DNA collection method to gather
genetic material and, in turn, to receive accurate results on the chromosomal
structure of individual reptiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will
capitalize on a combination of novel genetic techniques with non-invasive DNA
sampling to allow for the identification of physiologically and behaviorally
relevant chromosomal markers in reptiles, focusing on non-avian squamates.
Genetic sequencing of chromosomal markers in avian reptiles is a straightforward
scientific and commercially already available procedure, whereas non-avian
reptiles possess highly variable chromosomal determination mechanisms, from
temperature-dependence through sequence-based chromosomal assignment. Thus, even
within the closely related lineages of lizards and snakes, protocols used for
genetic assessment in one species may not work in other species. The technology
developed here solves this by utilizing a new quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (qPCR) based approach to identify gene-copy number in specific
reptilian chromosomes. A quantitative genetics solution will determine
chromosomal identity for over 4000 species of lizards and snakes and combine it
with expertise in diverse non-invasive DNA collection and extraction techniques.
The proposed novel combination of protocols has been validated to uniquely
enable the assessment of the molecular markers of potential physiological and
behavioral traits in a broad diversity of reptiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.