* 1935843
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Thermal Radiation Control using Crumpled 2D-Xene Materials for Wearable Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Jaeho Lee, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 305,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wearable devices pose unique challenges for
thermal management. The cooling or heating system must be flexible and able to
adapt to changing conditions. For example, direct sunlight can have a strong
heating effect. Conventional cooling or heating systems for thermal radiation
control, however, are based on rigid structures and cannot adapt to changing
conditions. Thermal radiation control for wearable devices requires a novel
mechanism to selectively and dynamically modulate light absorption and infrared
emission. There are many examples in nature that can change color or regulate
body temperature using surface structures. Inspired by unique examples in nature
such as desert ants and chameleons, the PIs will create a selective emitter and
integrate it with a stretchable polymer substrate to enable dynamic thermal
radiation control. The concept is based on a controllable variation in the
morphology of two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene and phosphorene.
These materials, called 2D-Xenes, are a novel platform to control thermal
radiation in a reversible manner. The research will lead to a better
understanding of relationships morphology, spectral emissivity, and temperature
in 2D materials. In turn, the work will breakthroughs in thermal management of
wearable devices. The PIs will integrate research and teaching and establish an
outreach program that will spark the scientific interest of K-12 students,
underrepresented students, and veterans. The PIs will also organize
collaborative outreach events across the participating institutions. Joint
workshops will expose students to state-of-the-art research and education
opportunities in the PIs' respective
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past
several decades, advances in our knowledge of controlling electricity and light
has made revolutionary progress in the field of electronics and photonics, but
our knowledge of controlling heat has made relatively little progress. The PIs
aim to add significant contributions to the scientific community by presenting
novel material designs of thermal radiation control and identifying novel
mechanisms of dynamic thermal radiation control for wearable devices. The main
objectives of this project are to establish a fundamental understanding of
relationships between microscale-to-nanoscale morphology, spectral emissivity,
and temperature using 2D-Xene materials such as graphene and phosphorene and to
enable dynamic thermal radiation control for wearable devices. The PIs will
combine complementary expertise in nanomechanics and thermal sciences to
demonstrate unique morphology control in 2D-Xene materials via mechanical-
straining-induced crumpling and investigate the effects of varying crumpling
levels in thermal properties through computational and experimental approaches.
The major hypothesis of the proposed research is that strain-induced morphology
variations in crumpled 2D-Xene materials lead to selective changes in the
emissivity spectrum and to significant changes in temperature for wearable
devices. The controllable strain-induced morphology variation in the proposed
material design allows quantitative experimental investigations, which will
reveal characteristics of morphology-dependent emissivity, and emissivity-
dependent temperature. The project will elucidate solar absorption and infrared
emission phenomena in crumpled 2D-Xene materials via rigorous coupled-wave
analysis and finite-difference time-domain computations. The project will
identify the limits of thermal radiation control and present viable pathways of
thermal management for wearable devices. For instance, strains induced by a
wrist movement can change the morphology of the 2D-Xene material and the 2D-Xene
material-based selective emitter will provide dynamic thermal radiation control.
Through this work, the project will explain how artificial periodicities created
by crumpled 2D-Xene materials lead to emissivity and temperature modulations and
enable predictive modeling for wearable devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.