* 1935604
* Fundamental Investigation of Preferred Orientation Mechanism in Concrete
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Roya Maboudian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 12/31/2023
* USD 559,015.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Over time, concrete structures deform under the
weight they support, which ultimately leads to structural failure if not
replaced. The concrete deformation is caused when the microscopic grains that
bind the concrete together - grains known as calcium-silicate-hydrate - are
compelled by the compressive force to move past each other. However, the
mechanism that causes some concretes to deform more than others is not well
understood. In this project, researchers are studying how a series of calcium-
silicate-hydrates responds to compressive stress. For example, the team is
examining the effect of adding aluminum, which is now being added to some
cements as an environmentally friendly way to dispose of metal wastes. The
researchers are using advanced X-ray-based imaging techniques to directly
visualize how the grains respond to compression. The results of this project can
be used to provide insights into concrete failure mechanisms and suggest
remedies to increase durability towards more environmentally responsible
infrastructure. As such, this project plays a crucial role in the forecasting
and replacement of the nation?s aging civil infrastructure. The project is
training both undergraduate and graduate students; an emphasis is placed on
recruiting students from groups typically underrepresented in the sciences to
join the team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: An insidious decay
mechanism of concrete is its creep under stress. The main binding phase,
nanocrystalline calcium-silicate-hydrate (C-S-H), is implicated in the creep,
but there is very little understanding of how these grains slide past each
other. C-S-H grains comprise a number of calcium oxide sheets decorated with
silica tetrahedra, where each sheet is separated by a thin layer of water
molecules. Depending on the amount of silicon or if metals are present, the
properties of the C-S-H can vary significantly. The team is using domestic
synchrotron facilities to measure grain alignment (texturing) under uniaxial
stress towards determining the mechanism(s) of grain slippage. The water
environment in C-S-H is being studied with proton nuclear magnetic resonance
relaxometry to determine how liquid- or ice-like it is. Finally, the strain in
silicon - oxygen bonds under stress is being studied with uniaxial-stress Raman
spectroscopy to determine if there are slip planes within the structure under
uniaxial stress. The development of uniaxial-stress Raman spectroscopy will be
useful for understanding similar phenomena in other nanocrystalline ceramic
materials. The results of the project are useful for engineering models of
structural integrity in cement-based structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.