* 1935309
* Developing Science Drivers for a Proposed US High Arctic Research Center: Fairbanks, AK - October 2019
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Nettie LaBelle-Hamer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2021
* USD 49,961.00

Rapidly changing conditions in the Arctic have increased access to natural
resources and maritime routes. Such increased access affects not only the
natural environment, but also impacts the lives of Indigenous and local
residents. Thawing permafrost and coastal erosion affect infrastructure,
communities, and ecosystems. The enormity of the region exacerbates security and
safety concerns created by lack of infrastructure, insufficient emergency
response capabilities, and scarce monitoring. Evolving Arctic conditions also
present significant challenges for scientists and policy makers, such as
insufficient observations and monitoring to build more robust climate models.
This project supports a conference in Fairbanks, Alaska, to scope the science
drivers for the creation of a US High Arctic Research Center (HARC) located at
or near Oliktok Point in Alaska. Intended outcomes of the conference include
well-defined science questions to be answered by access to the Arctic that HARC
would create, the potential role for the National Science Foundation and other
federal agencies, and a list of stakeholders. This workshop will engage Arctic
experts and knowledge holders to develop scientific justification for evaluating
the potential establishment of another permanent research facility in the
Arctic. The pursuit of a US High Arctic Research Center will formalize
relationships and communication pathways among scientists, Arctic communities,
industry, state and federal agencies, and international
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will engage Arctic domain science
experts to articulate the research needs and scientific priorities for a
permanent, year-round research station in the US High Arctic where restricted
air space, coastal access, and existing infrastructure will improve the quality
and cost-effectiveness of basic science and operations. Experts from disciplines
across Earth sciences will be brought together to help define the science
drivers and expand interdisciplinary collaborations to create broader impacts to
basic research including better forecasting, enhanced modeling, and improved
understanding of environmental change and its ramifications. The workshop will
identify the key science missions and technical activities that would be
essential to realize this proposition. While the increase in human interaction
with the Arctic environment is primarily due to the increase in natural resource
exploitation and the changing global climate, these activities also create
cultural, development, and socioeconomic changes and opportunities. The pursuit
and establishment of a multifaceted research, education, and outreach program,
as will be developed through this project, may ensure that the knowledge gained
by the University of Alaska Fairbanks and its HARC partners will be developed
with, and transferred, to Arctic stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.