* 1935291
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Functional-Domain Soft Robots Precisely Controlled by Quantitative Dynamic Models and Data
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Ellen Roche, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project will create a new class of submillimeter surgical soft robots,
capable of untethered operation in the human body, and enabled by programmable
domains of soft functional materials designed to respond in different ways to
external magnetic fields. These materials can be used to propel and steer the
robot or to trigger permanent shape change, with different functions selected by
the frequency of the forcing field. Other material domains are designed to
provide distributed sensing through changes in electronic properties. At the
system level, both model-based and data-driven methods will be used to modulate
the external magnetic field to control the robot in the body, based on real-time
fluoroscopy images and information from the robot's sensors. Robot performance
will be experimentally validated, including in animal models. The result will be
enhanced accuracy, steerability, and navigability over conventional techniques,
thus providing access to complex and constrained environments unreachable by
existing surgical robots or robotic catheters. These new robots will open new
venues for minimally invasive surgery and potentially address longstanding
challenges and unmet needs in healthcare. The project will be carried out by a
team of researchers with complementary expertise, including soft active
materials design and fabrication, constitutive modeling and mechanics, flexible
electronics and sensors, machine learning and data processing, medical device
design, and translational medicine. The project will provide research and
training opportunities to graduate, undergraduate and high school students from
underrepresented groups, and will offer workshops and seminars for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft robots are currently facing a set of key
challenges including untethered actuation, distributed sensing, accurate
control, and miniaturization. This project seeks to address the challenges
through a paradigm-shifting functional-domain approach for the design,
fabrication, and control of a new class of functional-domain soft robots (FunDo
SoRo). FunDo SoRo with self-contained multi-functional domains of programmable
actuation and distributed sensing and data-driven strategies for accurate
dynamics control will represent a new paradigm in the design, manufacture and
control of soft robotics. The specific approaches in achieving FunDo SoRo are to
1) develop novel functional materials and multi-material 3D printing techniques
to realize field-based remote actuation, shape-reconfiguration, and distributed
sensing through a set of integrated actuation domains responsive to static
magnetic fields, shape-memory domains reconfigurable under dynamic magnetic
fields, and sensing domains capable of measuring strain, contact pressure, and
temperature; 2) develop theoretical and computational models to quantitatively
predict the dynamic response of FunDo SoRo upon actuation, and data-driven
strategies assisted by machine learning to accurately control the dynamics of
FunDo SoRo; and 3) experimentally validate submillimeter soft continuum robots
for minimally invasive procedures to address unmet needs and challenges in
healthcare such as cerebral aneurysms or obstructive pulmonary
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.