* 1935957
* EAGER: Influence of Ionic Liquids on Product Selectivity in CO2 Electroreduction over Copper Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Elizabeth Biddinger, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Carbon dioxide (CO2) electroreduction holds promise for producing fuels and
chemicals from waste CO2 and renewable electricity. Opportunities exist to
produce more high order hydrocarbons and alcohols, however controlling product
selectivity and having high activity remain as the key challenges to overcome.
The proposed exploratory research project aims to investigate the use of copper
(Cu) and ionic liquids (ILs) as co-catalysts for the conversion of CO2 to
valuable chemicals and fuels. This is a high risk-high payoff project that may
lead to the development of technologies for on-demand conversion of CO2 to fuels
and chemicals using renewable electricity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breakthroughs in
achieving high product selectivity for hydrocarbons and alcohols are possible by
using ILs as dilute aqueous additives in CO2 electroreduction over Cu. The
central hypothesis of the proposed EAGER project is that the utilization of ILs
as co-catalysts at low concentrations in aqueous electrolytes can suppress the
hydrogen evolution reaction and enhance CO2 electroreduction selectivity towards
higher order hydrocarbons and alcohols on Cu catalysts. By modifying the IL
cation-anion pair, the thermophysical and chemical properties of the IL can be
altered dramatically. The proposed research plan seeks to identify the key
properties an IL must have in order to be a good co-catalyst for the enhancement
of the faradaic efficiency towards hydrocarbons and alcohols. To test the
hypothesis, the work is split into two main objectives: 1) Identify key IL
structure properties that influence faradaic efficiency of CO2t
electroreduction, and 2) Determine if there are synergistic effects between IL
and Cu morphology on CO2 electroreduction faradaic efficiency. The scientific
insights developed for selecting ILs based upon their structure-property
relationships will be transferable to other electrochemical systems,
significantly impacting the way ILs are used. The proposed research plan may
also be applicable to other electrochemical synthesis methods, such as
electrochemical ammonia synthesis and electrochemical hydrogenations, and other
electrochemical systems, such as batteries, fuel cells and waste treatment. The
educational broader impacts of the proposal include scientific workforce
development, particularly of women in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.