* 1935599
* Collaborative Research: SitS NSF UKRI: Decoding Nitrogen Dynamics in Soil through Novel Integration of in-situ Wireless Soil Sensors with Numerical Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Guiling Wang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2023
* USD 695,000.00

This project was awarded through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" opportunity, a
collaborative solicitation that involves the United States Department of
Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA NIFA) and the
following United Kingdom Research and Innovation (UKRI) research councils: 1)
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), 2) the Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), 3) the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), and the Science and Technology Facilities
Council (STFC). Nitrate runoff from soil in drainage water from agricultural and
horticultural lands into waterways, a process that is increased even more by
nitrogen-containing fertilizer use, is a long-standing challenge for
agricultural sustainability and environmental protection. One effective approach
to improve efficiency of water and fertilizer use, and thereby decrease nitrate
runoff, is through precision farming practices guided by real-time monitoring
and near-term forecasts of crop irrigation and fertilization needs. Currently,
there is a severe lack of reliable sensing technologies and modeling tools for
monitoring the variability of soil moisture and nitrogen concentration over
different scales. This interdisciplinary collaborative project involving
researchers at the University of Connecticut and the University of New Hampshire
in the U.S., and at the University of Southampton and the University of Reading
in the U.K., aims to tackle the grand challenge of decoding nitrogen dynamics in
soil through integration of four innovative solutions: 1) High frequency
wireless nitrogen sensing technology; 2) Field-deployable high-accuracy
calibration sensors in soil; 3) Real-time profiling of nitrogen species and soil
moisture levels in two typical ecosystems (corn farm and deciduous forest); and
4) Data-driven modeling of nitrogen dynamics in the region of soil in the
vicinity of plant roots where the soil chemistry and microbiology are influenced
by root growth, respiration, and nutrient exchange. The proposed convergent
research of innovative in-situ sensing and data-driven modeling will close the
technology gap between soil signal detection and agricultural management. Unique
integration of soil sensor development, lab-scale tests and field tests,
wireless sensor networks, and model validation will yield significant impacts on
broader scientific communities and key stakeholders. Multiple education and
outreach initiatives, including hands-on experiments and online video clips,
will stimulate student interest in STEM careers, especially for underrepresented
groups. Interactions with industrial partners, policy makers, and end users will
be strengthened through workshops and seminars. All these features contribute to
improving resource use, better food security, and the reduction of soil and
water contamination in the US and UK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By targeting two
critical soil signals, nitrogen species (ammonium and nitrate) and soil
moisture, this US-UK SitS collaborative project will be conducted through six
interactive tasks. First, high frequency fine-resolution miniature hydrogel-
coating solid-state ion selective membrane-based (HS-ISM) wireless nitrogen
sensors will be developed by the US team to enable real-time in situ nitrogen
detection in soil. Second, droplet-flow microfluidic-based sensors (DFMS) for
nitrogen will be developed by the UK team for in situ calibration of the mass-
deployed HS-ISM sensors. Third, low-cost and low-energy wireless networks will
be developed for data collection from multiple sensors across large fields.
Fourth, in a lab-scale soil system, HS-ISM nitrogen sensors, in conjunction with
newly developed mm-sized soil moisture sensors (MSMS), will be assessed for
high-resolution profiling and wireless data transmission capability and
calibrated in situ using DFMS sensors. Fifth, wireless nitrogen sensors and MSMS
sensors will be deployed at two ecosystems, a corn farm in the US and a forest
ecosystem in the UK, and examined for 13 months. Finally, numerical models of
the rhizosphere nitrogen cycle will be calibrated based on the in-situ nitrogen
profiling data. These new numerical models will be used to simulate and predict
the rhizosphere nitrogen dynamics under different weather and farming practices
beyond the end of the project. This project will transform existing inefficient
and labor-intensive soil analysis practices to an automated and highly-efficient
soil nitrogen dynamics decoding and field modeling strategy. This project will
lead to a better understanding of soil nitrogen dynamics and provide a new
vision in nitrogen sensing technology and soil modeling methodology, enabling
better soil management by key stakeholders in both the US and
UK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.