* 1935018
* GCR: Collaborative Research: Convergence on Micro- and Nanoplastics in Aquatic Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* Wayne Landis, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2025
* USD 322,927.00

This Growing Convergence Research project will advance scientific understanding
of how micro- and nanoplastics impact aquatic environments. Plastic pollution is
one of the greatest current global environmental challenges and a large fraction
of it is present in micro- (&lt;5 mm) and nano- (1-1000 nm) sized fragments.
Ingestion or uptake of these microscopic fragments of plastic can damage
tissues, alter growth, and affect reproductive processes in aquatic organisms
critical to the food web. To inform risk assessments and develop remediation
strategies, this project will converge across environmental toxicology,
environmental engineering, marine biology, and fisheries science to establish
foundational science on the fate and effects of micro- and nanoplastics in
aquatic ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore what
properties of micro- and nanoplastics and what environmental factors are
determinative of risk. The research team will: 1) characterize the
physicochemical composition, size, and shape of micro- and nano-scale plastics
commonly found in aquatic environments; 2) determine the biological consequences
of micro- and nanoplastics exposure in freshwater and estuarine model organisms
using rapid toxicity testing strategies; 3) design and validate two estuarine
microcosm assays to study micro- and nanoplastics fate and impacts; 4) determine
how real-world transformations of micro- and nanoplastics may alter the fate of
the plastics or plastic additives; and 5) establish computational models of
micro- and nanoplastics environmental fate, transformations and predictive
ecotoxicology. The project will also establish the Pacific Northwest Consortium
on Plastics, which will bring together diverse researchers, regulators, and
other stakeholders to catalyze innovation within the project and to amplify the
broader impacts of this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.