* 1935073
* Addressing neuron-to-network energy-efficiency gap by investigating neuromorphic processors as a unified dynamical system
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 380,000.00

This project investigates a fully-coupled, analog neuromorphic architecture
where the entire learning network is designed as a unified dynamical system
encoding information using short-term and long-term network dynamics. At the
fundamental level, a single action potential generated by a biological neuron is
not optimized for energy and consumes significantly more power than an
equivalent floating-point operation in a Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) or a
Tensor Processing Unit (TPU). Yet a population of coupled neurons in the human
brain, using ~100 Giga coarse neural operations (or spikes) can learn and
implement diverse functions compared to an application-specific deep-learning
platform that typically use ~1 Peta 8-bit/16-bit floating-point operations or
more. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal is
addressing this neuron-to-network energy-efficiency gap by investigating a
growth-transform neural network (GTNN) based dynamical systems framework for
designing energy-efficient, real-time neuromorphic processors. First, the
project is investigating how a GTNN can exploit population dynamics to improve
system energy-efficiency, while optimizing a learning or task objective in real-
time. Second, the project is investigating how short-term and long-term network
dynamics can enable scaling the proposed GTNN to billions of neurons without the
need for explicit spike-routing and by exploiting network's limit-cycle fixed-
points as analog memory. Third, the project is investigating a continuous-time,
analog GTNN processor that can be used to demonstrate the energy-efficiency of
proposed approach compared to other benchmark neuromorphic and deep-learning
processors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is also supporting open-source
development of a GTNN simulator which will be disseminated to the neural
network, neuromorphic engineering and neuroscience communities. The open-source
tool will also form the basis for organizing tutorials and special sessions at
IEEE conferences. The demonstration platforms developed through this project is
being be used to connect with other NSF sponsored outreach programs at
Washington University, which includes outreach to students belonging to
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.