* 1935551
* SitS NSF-UKRI: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Coupling of Soil Structure and Gas Fluxes Measured with Distributed Sensor Systems: Implications for Carbon Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kenichi Soga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

It is estimated that soil contains approximately three times as much as carbon
as the atmosphere, and improving soil management thus plays a critical in
mitigating climate change. However, our current understanding of the effects of
soil management on carbon cycling and the emission of major greenhouse gases is
limited. Carbon effluxes from soils are largely controlled by root respiration,
and microbial respiration of soil organic matter including rhizospheric organic
carbon. All of these processes are highly sensitive to soil structure. Using the
distributed fiber optic sensing technology and underground wireless sensor
network technology, this project aims to link the changes in soil structure to
the measured concentrations of major greenhouse gases. This will improve the
scientific understanding of how carbon loading from vegetated land occurs at
field scale. The outreach strategy is focused on engaging with the wider
community and the profession to raise awareness of the issues and provide tools
to explore solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the University of
California, Berkeley and Colorado School of Mines (CSM), in collaboration with
the research group at Rothamsted Research (RR) in the UK, will develop spatially
distributed measurement technology, based on the use of buried fiber optics and
wireless sensor network sensors, to measure soil strain, water content and the
concentrations of various soil gases. It aims to accurately measure critical
soil-water parameters at low-cost at the field scale. The research hypothesis
that links soil gas generation to soil structure changes will be examined by
conducting measurements in the laboratory using the coupled porous media/climate
wind tunnel facility at CSM and in the field at RR. These data will be used to
explore the scope for including microscopic soil structure in soil carbon models
and hence improve our fundamental understanding of biochemical processes
occurring across various spatial scales. These new models will in the future
allow the effects of soil management on carbon dynamics to be predicted, and
hence give an understanding of the impact of different soil management
strategies (e.g. tillage) on soil sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was awarded through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)"opportunity, a
collaborative solicitation that involves the United States Department of
Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA NIFA) and the
following United Kingdom Research and Innovation (UKRI) research councils: 1)
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), 2) the Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), 3) the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), and the Science and Technology Facilities
Council (STFC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.