* 1935250
* I-Corps: Blockchain-Based Web of Trust for Edge Computing
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Rhonda Shrader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is in enabling more comprehensive,
secure, private, and real-time analysis of internet of things (IoT) data
generated by connected devices such as mobile phones and connected vehicles.
Vast amounts of IoT data are generated each year. Even the most useful IoT data
is often transferred through and stored in systems that can have privacy and
security problems. This I-Corps project has the potential to refactor how
existing IoT workloads work in a secure fashion, enabling the processing of this
data to be secured and anonymized directly in the networks in which they are
generated. From a commercial standpoint, this technology can refactor how
existing corporations deploy analytics to utilize IoT data. Much like cloud
infrastructure refactored how large digital workloads were handled into
specialized computing centers, this technology can refactor deployment of large-
scale, real-time data analytics onto the networks of devices generating them.
Ultimately, this means corporations will have access to data processing
capabilities that can scale to how fast they generate data, and consumers will
benefit from privacy and data security guarantees.

This I-Corps project is based on two novel technological developments
surrounding blockchain and decentralized systems. The first is a context aware
reputation system for digital devices that acts as a peer-to-peer credit system
for machines. The second is a way of routing and storing data such that it is
impossible to recover any information from a single compromised machine. These
two innovations are inspired by the original idea of decentralization as taken
from the internet, with the reputation system motivated by Pretty Good Privacy
(PGP) and the routing/storage mechanism inspired by Named Data Networking and
polynomial-based cryptographic techniques. This inspiration is applied and mixed
with current understanding of blockchain systems to create a more secure yet
still highly scalable peer to peer network. Ultimately, these two systems
working together can vastly scale data storage transactions per data shard as
contrasted with existing blockchain systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.