* 1935651
* SitS NSF-UKRI: Collaborative Research: Sensors UNder snow Seasonal Processes in the evolution of ARctic Soils (SUN SPEARS)
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2020,02/29/2020
* Trevor Irons, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 02/29/2020
* USD 421,085.00

This project was awarded through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" opportunity, a
collaborative solicitation that involves the United States Department of
Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA NIFA) and the
following United Kingdom Research and Innovation (UKRI) research councils: 1)
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), 2) the Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), 3) the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), and the Science and Technology Facilities
Council (STFC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Melting ice sheets and glaciers are
exposing vast landscapes dominated by seemingly barren post-glaciation soils.
These new habitats support specialized and resilient microorganisms and, after
many years, even lichens and plants. However, access to and measurements of
these remote sites are typically restricted to the summer and, thus, seasonal
effects including prolonged cold, dark winters are under-studied. This
collaborative effort between U.S. (University of Utah; University of Colorado,
Boulder) and U.K. (Queen Mary University of London; British Geological Survey)
researchers will measure biological, hydrologic, and chemical activity under the
winter and spring snowpack in soils near a retreating glacier in Svalbard,
Norway, via continuously operated sensors and repeated field measurements. This
will enable scientists to understand how under-snow processes contribute to the
functioning and development of these unique soil ecosystems now and into the
future. Additionally, project researchers will bring interactive lessons to
classrooms in underserved areas in rural Colorado and Utah, remotely reach
classrooms and podcast audiences around the world, provide research training for
high school students from rural Colorado, and training for two university
students and three postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial
extent of Arctic soils is rapidly expanding due to glacier retreat. These soils
are of ever-increasing importance as a climate mediator and provider of
ecosystem services and are also experiencing the effects of the polar
amplification of climate change. Despite previous efforts to trace the
development of soils following glacier retreat, it remains unknown to what
extent seasonal processes affect their evolution on annual to multi-decadal
timescales. Due to the inaccessibility of most Arctic regions outside of a brief
summer period, the seasonal dynamics of pioneer Arctic soil systems are largely
unexplored. To resolve these challenges, the project's goal is to achieve
continuous year-round monitoring of dynamic processes across an age gradient of
Arctic soils using a network of buried geophysical sensors in a High-Arctic
glacier forefield. This effort will be coupled with repeated field monitoring of
soil biogeochemical processes via state-of-the-art molecular techniques, and
development of a microbially-explicit biological-geophysical model to describe
soil evolution. Using a space-for-time chronosequence approach that for the
first time captures intra-annual (i.e. seasonal) variability, this project aims
to improve understanding of how seasonal processes contribute to long-term
development of Arctic soils. This cross-disciplinary collaboration among
researchers with expertise in geophysics, engineering, microbial ecology,
biogeochemistry, and Earth system modelling, will permit mechanistic inference
and projections, and transform the capacity to conduct year-round research in
remote and complex environments. Data and model code will be shared via web-
based archives, enabling a new generation of soil models. Findings will be
disseminated to the scientific community through publications and conferences,
and communicated more broadly through public
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.