* 1935834
* Mechanics of Trauma-Induced Tauopathy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Patrick Alford, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2024
* USD 449,151.00

Athletes and soldiers exposed to repeated head injuries have increased risk of
developing chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), a neurodegenerative disease
characterized by decreased cognitive function and tangled deposits of the
protein tau in the brain. Though this correlation is well established, it is not
known how the forces acting on the brain during injury cause development of CTE.
This project will focus on understanding how mechanical stretching of neurons
induces tau to be mislocalized to dendritic spines, where it alters the ability
of neurons to receive electrochemical signals from other neurons. In addition,
the project will study how the deformation of individual neurons during injury
influences the likelihood of this mislocalization and loss of function. Brain
injury and CTE affect millions of Americans every year, and it is likely that
CTE cases will increase as soldiers exposed to improvised explosive devices in
previous wars age. These studies will be first steps toward a mechanistic
understanding of CTE initiation, and could provide important clues for better
CTE treatment in the future. Recognizing that children of all ages can get brain
injuries from falling off bikes or playing contact sports, the investigators
have developed an outreach program aimed at teaching elementary school children
about helmet design and head injury, which will be expanded as part of this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three research aims. The first will
experimentally determine the mechanism through which stretching induces tau
mislocalization, including focusing on microtubule rupture and focal swelling by
rapidly stretching rat hippocampal neurons. The second will determine how cell
structure and orientation relative to applied deformation influences tau
mislocalization and subsequent loss of dendritic function. The final aim will
develop a set of theoretical models to predict tauopathy based on neuron
structure and the dynamics of brain tissue deformation, including a viscoelastic
continuum model, a neurite model, and a cytoskeletal
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.