* 1935906
* Doctoral Mentoring Consortium at International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) 2019
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Chitta Baral, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 07/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This grant supports student travel for select students to participate in the
Doctoral Mentoring Consortium (DMC) at the International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) that will be held in Macao, China during August
10--16, 2019. This is the premier international conference for researchers in
artificial intelligence research across a fully international research
community. This activity will bring together a broad community of researchers in
the field of AI and support junior researchers at this critical early-career
stage. The DMC creates the opportunity to bring in participants who might not
have attended an AI conference due to lack of resources. This is especially true
for those at smaller institutions and those which have less developed AI
programs. Engaging such participants has the potential to draw more talent into
AI research, improve research ideas in their formative stage, and engender
collaborations across the breadth of disciplines. This event provides students
with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on their work at a critical
time in their research and enables them to explore their career
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.