* 1935169
* Molecular framework underlying stolon development in strawberry
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Zhongchi Liu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 02/29/2024
* USD 835,909.00

Strawberry is an immensely important fruit crop contributing to human nutrition
and agricultural output. As current strawberry varieties are all derived from
traditional crossbreeding efforts, they need to be propagated through daughter
clones to preserve their unique hybrid combination. These daughter clones, known
as runners, are produced from long and hortizontal stems named stolons. However,
little is known about how stolon formation is regulated and why strawberry is
one of the few plants endowed with the molecular machinery to conduct asexual
reproduction through stolon. The experiments are aimed at revealing the
molecular mechanisms that underlie this special and highly important
developmental trait of strawberry. Further, the project will train next
generation scientists in critical thinking, communication, as well as
experimental design and execution. Additionally, a professor at the Virginia
State University will bring two undergraduate students to the University of
Maryland each summer to learn DNA sequence analysis and conduct research.
Overall, the project will provide knowledge base and tools to switch on and off
stolon, leading to improved strawberry production when stolon formation is
switched on or increased fruit yield when stolon formation is turned off. The
data generated from the project such as RNA sequence data and network analyses
will be easily accessible through websites and public depository; the research
materials will be shared with the scientific community. The results will advance
basic understanding of plant development and provide novel strategies in the
improvement of strawberry productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In strawberry, the
interesting mode of asexual reproduction through stolon provides an unusual
opportunity to investigate axillary meristem cell fate determination as each
axillary meristem either develops into a stolon or a branch crown (a shoot that
terminates with flowers). Previous studies using a diploid strawberry Fragaria
vesca identified a key signaling component of gibberellin, FveRGA1, as a
repressor of stolon formation. The experiments will investigate the mechanism of
how FveRGA1 represses stolon formation in F. vesca by first isolating null
alleles of FveRGA1 with CRISPR and then characterizing the mutant phenotype.
Transcriptome and consensus co-expression networks will identify genes expressed
in the axillary meristem that gives rise to stolon. Proteins that directly
interact with FveRGA1 in the axillary meristem will be identified through a
yeast two-hybrid screen and confirmed by Bimolecular Fluorescence
Complementation. The role of identified candidate genes in stolon development
will be determined using RNAi and over-expression in transgenic F. vesca.
Finally, forward genetic approach will be used to map and isolate genes defined
by new mutants with altered ability in stolon formation. These experiments will
provide novel insights into the molecular underpinnings of stolon development
and illuminate the mechanisms of molecular interaction between the identified
genes and FveRGA1 in controling stolon formation. The ablity to suppress stolon
production will maximize branch crown formation, leading to more flowers and
higher fruit yield. Insights derived from this project will provide knowledge
and tools to switch on and off stolon, leading to improved strawberry production
and yields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.