* 1935966
* Mid-Scale RI-1 (M1:IP):  FABRIC: Adaptive Programmable Research Infrastructure for Computer Science and Science Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* James Griffioen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Cooperative Agreement
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 21,793,117.00

FABRIC is a unique national research infrastructure to enable cutting-edge, and
exploratory research at-scale in computer networking, distributed computing
systems, and applications. It is a platform on which researchers will experiment
with new ideas that will become building blocks of the next generation Internet
and address requirements for emerging science applications that depend on large-
scale networking. FABRIC will create the opportunities to explore innovative
solutions not previously possible for a large variety of high-end science
applications. FABRIC will provide a platform on which to educate and train the
next generation of researchers on future advanced distributed systems designs.
It will engage with students and educators from under-represented communities to
create a diverse cohort of developers and experimenters. FABRIC members will
participate in community building and will engage in outreach and tech transfer
to industry affiliates. The FABRIC team is led by researchers from University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, University of Kentucky, Clemson University,
Illinois Institute of Technology, and the Department of Energy's ESnet (Energy
Sciences Network). The team also includes researchers from many other
universities to help test the design of the facility and integrate their
computing facilities, testbeds and instruments into FABRIC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of the project is to create a nation-wide
high-speed (100-1000 Gigabits per-second) network interconnecting major research
centers and national computing facilities that will allow researchers and
scientists at these facilities to develop and experiment with new distributed
application, compute and network architectures not possible today. Uniquely,
FABRIC nodes can store and process information "in the network" in ways not
possible in the current Internet, which will lead to completely new networking
protocols, architectures and applications that address pressing problems with
performance, security and adaptability in the Internet. Reaching deep into
university campuses, FABRIC will connect university researchers and their local
compute clusters and scientific instruments to the larger FABRIC infrastructure.
The infrastructure will also provide access to public clouds, such as Amazon Web
Services, Google Cloud Platform, and Microsoft Azure. This experimental facility
will allow multiple experiments to be conducted simultaneously, and is capable
of incorporating real traffic and real users into experiments. For more
information about FABRIC including current plans for connected facilities visit
https://www.fabric-testbed.net. All project software is available at
https://github.com/FABRIC-testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Foundation-wide Mid-scale Research Infrastructure program. The
project will be managed by the Division of Computer &amp; Network Systems (CNS)
within the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering
(CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.