* 1935780
* Dissecting microvascular underpinnings of injury-induced alterations in functional cerebral blood flow
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Jonathan Fisher, New York Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 10/31/2020
* USD 94,662.00

This proposal will work on identifying non-invasive markers for traumatic brain
injury (TBI). The proposal lays out a plan to verify quantitative biomarkers for
mild (m)TBI that persist in the weeks following an injury. The proposed research
will partner with faculty and postdocs at the New York Medical College, the
University of Colorado, the University of Pennsylvania, and the FDA. The
proposal includes a well-designed mentoring plan to be implemented by the
principal investigator. The plan includes tracking progress through Individual
Development Plans; informal discussions to assess satisfaction with the
mentoring program' and tracking progress toward career goals.

The principal investigator will evaluate diffuse correlation spectroscopy as a
noninvasive optical method for monitoring real-time changes in cerebral blood
flow, in order to better inform medical interventions in the event of
neurological injury or disease. This project will provide information on the
types of changes that can be interrogated using the low-resolution diffuse
correlation spectroscopy (DCS) technique. Direct comparison to a high resolution
technique will provide necessary information on sensitivity and specificity for
DCS. The use of stimulated changes during monitoring will provide the types of
necessary detail on the populations of blood vessels that can be assessed.
Cerebral blood flow can be used to inform medical interventions in cases of
neurological injury or disease.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.