* 1935888
* Phase II:  Lighting the Pathway to Faculty Careers for Natives in STEM
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,103,673.00

To continue to remain competitive in the global economy, the U.S. must utilize
its diverse talents to advance scientific knowledge and technological
innovation. This project aims to increase the diversity of STEM researchers and
professoriate. The American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) will
continue the Lighting the Pathway (LTP) program, started in August 2014, to
increase the representation of American Indians, Alaska Natives, and Native
Hawaiians in STEM faculty positions at colleges and universities across the
country. The LTP program provides mentorship, professional development,
community, and network-building opportunities year-round, both in-person and
virtually, to facilitate LTP students successfully completing their degrees,
advancing to the next academic stage, and persisting along the STEM academic
career path. Planned activities will reinforce Native cultural identity,
leverage existing resources, and create a network of Native STEM scholars and
faculty. The LTP program helps scholars to overcome feelings of isolation both
socially and culturally by connecting them with Native peers and mentors and
with their broader STEM community. An evaluation component will be used to
understand which critical elements of the LTP program are most effective in
retaining students in STEM. The evaluation will assess the impact of the program
on scholar persistence in STEM. Knowledge gained from this evaluation can inform
the design of training programs for other underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will recruit Native undergraduate,
graduate and postdoc students whose major field of study is in the biosciences,
engineering and/or geosciences. Over the course of 5 years, AISES will recruit a
total of 72 students with interest in a career in academia. Each cohort group of
18 students will engage in the program for a period of two years, with
possibility of staying in the program for continued mentoring and career
guidance. Each LTP student will be matched with a senior faculty mentor, who
will provide guidance in the student's academic endeavors and help in navigating
the STEM career path. LTP participants will be encouraged to present their
research work at a relevant scientific conference in their field of study.
Students and mentors will also attend the AISES National Conference with a
specific day dedicated to faculty career development. Additionally, the LTP
students will receive professional development and coaching through webinars,
assistance with applying for fellowship, and other activities relevant to
success in a STEM career. The program will assist undergraduate participants in
securing research experiences, provide training in leadership and other
professional skills that will help them advance to the next academic level.
These findings will serve as a guide for future, expanded-scale projects and
will also inform application to other underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Directorates for
Biological Sciences (BIO), Engineering (ENG) and Geosciences
(GEO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.