* 1935200
* RUI: Water from Stone -- Investigating the Hydrologic Role of Rock Glaciers
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Jeffrey Munroe, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 337,649.00

Rock glaciers form when ice glaciers are buried by rock avalanches, or when ice
accumulates within loose piles of rubble at the base of steep cliffs. In both
cases, this ice can deform, allowing the rock glacier to slowly move downhill.
When rock glaciers extend to lower, warmer elevations, or when summer
temperatures rise, this ice melts and water is released to feed streams and
wetlands. This project will investigate how much water is coming out of the
hundreds of rock glaciers in two mountain ranges in Utah that are important
contributors of water to the Colorado River system, the Uinta Mountains and the
La Sal Mountains. Undergraduate students at Middlebury College will be directly
involved in all aspects of the field and laboratory research. These students
will also participate in mentoring of students at Terra Academy, a public high
school in northeastern Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has demonstrated
that rock glaciers alter the timing and amount of runoff in high-elevation
watersheds and serve as an important component of late summer baseflow. There is
also evidence that thawing of permafrost within rock glaciers is releasing
meltwater formerly archived as perennial ice. If the ice reservoir within rock
glaciers is eliminated, then there may be less water available for these
watersheds in the future. This project will test the hypothesis that melting of
formerly perennial ice within rock glaciers is contributing unsustainably to the
hydrology of high-elevation watersheds. Techniques will include a combination of
satellite-based radar interferometry for monitoring rock glacier movement;
deployment of dataloggers for recording the temperature of rock glacier surfaces
and water discharges; sequential sampling and hydrochemical characterization of
rock glacier discharge waters; dating of rock glacier melt water; and ground
penetrating radar surveying to identify internal ice. This project will provide
numerous opportunities for involvement and training of undergraduate students in
cutting-edge research methods. The principal investigators and their students
will also mentor high-school students at Terra Academy, a public school in
northeastern Utah, who will conduct independent research on hydrology and
related topics. Results will be communicated with the US Forest Service to aid
management decisions and better predict future changes in water
availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.