* 1935143
* CUE Ethics: A Curricular Design Community for Broadening Participation through Computing in the Arts
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Bill Manaris, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 03/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

This project aims to redefine how to teach computer science to students who
approach computing from a broader and more diverse set of interests than typical
in most programs. These students are not traditional computer science majors
but, instead, students who will follow their interests to apply computing to
fields as diverse as fine arts, humanities, political science, music, writing,
social science, and history, among others. There are many decades of deep
integration between arts and technology from which to draw inspiration for new
curricular frameworks. The primary objective is to create an educational
community consisting of diverse institutions, which will be poised to develop
effective Computing in the Arts (CITA) degree programs. Graduates of these CITA
programs will create, design, and code new tools for artistic creativity. From
contemporary music-, art- and theater-production, to creating new forms of
animation, digital media, and games, to invigorating the visual and audio
systems of tomorrow's computers, to inventing revolutionary networked
applications, the work students do in these collaborative programs will prepare
them for computing-aware, productive, and integrated careers in the information
and arts economies. While the project concentrates on computing and the arts
(e.g., art, music, dance, sculpture, theater), this approach in curricular
integration is general and can apply across many fields. CITA curricula have
been shown to attract a new, diverse population, including retaining and
graduating significantly larger numbers of women. Moreover, by combining art and
computing, this curricular approach enhances creativity, design skills, and
innovation potential. In this age of social media, immersive and digital art,
ubiquitous computing, and new transformative computer-based systems awaiting
discovery, this project may have a significant cultural and economic impact on
our nation and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, a strong,
cohesive, and diverse educational community will be created, consisting of a
mid-size liberal arts and sciences university, two research-1 institutions, and
a smaller liberal arts college, centered on Computing in the Arts degrees. A
six-year longitudinal study at the lead institution shows that a CITA degree
attracts a different student population to computing; attracts and retains
almost twice as many female students; and graduates 45.5% women compared to the
19% average in computer science across the nation. The project will assemble
representative Art+CS teams from departments of computer science, art, music,
dance and theater at each institution, establish regular online inter-school
meetings, and hold at least two meetings at different schools during the grant
period to bring the teams together. To strengthen this multi-institutional
community, a concrete synthesis activity will be carried out -- a joint,
telematic, real-time, four-institution CITA performance project, which will
involve students, faculty, and necessary resources to combine motion capture,
audience participation, dance, music, and visual art. Upon completion of this
activity, the assembled team aims to be ready to develop Curricular Guidelines
for CITA degree programs, to broadly disseminate successes, lessons learned, and
methods for broadening participation across the nation, with concrete student
and potentially transformative social outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IUSE:
CUE project is co-funded by EHR/DUE and CISE Directorates CNS, CCF, IIS, and
OAC, reflecting the project's alignment with the broader goals of the IUSE: EHR
program in DUE and complementary programs in CISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.