* 1935632
* SitS NSF-UKRI: Wireless In-Situ Soil Sensing Network for Future Sustainable Agriculture
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Cody Zesiger, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 12/31/2023
* USD 799,957.00

This project was awarded through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" opportunity, a
collaborative solicitation that involves the United States Department of
Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA NIFA) and the
following United Kingdom Research and Innovation (UKRI) research councils: 1)
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), 2) the Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), 3) the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), and the Science and Technology Facilities
Council (STFC). This project is a collaboration between researchers at the
University of Utah in the U.S. and researchers at the Imperial College London
and the University of Aberdeen in the UK. With the world's population expected
to surpass 9 billion by 2050, increasing food production threatens soil
security, presenting one of the grand challenges of the 21st century. Sustaining
high levels of food production depends on irrigated agriculture, which consumes
over 70% of freshwater reserves in many regions of the world. Due to the
diminishing freshwater sources, alternative water sources have been considered
and used for agriculture. However, their impact on soil health and related
contaminant effects on the soil ecosystem and productivity remain largely
unknown. This research focuses on developing low-cost wireless soil sensing
network that can effectively indicate the health condition of soils being
irrigated by using different alternative water sources. The research outcomes
will not only be critical for developing better soil maintenance, protection,
and management practice, but also for enabling a wide range of research on soil
health and associated links to sustainable agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research program is to develop a low-power and low-cost underground
wireless sensing network by employing commercially available sensing probes, but
designing low-power electronics and integrating them with the proposed wireless
powering and data telemetry system, followed by packaging and validating the
sensing network in the field. The prototype system will be further demonstrated
in a pilot study to investigate the effect of irrigation on soil condition with
different water sources. The proposed system can substantially reduce the cost
of the buried sensors as there would be no large power source such as a solar
panel or a battery. Much of the expensive electronics would be moved to the
external powering system implemented on an autonomous vehicle (ground or
aerial). The lower-cost and lower-power configuration can potentially enable a
much higher sensor density for large farmland or intense research plot
monitoring. The wireless interface for the soil sensing network implemented on
autonomous vehicles can greatly reduce the current lab-intensive human
interface. The proposed network will be developed in collaboration with
stakeholders in the agricultural industry from the outset of the project. With
this vision in mind, this US-UK SitS research team plans to achieve the proposed
objectives through the following tasks. (1) Develop low-power, low-cost,
underground, in-situ soil sensor modules and achieve a reduction in power and
cost by one to two orders of magnitude compared to commercial products. Low-
power electronics in both discrete and ASIC forms will be designed and fitted to
existing sensor probe technology. (2) Develop wireless power transfer and data
telemetry systems that can transfer power from a source above the ground to an
underground sensor module, charging a rechargeable battery or enabling a
battery-less underground sensing operation. This approach can greatly simplify
the system installation and maintenance. (3) Demonstrate the proposed system
operation from a controlled laboratory environment and open field testing.
Sensor modules' calibration and stability will be investigated to ensure long-
term reliable operation. (4) Deploy the wireless sensor technology to
investigate irrigation effect on soil health by using alternative water sources.
Soil moisture, temperature, and salinity will be measured in-situ and collected
wirelessly. Soil pH, ammonia, organic carbon and nitrogen will be measured from
collected soil samples. These parameters can indicate soil intrinsic conditions
due to different irrigation practices. The proposed sensing network and study
could enable far more efficient use of fresh water sources in irrigated
agriculture. The proposed sensing paradigm could be applied to a wide range of
soil health studies with direct societal impact by helping improve soil
conditions and agricultural productivity. Furthermore, the research team will
broaden the impact of this research through establishing an interdisciplinary
education and training program, and engaging with agricultural producers and
stakeholders to disseminate research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.