* 1935371
* Interfacial Effects in Mechanical and Thermal Properties of Ductile Heterostructured Nanowires
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Penghui Cao, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2023
* USD 586,429.00

While metal-semiconductor heterostructures are ubiquitous in modern electronic
systems, the role of interfaces in their mechanical and thermal properties
remains elusive, and the limited understanding poses challenges in designing
reliable and efficient devices. This is particularly true for semiconductor
nanowires that could be potential building blocks in next-generation
electronics. On the mechanical side, the major concern of using silicon
nanowires is their brittle nature. On the thermal side, thermal conductivity
reduction in nanonowires could be either detrimental for heat dissipation or
favorable for energy harvesting, yet the strong dependence on boundaries make
predictions very difficult. This award supports research to use metal-silicon
nanowires as a model material to investigate their mechanical and thermal
properties through combined experimental and computational approaches. The
outcome of this project will lead to new knowledge about interfacial effects in
mechanical ductility and thermal conductivity of heterostructured nanowires.
Research output will be integrated with educational activities that will train a
diverse group of students in the cross-disciplinary areas of mechanics of
materials and heat transfer. Mentoring and outreach efforts will also provide
underrepresented students valuable experience in cutting-edge research in the
PIs' laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While mechanical and thermal properties
of nanomaterials have been extensively studied over the past two decades, there
remain significant gaps in our knowledge about fundamental determinants at the
nanoscale and particularly across metal-semiconductor interfaces. This project
aims to reveal deformation mechanisms and dislocation processes during
mechanical deformation of nanowires. The study is driven by the hypothesis that
the semiconductor nanowires will have brittle-to-ductile transition by
incorporating metal-semiconductor interfaces. Atomistic simulations and in-situ
transmission electron microscopy will be performed to study the mechanical
properties such as yield strength and fracture behavior as well as the
associated atomistic processes underlying deformation. On the thermal side, the
metal-semiconductor interfaces complicate the transport mechanisms of heat and
electricity by adjoining an electron-dominant metal to a phonon-dominant
semiconductor, but this can lead to a special opportunity to study the electron-
phonon coupling effect. Microbridge-based nanowire thermal conductivity
measurements will be performed to study the thermal properties with respect to
varying interface density. By combining advanced computations, nanowire
metrology techniques, and unique materials processing, the project will answer
the important questions regarding the role of metal-semiconductor interfaces in
brittle-to-ductile transition and electron-phonon
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.