* 1935279
* The Role of Indian Ocean Internal Processes in Generating Decadal Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Weiqing Han, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2024
* USD 558,867.00

From Indonesia to East Africa, fluctuations of Indian Ocean (IO) sea surface
temperature (SST) have been linked to floods, droughts, wildfires, and other
disruptive impacts of shifts in rainfall and temperature. These impacts have
motivated efforts to characterize IO SST variability and the physical mechanisms
that drive it, efforts complicated by the sparsity of observations in the
region. A key question in research to date is the extent to which variability of
IO SSTs is driven by mechanisms local to the IO and how much is externally
forced by El Nino events in the Pacific and other remote influences. Research by
the PIs and others has focused on identifying forms of locally-driven IO SST
variability and identifying the roles of atmosphere-ocean interactions and
subsurface currents and ocean heat storage in generating
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here the PIs specifically address IO SST fluctuations
that take place over a decade or two, which they call the Indian Ocean Decadal
Oscillations (IODOs). In its positive phase the IODO features warmer than normal
SSTs extending from western Australia to southern Africa accompanied by
anomalies in sea level pressure and surface wind. Simulations from the Community
Earth System Model (CESM) suggest further anomalies of the subsurface ocean,
with higher temperatures to a depth of 200m or so below the region of warm SSTs.
The project seeks to investigate the mechanisms of the IODO and explore its
impacts on the global climate system through a combination of observational
analysis and model simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal as
well as scientific interest given the large populations living in countries
surrounding the IO, many of which are quite vulnerable to the impacts of IO
variablity as noted above. Results of the work can inform the development of the
multi-national IO Observing System (IndOOS) as well as field campaigns organized
around it. The project also provides support and training to a graduate student
as well as summer support for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.