* 1935980
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:DP): Next Generation Event Horizon Telescope Design
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jonathan Weintroub, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2024
* USD 14,625,302.00

The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) recently made the first direct image of a
black hole, an image seen by billions of people around the world. Both the
scientific community and the general the public were galvanized by this result.
The program funded here is a design project to plan a greatly enhanced EHT (EHT-
II), one with 7-8 additional telescopes placed around the world in locations
designed to maximize imaging speed, dynamic range, and fidelity. The much faster
snapshot mode of this combination will allow rapid tracking of changes near the
black hole event horizon, allowing for the first time ever the creation of
movies directly showing the dynamics of extreme gravity environments. The
greater imaging power will also address long-standing fundamental questions such
as how matter is blasted away from a black hole in the form of relativistic
jets. Broader impacts include a National Air and Space Museum exhibit, and
training of students in instrumentation
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instead of relying on existing large
facilities to form the Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) array, as the
existing EHT has done, this design program will consider engineering and
placement of small-diameter dishes that optimally fill out an Earth sized
virtual telescope, tailored precisely for science objectives. By roughly
doubling the number of dishes in the array through cost-effective use of small
dishes, the EHT-II will be capable of making the first real-time movies of
supermassive black holes. The Large Millimeter Telescope in Mexico, in
collaboration with the University of Massachusetts Amherst, will serve as a
testbed for advanced dual frequency receivers that will be developed as part of
this design initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Foundation-wide Mid-scale Research Infrastructure program. The project will be
managed by the Division of Astronomical Sciences within the Directorate for
Mathematics and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.