* 1935356
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Uncovering the role of Golgi organization on function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Neha Kamat, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2022
* USD 116,887.00

Synthetic cell engineering has the potential to reveal insights into the
fundamental chemical and physical processes that underlie the function of
biological cells and organelles as well as advance the design of biologically-
inspired devices and materials with applications ranging from medicine to
biotechnology. Recently, it has become clear that the function of many proteins
and lipids in biological cells depends on posttranslational modifications,
covalent additions to the surface of proteins after their synthesis. A majority
of these modifications are performed by the Golgi apparatus, a central membrane
organelle in mammalian cells with a unique and dynamically changing structure.
Yet neither the features of the Golgi that facilitate the synthesis of these
highly complex chemical structures nor how those reactions are spatially and
temporally controlled is fully understood. To better understand the regulatory
mechanisms of the Golgi structure, this proposal will reconstitute chemical and
physical features of the Golgi in an in vitro system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will develop new strategies to uncover how physical features of
membranes influence an essential posttranslational modification, glycosylation.
Specifically, it will recreate a model multi-step glycosylation modification of
lipid carriers in vitro using both microfluidic and vesicle-based platforms and
uncover the rules of membrane spatial and physical features required to
recapitulate the posttranslational modification process. Successful completion
of these studies will reveal design rules that will enable creation of other
posttranslational modifications through re-organization of these reactions,
including synthetic modifications. With these insights, it will be possible to
extend these findings to influence the activity and function of modified
proteins and lipids in order to impact biological processes. This project will
bridge a variety of interdisciplinary techniques in membrane biophysics,
membrane protein reconstitution, protein engineering, microfluidics, transport
phenomena, and chemical kinetics necessary to realize the project goals. The
knowledge developed here will benefit the biotechnology and pharmaceutical
industries and have potential biomanufacturing applications in the design of
therapeutic compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Cellular Dynamics and Function and Systems and Synthetic Biology Clusters,
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Directorate for Biological
Sciences and by the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program, Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems, Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.