* 1935290
* RAPID: Assessing the fate of flood-born contaminants
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Ryan Smith, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Julie Pett-Ridge
* 12/31/2020
* USD 44,888.00

Floods can cause significant problems for nature and society. In addition to
water damage, toxic contaminants can be mobilized and affect public health and
safety. However, only little is known about the nature of contaminants and how
they are distributed during floods. The proposed project studies potentially
dangerous contaminants in water and flood deposits from the 2019 Missouri River
flood, Nebraska. Rural and urban areas are studied to assess the impact on the
environment and society. The goal is to identify contaminants and understand how
they are transported. The results will help to identify areas where they were
deposited and may pose health risks. Catastrophic flood events, such as the one
studied here, are predicted to become more frequent in the future. Understanding
what the most dangerous contaminants are, where they are most likely to be
deposited, and for long they remain a threat to nature and society will help to
guide future rural and urban development strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
determine how contaminants were redistributed during the catastrophic Missouri
River flood event, the proposed project will collect soil, river and lake
sediment samples near Omaha, Nebraska. The samples will be taken along detailed
profiles with sampling intervals &lt;100 m as well as in a larger-scale grid
pattern (3 km2, 500 m intervals) and analyzed for metals and total phosphorous,
nitrogen and organic carbon contents. Water samples will be taken from rivers
and lakes/ponds in the field area and complemented by groundwater samples from
existing wells. Soil and sediment samples will be analyzed using ICP-MS
(metals), ICP-AES (phosphorous), thermal conductivity detection (nitrogen), and
infrared absorption (carbon). Water samples will be analyzed for P and N species
via a portable Hach DR 1900 spectrophotometer. The data will allow to identify
what contaminants are typically associated with urban and rural agricultural
areas, quantify their abundances, and determine how they were redistributed
during the flood event. The results will be integrated to develop models that
can be used to predict where toxic contaminants are most likely to be deposited
during and/or after catastrophic floods. Resampling of the same locations during
the following years can then help to understand residence times of contaminants
and their long-lasting effects on the environment. Because extreme weather
events are predicted to become more frequent in the future, this project will
provide an important first step to design urban and rural development strategies
aimed at reducing the ecologic, social, and economic damage associated with
catastrophic floods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.