* 1935410
* BEE: Testing the Rapid Evolution of the Determinants of Species Coexistence
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Martin Turcotte, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 02/28/2025
* USD 991,219.00

Two fundamental questions in biology are: how do similar species coexist and how
do they drive each otherâ€™s evolution? It is becoming clear that the mechanisms
that dictate both coexistence and evolution can influence each other and thus
both should be studied together. This project fills a critical gap in our
knowledge of such interactions by testing why evolution in response to
competition sometimes promotes or sometimes hinders species coexistence leading
to a loss of biodiversity. The approach is to combine novel experimental
evolution methods with analyses from recent ecological theory. This research is
important because it will create a stronger integration between two research
fields, bridging evolution and community ecology, by providing a deep
understanding of the interactions between processes that dictate both the
creation and the maintenance of biodiversity. In addition, this project will
provide opportunities to increase the participation of underrepresented groups
in science as well as create educational research kits, and teacher training
workshops, that will be distributed to urban and rural high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Well known field observations suggest that evolution in
response to competition should promote species coexistence, yet, theoretical
models find a greater diversity of outcomes including evolution promoting
competitive exclusion. To understand why evolution sometimes hinders or promotes
coexistence, this research project will fill critical empirical gaps by
conducting manipulative field evolution experiments combined with analyses from
the modern coexistence theory framework. Using two common species of duckweed,
rapidly reproducing floating aquatic plants, this project will test how
evolutionary coexistence dynamics are dictated by niche differences (processes
that promote stable coexistence), by competitive ability differences (processes
that promote competitive exclusion), and their evolutionary potential (genetic
variance). Specifically, it will first quantify variation in niche and
competitive ability differences and in their genetic variance among natural
populations of duckweed. Then using experimental evolution in field mesocosms,
it will test how these properties evolve in response to competition in each
population. In addition, this research will quantify the relative importance of
niche and competitive ability differences in driving evolutionary coexistence
dynamics. Together, this project will test the feedback between competition,
evolution, and coexistence acting through niche and competitive ability
differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.