* 1935080
* NSF Student Travel Support for the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2019)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Dejing Dou, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2020
* USD 24,000.00

This grant provides international travel support for U.S.-based graduate student
participants to attend the 2019 International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM
2019), which will be held in Beijing, China, from November 8-11, 2019. ICDM has
established itself as the world's premier research conference in data mining. It
provides an international forum for presentation of original research results,
as well as exchange and dissemination of innovative and practical development
experiences. The total number of ICDM participants in the past has been in
excess of 500, with a majority of the participants from the U.S., then Europe
and Asia. Besides the technical program, ICDM 2019 features workshops,
tutorials, panels, demos, data challenge competition, and a Ph.D. forum. The
conference recognizes the importance of recruiting and engaging students in data
mining research in early stage of their graduate study. The Ph.D. forum is
designed to provide an interactive environment in which Ph.D. students can meet,
exchange their ideas and experiences both with peers and with senior researchers
from the data mining community in an international scope. The supported students
will advance their skills and knowledge, learn about the latest research, and
develop their research networks in data mining. A strong representation of U.S.
researchers at the conference is useful in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in
this important area.

The ICDM conference series promotes novel, high-quality research findings, and
innovative solutions to challenging data mining problems, and seeks to advance
the state-of-the-art in data mining. The conference covers all aspects of data
mining, including algorithms, software, systems, and applications. ICDM draws
researchers, application developers, and practitioners from a wide range of data
mining related areas such as statistics, machine learning, pattern recognition,
databases, data warehousing, data visualization, knowledge-based systems, and
high-performance computing. The conference proceedings are published by IEEE.
The recipients of the NSF travel support will be listed at the ICDM 2019
conference website, together with additional ICDM 2019 information.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.