* 1935500
* Collaborative Research: HEBB: Human-Robot Enabled System to Induce Brain Behavior Adaptations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Laurel Riek, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The overall research objective of this collaborative project is to create an
embodied, intelligent robotic system that can induce meaningful long-term change
in human motor function by providing personalized, adaptive feedback and
noninvasive neural stimulation designed to induce desirable neuromotor
plasticity. The motor behavior targeted for enhancement is plantarflexor power
during the push-off phase of gait; stroke survivors often produce diminished
plantarflexor power and rely instead on an inappropriate hip flexion "pull-off"
compensation, thereby limiting the quality of their gait and quality of life.
Personalized learning methods will be employed to model and optimize behavioral
responses to changes in performance feedback provided by an intelligent mobile
robotic coach, which will guide gait training. The project will lay the
foundation to determine whether training based solely on principles of motor
learning suffice to induce meaningful increases in plantarflexor power that are
retained over time, or whether simultaneous targeted changes in brain
excitability are required. This project advances the NSF mission to promote the
progress of science and advance the national health by developing an adaptive
motor learning algorithm embedded within an interactive mobile robot to induce
meaningful long-term changes in human motor function through human-robot
interaction. Broader impacts of the project include efforts to enhance research
reproducibility and rigor, and to broaden participation in STEM for women,
minorities, and persons with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of this research is to create an embodied, intelligent system that
provides personalized, adaptive feedback to induce neuromotor plasticity,
mediate motor adaptation, and promote meaningful, lasting increases in
plantarflexor power, which is diminished during walking in many stroke
survivors. Three sets of human subject experiments are researched. The first
will identify critical parameters of performance feedback that facilitate the
desired behavioral change. The second will use a novel learning paradigm to
model and optimize behavioral responses to changes in performance feedback
provided by an intelligent robotic coach. The third will use single-pulse
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and paired associative stimulation (PAS)
to harness neuroplastic effects in humans such that desired behavioral changes
induced by optimized feedback training are made persistent through Hebbian
learning mechanisms. The envisioned system will involve bi-directional learning
between the human and machine intelligences to determine how to control
important, but subject-specific, variables critical for maintaining and
promoting motor function across the life and health span. Understanding these
bi-directional relationships within the context of neurorehabilitation may
provide insights that can further advance human-robot teaming in a range of
application domains, including healthcare, manufacturing, and personal
transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.