* 1935860
* Evaluate the use of a portable multi-modal physiological monitoring system in the virtual reality environment for the assessment of mild traumatic brain injury
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Tzyy-Ping Jung, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2021
* USD 99,969.00

UCSD and FDA will jointly develop and test a wearable and easily deployable
system, based on virtual-reality goggles, to collect synchronized brain and
biometric signals from mild traumatic brain injury (TBI) patients and healthy
participants. They will also develop advanced computational approaches to
identify abnormal biomedical signals associated with TBI. The goal of this
project is to test the feasibility of using a portable, compact, and deployable
system as a pre- and post-hospital diagnostic and monitoring tool of
TBI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCSD and FDA jointly propose an intense,
twelve-month program to design, develop, fabricate and test a wearable and
easily deployable system, based on a Virtual-Reality (VR) Head-Mounted Display
(HMD), to collect synchronized neural and physiological data from TBI patients
and healthy participants. The use of VR HMD allows the use a compact form factor
for collecting multi-modal bio-sensing data in a comfortably wearable manner,
providing unprecedented opportunities to assess and evaluate the brain and mind
under various cognitive tasks immediately after an injury (i.e. pre-hospital
care)&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to determine the utility of a
portable and multi-modal physiological signal monitoring system as a diagnostic
and monitoring tool of TBI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.