* 1935885
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:IP): NSF National EXtreme Ultrafast Science (NEXUS) Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Claudia Turro, Ohio State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kelsey Cook
* 09/30/2024
* USD 10,484,658.00

With support from the NSF Division of Chemistry through the Mid-scale Research
Infrastructure-1 program, a team led by Robert Baker at The Ohio State
University (OSU) is implementing the NSF National EXtreme Ultrafast Science
(NEXUS) Facility - a beyond-the-state-of-the-art national XUV light source to
serve the scientific and engineering communities as an open-access user
facility. This light source will be coupled to a versatile array of experimental
capabilities, designed to facilitate transformative progress in areas of
national priority with emphasis on energy conversion and quantum information
science. This national facility brings new technology in high-power lasers to
the US for the first time. This mid-scale infrastructure bridges the gap between
tabletop instruments and large-scale facilities such as free electron lasers and
synchrotrons. This facility also brings new capabilities to the broader
community and contributes to US competitiveness in the global landscape. Upon
completion, the facility will be available to researchers seeking new insights
across chemistry, physics, materials science, and other disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of this facility is a new laser technology
for producing extreme ultraviolet and soft x-ray photon energies at repetition
rates of hundreds of kilohertz with average power exceeding one kilowatt. The
combination of attosecond time resolution, high energies, and high repetition
rates enables measurements that currently cannot be made with existing
technology in a laboratory setting. The facility will provide the following
experimental platforms with attosecond to femtosecond time resolution, depending
on the experiment: 1) X-Ray Absorption/Reflection Spectroscopy, 2) X-Ray
Magnetic Circular Dichroism, 3) Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, 4) Angle-Resolved
Photoemission Spectroscopy, and 5) Laser-Induced Electron Diffraction.
Applications include such scientific challenges as biomimetic photosynthesis and
new quantum information technologies. Enabling these applications is the ability
to control matter at the scale of individual electrons and atoms in systems that
are far from equilibrium. This project directly responds to community-identified
grand challenges requiring observation of charge and spin transport in relevant
materials on the attosecond timescale with sub-nanometer spatial
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.