* 1935749
* Collaborative Research: CIBR: Building Capacity for Data-driven Neuroscience Research
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Amitava Majumdar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 630,486.00

Advances in experimental neuroscience are generating large amounts of high-
quality, high-resolution data that must be analyzed in order to reveal new
insights into how the brain functions. Dealing with this data avalanche poses a
special challenge for research that probes the structure and function of brain
circuits and systems with techniques such as large scale high resolution light
microscopy, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and high density
recording of brain electrical activity. The aim of this collaborative project
between the University of California San Diego and Yale University is to
catalyze such research by enhancing the capabilities of the Neuroscience Gateway
(NSG), an existing cyberinfrastructure resource that was originally developed to
facilitate projects that need High Performance Computing, such as large scale
computational modeling of brain circuits. The current project will enhance NSG
by incorporating innovations in high throughput computing (HTC) and data
management that are required for research involving large amounts of data,
implemented in ways that reduce or eliminate the technical and administrative
challenges faced by scientists who need to deal with such data. In addition to
enabling data-intensive neuroscience research, these new capabilities will
increase NSG's utility in education, where it is already widely used in
neuroscience and biology instruction at the undergraduate level and higher.
Webinars, workshops, and training classes at various conferences will be
presented to students and researchers to learn about NSG's new capabilities.
This project will increase NSG's scientific and social value as an open and free
resource that democratizes participation in science by enabling access to
computing and data resources for students and researchers at all academic
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project adds HTC features to NSG that
have been judged most suitable to meet the large scale computing needs for
neuroscience data processing, based on actual and projected use cases provided
by neuroscientists engaged in data-intensive research. It incorporates
commercial cloud computing and Open Science Grid (OSG) resources, integrating
them with NSG’s ability to submit appropriate compute workloads to these HTC
resources while maintaining the ease of use features of NSG that allow users to
seamlessly exploit these compute resources,. Many of the tools that utilize HTC
computing mode are made available via NSG to allow processing of input data and
retrieval of output results within the existing web based and programmatic user
environment of NSG. Flexibility is also provided for users to directly use
containerized images of neuroscience modeling and data processing tools on
commercial cloud computing resources. Integration of OSG’s data federation
capability allows processing of publicly available large neuroscience data which
can be distributed in a scalable manner to HTC resources. Incorporation of
various data functionalities such as the ability to transfer large data directly
to NSG’s storage, share data among NSG users, access and process data by
multiple NSG users, enable researchers to perform a wide diversity of data-
driven neuroscience research be it processing of electrophysiological
(electroencephalography i.e. EEG, magnetoencephalography i.e. MEG), imaging
(fMRI) or behavioral (reaction time, test accuracy) data, correlational analysis
of multimodal data, or application of machine/deep learning. Throughout the
project close interaction with the user community is maintained to gain feedback
as new features are added and resources are incorporated. The web site for this
project can be found at https://www.nsgportal.org/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.