* 1935458
* SITS-NSF-UKRI: Reverse engineering the soil microbiome:  detecting, modeling, and optimizing signal impacts on microbiome metabolic functions
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Linda Kinkel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 805,588.00

Chemical signaling among microorganisms in the soil determines microbial
behavior, including whether or not soil microbes suppress plant diseases,
enhance crop growth, or grow on particular soil nutrients. However, little is
known about the specific chemical signals that mediate these behaviors, limiting
the potential for practical management to optimize microbial activities to
support healthy crops and ecosystems. The objectives of this project at the
University of Minnesota and the University of Manchester in the UK are to
develop and test a set of 100 novel, microbial recorders that can sense specific
signals and report on whether each of 100 particular genes in the microbe
responds. This project will provide a valuable means of identifying specific
chemical signals among soil microbes that can optimize beneficial functions or
suppress detrimental functions. The research will shed light on the complex
chemical and metabolic interactions that determine how well soil microbiomes can
support healthy crops and ecosystems, and provide insight into novel, practical
ways to harness microbiomes for beneficial functions. Tools created here will
also guide improvements in understanding the ecology and functional potential of
soil microbiomes in agricultural and natural habitats. Exchanges between U.S.
and U.K. scientists will be integral to the success of the research effort,
strengthening the capacities and output of scientists in both countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide fundamental insights into the
roles of signals in mediating the ecology of soil microbes and suppression of
plant diseases. This work establishes a foundation for engineering functional
soil microbiomes for precision agriculture. Specific objectives are to: 1)
Develop and test genetic recorder (GR) strains to "listen and report" on signals
in the soil that regulate primary and secondary metabolic pathways in
Streptomyces spp. isolated from disease suppressive soils; 2) Model and test how
species-species interactions that rely on primary and secondary metabolic
induction impact multi-species communities; and 3) Discover effects of potential
signals on Streptomyces metabolism and harness signals to optimize microbial
functional capacities in soil. Methods: 1) GRs will be created to detect the
activation of genes/pathways of interest in soil microbes using serine
integrase-mediated recombination. The GRs will be quantified using Next-
Generation Sequencing technology, and will be able to simultaneously record the
activation of hundreds of metabolic activities in a single high-throughput
experiment. 2) Genome-scale metabolic models, transcriptomics, and metabolomics
will be used to connect signals to functions. Existing metabolic modeling
platforms will be extended to incorporate novel functionality to understand how
signals influence the physiology of individual bacteria and alter emergent
ecosystem dynamics. 3) Potential signals will be screened for their direct
effects on Streptomyces antibiotic inhibitory and nutrient use phenotypes in
vitro, providing both a signal discovery platform and a direct comparison with
phenotypic data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was awarded through the
"Signals in the Soil (SitS) opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that
involves the ENG/CBET and BIO/IOS divisions of the National Science Foundation
(NSF), the United States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food
and Agriculture (USDA NIFA) and the following United Kingdom Research and
Innovation (UKRI) research councils: 1) The Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC), 2) the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC),
3) the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), and the
Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.