* 1935674
* Engineering Online Learning Pathways in Advanced Manufacturing and Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Craig Brice, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,999,802.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers
and technicians in production engineering. It will do so by supporting the
design, deployment, and evaluation of modular, online data science courses for
advanced manufacturing. Big data sets are now available to describe workflows,
properties of materials, and manufacturing and automation processes used in
advanced manufacturing. However, few manufacturing process engineers understand
how to tap into this data, organize and analyze it, and use it to improve
manufacturing processes. This project will develop online educational pathways
of modules and courses to teach practicing engineers and other learners how to
apply data science in the production manufacturing environment. The courses will
be developed by the Colorado School of Mines, in collaboration with the Red
Rocks Community College, Colorado Community College Online, and multiple
industrial partners. Individuals from these organizations will form a convergent
team with expertise in advanced manufacturing and data science, industry needs
and perspectives, and educational design and learning science. This project has
the potential to nurture and grow the advanced manufacturing workforce, as well
as to enhance the infrastructure for online education and educational
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a convergence approach to
course design by bringing together experts from university, community college,
and industry, who have broad disciplinary expertise and skills in data science,
advanced manufacturing, and engineering education. The resulting courses will
focus on data science tools, data science methodology, foundations of advanced
manufacturing, applying data science to advanced manufacturing, and ways of
learning and working in the modern era. The courses will be organized into
multiple educational pathways designed to serve individual learners, as well as
learners in industries, two-year colleges, and four-year colleges and
universities. The primary objectives of the project are to: 1. Create pathways
that encourage and support diverse learners to become proficient in using data
science to solve advanced manufacturing problems; 2. Use an Engineering Learning
Framework developed by the Principal Investigator, to design, develop, deploy,
evaluate, and disseminate sell-assessment tools, modules, and courses aligned to
form learning pathways that empower diverse learners to reskill or enhance their
skills to tackle advanced manufacturing problems through data science. 3.
Conduct project evaluation that will guide instructional design of the courses
and modules. 4. Engage industry partners and two-year institutions to provide
guidance on workforce needs as well as to pilot assessments, modules, and
courses. 5. Complete a research study to explore how psychological and
demographic characteristics affect learner performance. Project outcomes will be
presented at national conferences and the materials will be freely available on
the project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by NSF's EHR
Core Research: Production Engineering Education and Research (ECR: PEER)
program, which seeks to improve the education of future and current
professionals in production engineering. It also aims to study how effective the
innovative educational strategies adopted by these projects are in producing
their desired objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.