* 1935996
* Community Seafloor Geodetic Infrastructure for the Measurement of Deformation
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 5,467,472.00

Subduction zones are geologic faults that begin offshore where one tectonic
plate slides beneath another. Because of friction, some of the motion of the
lower plate is transferred to and builds up in the upper plate. The abrupt
release of the built-up strain caused by this energy transfer causes the
strongest earthquakes on earth. These great earthquakes cause widespread damage
from ground shaking and from flooding of coastal areas from resulting tsunami
waves. Recent events have occurred in Sumatra in 2004, Chile in 2010, and Japan
in 2011. Subduction zones also lie offshore the U.S. coasts along Northern
California, Oregon and Washington State and another along Alaska and the
Aleutian Islands. Both of these subduction zones have experienced great
earthquakes in the past -- Alaska had a great earthquake in 1964 and Oregon and
Washington State in 1700 -- and both will do so again in the future. A goal of
the scientific community is to better understand the geophysical processes at
work at these subduction zones in order to improve assessment of potential
earthquake hazards. Land-based high-precision measurements with the Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) can measure the slow build-up of strain
locally, but even the coastal sites are too far from the submerged shelf to
provide reliable estimates far offshore, where the fault zone reaches the
seafloor and where most tsunamis are generated. The GNSS-Acoustic technique,
which combines GNSS with acoustic ranging from a small robotic platform on the
sea surface to sensors (transponders) on the sea floor, allows measurement of
centimeter-scale horizontal motion of the seafloor. This can be combined with
measurements of ambient pressure at the sea floor to detect vertical as well as
horizontal motions. To date only one prototype vehicle and approximately a dozen
seafloor transponder have been available for the scientific community. This
project will add three new robotic platforms and forty-eight additional seafloor
transponders and for the first time incorporate pressure sensors directly in
several of the transponders. This project will approximately quintuple the
equipment available to the research community to make these important
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year project will procure and
commission geodetic instrumentation to measure seafloor deformation. Several
recent and prominent workshop reports and vision documents by the earth science
community have identified a need for growing seafloor geodetic capabilities to
answer pressing questions about earthquake, tsunami, and volcanic processes. The
infrastructure will provide accurate horizontal and vertical positioning of the
seafloor through two reliable and proven techniques with published scientific
results: GNSS-Acoustics and sea water pressure. Data from both systems will be
acquired using wave gliders, which are remotely operated wave- and solar-powered
sea surface platforms. This award does not fund operation, maintenance, nor
deployment of this infrastructure for science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seafloor
geodesy is poised to be transformative. It will allow for a broad community of
existing and next-generation earth scientists to study active deformation on the
seafloor. Improved access to these instruments will foster and communicate
knowledge of the new methods and science outside of the current and very small
marine community, to a much larger scientific community primarily consisting of
highly-skilled land-based geodesists, and an inclusive next-generation
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.