* 1935452
* A New Computational Approach for Wave Propagation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Alexander Idesman, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 297,049.00

Wave motion is the key mechanism of interest to many fields of science, such as
mechanics, acoustics, seismology, oceanography, coastal and offshore
engineering, electromagnetism, etc. Despite an extreme variety of physical
appearances of wave phenomena, mathematical models and numerical methods
implemented from them face reliability and accuracy concerns, especially at high
frequencies and under impact loadings. This award will support research on a new
numerical approach with optimal accuracy for wave propagation. The new modeling
technique will be able to provide accurate solutions for a broad range of civil
and military applications related to national health and security, respectively,
where wave propagation is a concern. The project will provide opportunities to
educate and train graduate and undergraduate students on the theoretical and
modeling aspects of wave propagation, with a focus on underrepresented students.
A workshop on dynamic behavior will also be developed for high school teachers
under this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many modern numerical techniques based
on weak-form formulations of partial differential equations do not provide
optimal accuracy in the discrete equations. This leads to a prohibitively large
computation time for real-world wave propagation problems. In this project, a
novel high-order numerical approach for wave propagation on Cartesian meshes for
irregular domains will be directly formulated in terms of discrete equations
with unknown coefficients. These coefficients are calculated by the minimization
of the local truncation error and provide the optimal order of accuracy. Some of
the important applications will include high-frequency wave propagation in the
Hopkinson Bar and elastic wave propagation in the vicinity of crack tips and
defects. Due to stationary Cartesian meshes, there will be no need to remesh the
domain for a moving crack. The moving crack will be treated by the corresponding
high-order boundary conditions on the same Cartesian
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.