* 1935196
* EBP: CS for All: Engaging Struggling Learners in Computer Science Instruction
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Maya Israel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 12/31/2020
* USD 258,724.00

Students with disabilities constitute approximately 15% of the entire student
population, and the majority of those students receive their instruction in
general education classes alongside their peers. Despite the growing momentum to
introduce computer science (CS) into K-12 instruction, however, little research
has been done on meeting the needs of these learners. The goals of this project
are to (1) investigate the challenges that students with learning disabilities
face during CS instruction, and (2) develop interventions to address those
challenges based on research-based practices from other content areas.

Areas of focus include Universal Design for Learning (UDL), balancing explicit
instruction within open-ended CS activities, and encouraging student
collaboration. To accomplish these goals, the project employs a mixed-methods
research design within three rounds of data collection. First, it examines
specific barriers and then progresses to two iterative studies of computing
instruction that include strategies that support struggling learners. Data
sources include teacher interviews, classroom observations, student artifact-
based interviews, and analysis of video screen capture of students? computing
activities for measures of persistence, collaborative problem solving, adaptive
help seeking, and computational thinking (CT).