* 1935243
* Nature-Based Solutions for Restoring Rivers and Streams
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Xiaofeng Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2023
* USD 297,791.00

Rivers and streams are a key component of the global ecosystem. Human alteration
and pollution have made many of them no longer able to provide full ecological
services and functions. In recent years, substantial efforts have been invested
in restoring rivers and streams to improve their health, promote biodiversity,
and increase resiliency. Among many restoration solutions, those mimicking how
Nature works are increasingly employed, e.g., the re-introduction of wood into
rivers and streams. However, the knowledge base for these nature-based solutions
can be enhanced by improved scientific understanding on the physical processes
around restoration structures. A principal objective of this research is to
improve the knowledge base for nature-based approaches for river and steam
restoration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach to be used in this work
utilizes state-of- the-art computing technology which makes it feasible to
resolve the complex geometry of the restoration structures. It is anticipated
that this project will reveal the physical processes around and within
restoration structures. The understanding of physical processes is critical to
successful implementation of nature-based solutions. Ecologically functional
rivers and streams add great socio-economic value to the communities living
around them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.