* 1935863
* Collaborative Research: Thin Crust Over The Marion Rise: Remelting The Gondwanan Mantle II
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Michael Cheadle, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Steven A. Hovan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 51,901.00

Earth is a dynamic planet. Its surface is being continuously created and
destroyed at ocean ridges and subduction zones, which comprise the boundaries of
the great tectonic plates. These processes create seismic and volcanic hazards
as well as generating economic resources, thermal energy, and the planet's
oceans and atmosphere. Underlying this is the circulation of the Earth's mantle,
largely manifest by upwelling along ocean ridges, and mantle plumes. The latter
are upward flows that produce mantle hotspots, such as Hawaii and Iceland. Where
ocean ridges pass near mantle hotspots as at Iceland and the Azores Islands in
the Atlantic, and at Marion Hotspot in the Indian Ocean, the ocean ridge is
greatly elevated and has a chemical composition similar to the associated mantle
hotspot. The standard scientific explanation for this is that the volcanic
hotspot is created by a mantle plume rooted deep in the mantle, and that the
flow of this plume is partially diverted to the adjacent ocean ridge, where it
becomes the source of the lavas erupting there. However, there are large
differences between ocean rises, and a different process may be responsible for
the Marion Hotspot, a remote volcanic feature roughly 1,000 miles southeast of
South Africa that sits at the boundary of the African and Antarctic tectonic
plates. An international team, led by German, U.S., and Chinese scientists, is
working together to test a new hypothesis that the Marion Rise represents the
melting of a piece of anomalous mantle set adrift in the deep earth during the
breakup of the ancient supercontinent Gondwana. The conventional deep mantle
plume hypothesis predicts thickened crust all along the rise, while remelting
the Gondwana mantle predicts thin or missing crust along the ridge, with
isolated widely spaced local magmatic centers, with the thickest crust located
at the intersection of the mantle melting anomaly with the ridge.

This award supports the U.S. participation in a German-U.S.-China collaborative
cruise, which is the second of a two expedition program, the first of which was
led by the U.S. scientists. The U.S. Scientific Party will direct the
geophysical magnetics, gravity, and multibeam mapping survey of the Southwest
Indian Ridge west of the Discovery Fracture Zone north of Bouvet Island, and
will use this data, in combination with the results of the rock dredging and ROV
sampling on the German research vessel Sonne, to map out the extent of the
mantle directly exposed on the seafloor, and constrain the crustal thickness
where it is not exposed. They will characterize the differences in seafloor
topography and tectonics from that seen at magmatically more robust ocean ridges
such as the East Pacific Rise and Mid-Atlantic Ridge. In doing this, they will
directly test and validate one of the two hypotheses for the origin of the
Marion Rise described above.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.