* 1935059
* Collaborative Research:  ProteoCell: The Fat-Free Cell
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Christine Keating, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2024
* USD 707,471.00

This project seeks to build functional, lipid-free, 'living' cells by using
proteins to create multi-compartment 'ProteoCells' that can self-generate, house
reactions to produce products, interact with other ProteoCells, and in total,
define a new type of cell-like structure with fundamentally novel properties.
Cells are the most basic unit defining living systems, yet despite years of
study, it remains unclear why nature chose to use lipids as its hallmark
compartment-formers, and how compartmentalization enables a complex 'soup' of
biological molecules to function as an autonomous and self-sustainable unit.
This project addresses these questions by using engineering principles to design
new protein synthesis reactions, new compartment-forming proteins, and new
protein catalysts, and by studying how these 'designer' protein molecules
interact with one another to create collective cell-like units. This work will
address fundamental Rules of Life questions surrounding the roles of lipids and
proteins as essential cellular 'building blocks,' and the importance of
compartmentalization in cellular function. Synthetic ProteoCells may ultimately
provide an innovative tool to solve societal problems related to human health,
sustainability, and the environment. Development of the ProteoCell platform also
provides unique educational opportunities and opportunities to engage in a two-
way dialog with the public regarding the meaning of a synthetic cell, and the
possibilities, benefits, and concerns related to creating new forms of cellular
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientifically, this project will define how to
'bottom-up' construct lipid-free ProteoCells, including a self-assembling
physical boundary, a genetically programmable cytoplasm, and encapsulated
multicomponent reactions. ProteoCells will provide insights into the
relationship between the dynamic synthesis of polypeptide/protein building
blocks, their self-assembly, and the design rules to create functional
ProteoCells that can ultimately self-generate and self-support. The project
approach consists of modular and iterative engineering, production, and
integration of membrane-forming polypeptides/proteins; protein machinery for CO2
transformation; and machinery to support gene expression. The four aims of the
project will create composable ProteoCells and define the range of possible
properties; construct rudimentary organelles and define the properties necessary
for producing organic molecules from CO2; build multi-cellular ProteoCell
'communities' with defined organization; and probe the US public's perceptions
of risks/benefits of constructing a synthetic cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.