* 1935372
* Collaborative Research:  Booting up a Mirror Cell
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Neal Devaraj, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,814,014.00

A hallmark of life on Earth is homochirality, or the fact that many of the key
biological molecules - proteins, nucleic acids, sugars, and lipids - possess the
same chirality. The term chirality refers to the property of an object to be
distinguishable from its mirror image. We often refer to this property
colloquially as handedness, as our left and right hands are not superimposable
yet are mirror images of one another. These properties motivate the exploration
of constructing and studying mirror biomolecules. In this project, the
researchers seek to take the first steps toward building a mirror synthetic
cell, providing a unique lens through which we will attain a fundamental
understanding of chirality in biological molecules, systems, and processes. From
an applied perspective, the work could enable production of entirely new classes
of materials and mirror drugs endowed with improved stability and activity.
Creating substances that were previously impossible to create will lead to the
next-generation of renewable biotechnology and medical products. This proposal
will also promote interdisciplinary education, including the specific expansion
of STEM education and career opportunities for underrepresented minorities and
women. To educate the public, the research team will engage the artistic
community to illustrate the science of chirality through art, culminating in a
'Mirror World' exhibit that will be displayed at local museums. By doing so, the
research team aim to communicate the importance of molecular handedness to the
public, ensuring that advances made in this project benefit a broader community
and contribute to inspiring and training young scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researchers seek to design,
construct, and safely deploy synthetic mirror cells in which all of the key
molecules - nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids - exist in chiral
states opposite to their natural forms. Toward this goal, the team will develop
the capabilities to synthesize mirror DNA, RNA, and proteins; predict the
physiology of cells with mirror components; and assess the risks and rewards of
mirror life. If successful, this project will transform basic science,
bioengineering, and open up new applications in biotechnology. Synthetic mirror
cells will offer a unique lens to help decipher the role of chirality across
multiple scales of life and elucidate why natural life has focused on one
chirality. The researchers will develop a foundation for mirror cells via five
coupled research, education, and outreach activities: (1) developing schemes for
chemically synthesizing mirror biomolecules; (2) repurposing the natural
biological machinery to synthesize mirror nucleic acids and proteins; (3)
developing a computational framework for predicting the physiological impact of
alternative chirality; (4) identifying gaps in the current ethical, legal, and
environmental framework for synthetic cells and proposing new metrics for
assessing the risks and rewards of mirror life; and (5) inspiring and educating
the public about the potential of mirror life by working with artists to develop
a museum exhibit titled 'The Mirror World.' Looking forward, this work will be a
foundation for the know-how and capabilities to design, produce, evaluate, and
safely deploy synthetic mirror cells with transformative potential in
biotechnology, medicine, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.