* 1935450
* EAGER: Reimagining Teachers' Assessment Literacy Using Game-Based Learning Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Yoon Jeon Kim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 04/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The underlying premise of big data in education is that technology can help
teachers and schools make data-informed decisions to better support student
learning. As technology use in classrooms continues to increase, the data
generated from technology use will also increase. Teachers will soon be required
to develop a completely new set of assessment literacies around using the rich
data and analytics provided in educational technology. However, little is known
about how these kinds of data should be processed and presented to reflect
teachers' decision-making and pedagogical desires. To address this gap, this
project will reimagine teachers' assessment literacy in data- and technology-
rich classrooms by leveraging a game-based assessment to help teachers become
educated and critical consumers of analytics and algorithms embedded in
educational technology. With more literate teachers, it is possible to maximize
the potential of educational technology so that teachers can provide
personalized and data-driven feedback during the process of
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage an existing game-based
assessment, Shadowspect, that measures Common Core math standards as well as
cognitive and noncognitive skills such as spatial reasoning and persistence. The
researchers will conduct design-based research to iteratively develop and embed
interactive dashboards in the game and investigate how effectively different
representations and features of the dashboards can support teachers'
understanding and inform their actions. Additionally, the researchers will
investigate how learning analytics can be used to directly support K-12
teachers' assessment practices and identify the knowledge and skills teachers
need to be successful in this area. The ultimate goal of the research is to
understand teachers' assessment literacy in the era of big data and yield
generalizable design principles for interactive dashboard tools that can
facilitate teachers' data use without substantive external training. Ultimately,
this research can lead to future investigations of how teachers' formative
assessment practices might change when they have an increased understanding of
learning analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.