* 1935879
* Collaborative Research: Workshop: Integrated Design of Active Dynamic Systems (IDADS); Champaign, Illinois
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Christopher Vermillion, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2022
* USD 8,752.00

This workshop will provide travel support for 50 participants, many of which are
from under-represented groups, the opportunity to explore the state-of-the-art,
knowledge gaps, practice, and future research directions for the integrated
design and control of active systems. The workshop will consist of three
sections, each of which consists of two plenary talks followed by a breakout
session. Each section will address one of three critical topics in the
integrated design and control of active systems: 1) State-of-the-Art and
Fundamental Knowledge Gaps in Active System Design, 2) Moving Active System
Design Optimization Tools toward Practical Utility, and 3) Defining Future
Scientific Strategies for Active System Design. The breakout sessions will
consist of five groups of 10 heterogeneous researchers that will address
questions related to each topic. Each group will produce a written report of
their conversations, a Slack workspace will be created for open conversation of
all participants throughout and after the workshop, and the workshop organizers
will write a final report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will lead to the
creation of a convergent group of researchers that combine expertise in the
integrated design and control of active systems. This group will be well-
situated to address the fundamental questions at the intersection of design and
controls, and to create the methods and toolsets necessary to translate the
theory to practice for a wide range of important
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.