* 1935262
* Collaborative Research:  CYBORG cells:  Modular integration of synthetic organelles into living cells
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Saad Bhamla, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2023
* USD 520,226.00

As part of a larger effort to understand fundamental rules of life, this project
aims to make hybrid cells with living and artificial parts in order to ask how
cellular organelles function together as modular units. Cells contain diverse
organelles that play specific roles and interact with other functional units. By
developing hybrids of living cells with synthetic parts (cyborgs), this project
provides an innovative approach to understand modularity. Immediate goals are to
develop artificial cytoskeletons to allow control of cell shape and organization
upon command, offering insights into basic cellular processes. This project also
examines societal impacts to inform the team's researchers and to help prepare
public presentations to increase broader impacts. This work should spark public
discussion on the role of hybrid organisms in society and will examine public
concerns of producing something 'unnatural.' Additional impacts include training
a highly interdisciplinary research team, with intensive mentoring in each group
and across groups. The topic will engage the public and provide opportunity for
numerous outreach projects and public events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How cellular
processes can be explained by modularity remains poorly understood, partly
because of the lack of tools for manipulating whole organelles. The project
focuses on developing two types of artificial cytoskeletons (synCyto) that can
be introduced into living cells and controlled experimentally, based on: 1)
Spirostomum myonemes and (2) Magnetic particles (Magnetic Robotic Swarms). The
prediction is that these will form dynamic assemblages inside of cells that can
be controllable experimentally through inputs such as light or magnetic fields
to change cell shape and move other organelles. This work provides proof of
principle towards developing hybrid cells with multiple synthetic organelles.
Such synthetic organelles promise to provide prosthetic function to replace or
augment native organelles, and have the potential to confer new and enhanced
cellular functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.