* 1935782
* Engaging All Geoscience Disciplines at the National Association of Black Geoscientists Annual Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 49,413.00

This award provides partial support for about 10 faculty from historically black
colleges and universities (HBCUs) and for about 50 students-of-color from across
the nation to participate in the Annual Technical Conference of the National
Association of Black Geoscientists (NABG), 4-7 September 2019 in Fayetteville,
AR. Engaging HBCU faculty in professional development opportunities such the
NABG will help maintain their scholarship and social capital among prospective
employers of their graduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to expand the disciplinary representation of NABG to include more
people-of-color interested in broader disciplines of Geosciences, including
ocean (marine), atmospheric and earth sciences. A primary aim is to engage
faculty and students in HBCU environmental science programs and aid their
participation in a national conference of importance to placing them in the 21st
Century geosciences workforce. Despite the efforts of professional organizations
like NABG, underrepresentation of African Americans in geosciences remains low.
Recent assessments found that degree awards in geosciences to persons from
underrepresented groups remain very low; &lt;10% of geoscience degrees at every
academic level are awarded to those with minority status, and African Americans
earn fewer than 3% of geoscience baccalaureate degrees. Furthermore, most HBCU
degree programs of relevance to the geosciences are environmental and
atmospheric sciences programs. Students in these programs are historically
under-represented at the NABG annual conference. Earlier participants in NABG
meetings have continued in their academic preparation in geosciences or entered
the national geosciences workforce; including 100% career advancement for
students who attended at least four NABG conferences. Thus, participation of
students-of-color in NABG appears to be strongly correlated with career
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.