* 1935917
* ADVANCE Partnership: Council of Public Liberal Arts Colleges Partnering and Liaising Across the Nation
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sally Wasileski, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 09/30/2023
* USD 72,647.00

SUNY Geneseo will lead an NSF ADVANCE Partnership project called the COPLAC
Partnering and Liaising Across the Nation (PLAN) Initiative to provide
transformational institutional change strategies for COPLAC institutions. The
COPLAC (Council of Public Liberal Arts Colleges) consortium includes twenty-
nine, state-funded, predominantly undergraduate institutions (PUIs) across the
nation. All members of COPLAC share a mission to provide a high-quality,
affordable education to their constituents. The project will undertake two main
efforts: 1) training and empowering influencers such as administrators and
chairs to problem solve and create equity goals, and 2) creating facilitated
virtual professional affinity groups among COPLAC faculty. The training will be
integrated in the COPLAC annual meeting to support the participation of
institutional leadership. The affinity groups will be tailored to support the
unique needs of faculty at PUIs and create a conduit for sharing faculty equity
issues with COPLAC leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will ensure that
efforts include attention to intersectional issues in STEM academic workplaces
which will contribute to the effectiveness of the ADVANCE strategies that are
being adapted. The project includes a strong plan for sharing and disseminating
information on the project which will be broadly applicable to many other PUIs.
In addition, COPLAC institutions that are part of state systems of higher
education offer an additional avenue for sharing strategies developed with this
project with the state-wide systems. This project has the potential to reduce
inequities within the COPLAC consortium institutions and may result in a useful
model for other PUIs facing similar challenges across the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support to collaborations among STEM
professional societies and academic and non-academic non-profit organizations
designed to broaden the implementation of evidence-based equity strategies and
have a national or regional reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.