* 1935479
* Workshop on the Substance of STEM Education: Addressing the Gap Between Foundational, Meta, and Humanistic Knowledge
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Ariel Anbar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 03/31/2022
* USD 98,874.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by developing a vision for STEM education that will prepare
students for emerging technical and societal challenges. This project will
convene discussions to explore current and future contexts for STEM education.
Building off these discussions, the project will envision models for future STEM
education. The project will consider STEM education from a perspective that
integrates foundational knowledge (to know), meta-knowledge (to act), and
humanistic knowledge (to value). The investigators expect that this perspective
will provide better alignment of STEM education with technical and societal
challenges than a knowledge-centric education. The project focuses on two gaps
in current STEM education models. The first is the gap between the need for
students to learn STEM concepts and the need for them to develop the creativity,
critical thinking, and problem-solving skills needed for ethical decision-making
and action. The second gap occurs because STEM courses and degree programs
continue to reside within traditional STEM disciplinary boundaries, even as our
most pressing problems require interdisciplinary work. The project's goal is to
collaboratively establish a vision for the future of STEM education and develop
a well-articulated framework that describes this future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a virtual community of practice
that will meet in person to articulate a framework for the future of STEM
education with potential to achieve the project vision. The pre-workshop
activities will consist of a series of open internet-based discussions featuring
invited expert keynotes. The objective of the discussion includes: (1) to build
a community of practice; (2) to acquaint participants with the motivation,
context, and key concepts of the workshop; and (3) to envision and converge on
the curricular types, learner personas, and agenda for the workshop. Workshop
participants will be selected from this community of practice, based on their
expertise, knowledge, engagement, and leadership in the field. At the two-day,
studio-format workshop, approximately 50 expert participants will engage in an
iterative set of facilitated design-based exercises to develop prototype
curricula. Following the workshop, the developed curricula will be openly
available to the wider community of practice, with the aim of fostering an
emergent network that will continue to collaboratively develop and iterate
content and resources. If successful, the framework, curricula, and community of
practice developed through this project has the potential to provide a pathway
for evolving undergraduate STEM education to better meet rapidly emerging
economic, environmental, and societal challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is within the
Engaged Student Learning track, which supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.