* 1935799
* NanoEngineered Concrete Internal Conditioning for Targeted Suppression of Alkali-Silica Reaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jianqiang Wei, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 350,167.00

Alkali-silica reaction (ASR) is a major deterioration mechanism causing
significant expansion, cracking and damage to concrete material in service.
Inspired by immunization and targeted therapy in cancer treatment, targeted
suppression of ASR is the focus of this research. The existing mitigation
methods are primarily targeted at single ASR prerequisites with limited
efficiency and potential negative impacts on concrete performance. The primary
objective of this project is to uncover the side-effect free mitigation of ASR,
and then use the insights gained to guide the design of highly durable and
sustainable infrastructure materials with unprecedented properties. A state-of-
the-art methodology will be used by bridging the gaps between nanoengineering
and cement chemistry to convert nanostructure of ASR gels to prevent volume
expansion and cracking. This will lead to resilient and durable concrete thereby
extending the lifetime of infrastructure and reducing the repair and maintenance
costs. Overall, the acquired knowledge from this research effort will reduce the
economic and societal impact of infrastructure deteriorations by providing
insights for degradation preventions and service-life extension of new and
existing concrete structures. The university's STEM program will be exploited to
involve students in K-12 level as well as students at the undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoengineered internal conditioning of concrete
material triggered by multifunctional clay nanoparticles will be exploited based
on a combined thermodynamic modeling and experimental approach. A fundamental
understanding of the role of the nanoengineered internal conditioning in cement
hydration that can suppress formation of ASR will be investigated. The research
will focus on four research thrusts at: 1. Clay level: to functionalize clay
nanoparticles to improve their dispersion, reactivity and tunable functions for
internal conditioning; 2. Cement level: to tailor hydration behavior, pore
network, and both solid and liquid compositions; 3. ASR level: to suppress ASR
formation which prevents volume expansion and cracking; and 4. Concrete level:
to improve durability-related mechanical and physical properties, and resistance
to multiple aging mechanisms with a goal to design truly sustainable, resilient,
and durable concrete material. The success of this project would be instrumental
in advancing resilience-based and problem-oriented concrete material design
through nanoengineering and thermodynamic means to stratify the quality
requirement and performance expectation of future
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.