* 1935088
* RCN-SEES: Climate, Energy, Environment, and Engagement in Semi-Arid Regions (CE3SAR)
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Luis Cifuentes, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 18,770.00

This award is funded under NSF's Science, Engineering, and Education for
Sustainability (SEES) activities, which aim to address the challenges of
creating a sustainable world.

Research Coordination Network (RCN) CE3SAR (Climate, Energy, Environment, and
Engagement in Semiarid Regions) is a comprehensive partnership of researchers at
South Texas regional institutions and major research universities elsewhere
advancing knowledge of science, engineering and education for sustainability
(SEES). The network will develop and test an innovative model for conducting
interdisciplinary, region-specific, sustainability research closely tied to the
needs and interests of highly-engaged local stakeholders. RCN CE3SAR will
aggregate regional research capacities specific to sustainability in semiarid
climates contiguous to the Gulf of Mexico while leveraging research expertise
infused from outside the region. Geographic information science (GIS) will play
a key role in the process of integrating layers of scientific data, producing
scientific insight and presenting new ideas, new research directions and new
scientific knowledge to regional stakeholders as well as the scientific
community. The network will align regional capacities that heretofore were
largely disconnected and bring focus and synergy to a range of research that
will profoundly impact the region and its socioeconomic future. The network will
engage and educate regional communities, government and private-sector
stakeholders throughout the process.

South Texas comprises 28 counties, eight of which border Mexico and eight the
Gulf of Mexico, where coastal marine and estuarine environments quickly become
semiarid regions historically susceptible to drought. Climate change and its
ripple effects, from rising seas to parched riverbeds, will profoundly affect
South Texas socioeconomic structures, geographic distribution patterns and
educational and cultural institutions. While much sustainability science focuses
on global scales, local communities and institutions in South Texas and
elsewhere face crucial decisions over the next 20 years driven by sustainability
issues related to water, energy and use of space. Scientific knowledge must be
available at relevant scales for those decisions to be informed by
sustainability research; moreover, the science must be understood and accepted
by the community, which plays a vital role in implementing the research results
into its decision making and infrastructure. Experience has shown that importing
researchers from outside the region with little or no connection to the
community results in low acceptance of research results by local decision-makers
and by the community at large; moreover, South Texas has been historically
isolated and its residents suspicious of 'outsiders'. In order for
sustainability research to have a salutary and substantive local impact, it must
be advanced by regional researchers who also draw on national and international
expertise.