* 1935329
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Safe Medical Continuum Robots: Sensing, Control and Fabrication
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Michael Yip, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,999,975.00

This project will advance fundamental knowledge for modeling, control, and
sensing of soft-backboned continuum robots for surgical applications. The snake-
like or tentacle-like versatility of these robots provides enhanced dexterity.
Their compliant nature makes them especially well-suited for medical
interventions, because they safely conform to the geometry of the body rather
than damaging surrounding tissue. The modeling and control approach is
innovative because it treats the robot and surrounding tissue as an
interconnected system, and applies mathematical techniques developed for
deformable structures that may take an infinite number of possible shapes.
Inevitable uncertainties about the geometry and mechanical properties of
biological tissue are rigorously addressed using probabilistic on-line, model-
free learning. Movement of the robot inside the body is monitored using a linear
array of millimeter-scale passive radio antennas, similar to the RFID tags found
in retail stores. Different versions of these sensors will be explored,
variously capable of locating contact points, measuring interface forces, and
estimating the shape of the robot. The project also presents a framework for
development and validation of surgical robots, including a new systematic
classification of surgical tasks from a robotic perspective. This
interdisciplinary effort combines control theory, wireless communication, human-
centered design, and medicine to address a critical need for consistent high-
quality and accessible healthcare in the US. Project activities will help
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively
impact engineering education with hands-on engineering demonstrations,
practices, and lessons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project vision is a coordinated
design of continuum robots, sensors, environment testbeds, and validation
metrics for medical applications with their complex tissue environments. The
research team will (i) design scalable and online model-based and model-free
adaptive control approaches that consider the robot-and-tissue environment as a
tightly coupled, identifiable, and controllable system, (ii) develop wireless
sensing technology for continuum robot tracking, shape sensing, force
estimation, and communication channels that meet the constraints of medical
continuum robots and environments, and (iii) build a comprehensive set of
canonical medical robot and environment validation platforms, and a set of
relevant metrics for quantitative comparisons of future medical continuum robot
technologies. These contributions offer a generalized approach for robust
implementation of medical continuum robots in new tissue environments. It has
broad applicability across different robot hardware and clinical
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.