* 1935913
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:IP): 1.2 GHz NMR Spectrometer for National Gateway Ultrahigh Field NMR Center
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Philip Grandinetti, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 17,577,202.00

An award is made to the Ohio State University to acquire, install, and operate a
state-of-the-art ultrahigh field 1.2 GHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectrometer at the National Gateway Ultrahigh Field NMR Center. This next
generation NMR instrument will provide critical research infrastructure that is
currently lacking in the US, increasing our economic competitiveness with
substantial impact on diverse areas, such as energy conversion and storage, new
materials, molecular modeling, synthetic biology, diagnostic approaches, drug
design, and personalized medicine. The Center will provide unique opportunities
to attract and train young STEM scientists at the undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral levels, including those from underrepresented groups, who
constitute a rapidly growing fraction of NMR researchers. Active learning of NMR
concepts and applications will be promoted through local workshops, the regional
Gateway NMR conference, a high school day, an industry day, and national
workshops and conferences. These activities will increase academic and industry
partnerships within the national and regional NMR communities to carry the many
scientific promises of NMR at 1.2 GHz to fruition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
the past several years, OSU has built one of the largest and most advanced
shared NMR facilities in the nation as part of the Campus Chemical Instrument
Center (CCIC). NMR's non-invasive, non-destructive, quantitative, and highly
reproducible nature has turned it into one of the most versatile physical
techniques providing atomic detail insights into the inner workings of a myriad
of molecular systems and materials, many of which have enormous complexity and
extraordinary properties. Recent developments in high-temperature
superconducting (HTS) wire technology have allowed the construction of next
generation ultrahigh field NMR magnets up to 1.2 GHz. The acquisition of a 1.2
GHz NMR instrument at OSU will fulfill an urgent national and regional need for
such instrumentation, enabling transformative research that addresses
fundamentally new scientific questions to be carried out for a large number of
chemical and biochemical systems. These include microscopic properties of nano-
and non-crystalline materials, biomolecular structure, dynamics, and function of
large and/or weak protein and RNA complexes, intrinsically disordered proteins
and their interactions with nanomaterials, and metabolomics. This research will
enable a deeper understanding of biological interactions, communication, and
function at the molecular level and support the design of materials with novel
properties. The 1.2 GHz NMR spectrometer will be operated as a national center
with both regional users and those from across the US, including users from
academia, national labs, and industry. This project is supported by the
Foundation-wide Mid-scale Research Infrastructure program. The project will be
managed by the Division for Biological Infrastructure within the Directorate for
Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.