* 1935904
* Generation of food-based chlorination disinfection byproducts (F-DBPs) during food processing
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* William Mitch, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

With an estimated 76 million illnesses attributable to food per year in the US,
rinsing produce with washwater containing high doses of chlorine disinfectant is
becoming increasingly important. However, chlorine can react with biomolecules
in the produce to form chlorinated byproducts that are potentially cancer-
causing. This research will identify these chlorinated byproducts, focusing on
those that remain in the produce until eaten by consumers. The research will
quantify byproducts formed when lettuce, carrots, tomatoes, apples and chicken
are treated with chlorine-containing washwater under conditions used in produce
packing facilities. Successful completion of this research will produce results
that can be used to develop guidelines for chlorine doses that control foodborne
illness while minimizing cancer risk. The results will also help maintain
produce exports to countries concerned about these potentially cancer-causing
byproducts in food.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Foodborne outbreaks linked to
contaminated produce have heightened the importance of food disinfection in
processing facilities. However, chlorine is known to react with organic matter
to produce halogenated disinfection byproducts (DBPs) that are often toxic and
even carcinogenic. Chlorinated DBP formation during food processing may be more
significant than in drinking water, because food processing can involve 100-fold
higher levels of both chlorine (~300 mg/L) and organic precursors. While food
safety currently focuses on pathogens, this benefit must be balanced with the
potential health impacts of DBP formation. The goal of this research is to
characterize DBPs produced in foods from reactions of chlorine with the amino
acids tyrosine and tryptophan, and unsaturated fatty acids; two of the four
major biomolecular groups in food which are highly reactive with chlorine. The
central hypothesis of this research is that chlorination will initially form
halogenated tyrosines, tryptophans, and fatty acid halohydrin biomolecules, and
soluble byproducts can be released during prolonged chlorination. The shorter
chlorine contact times of food washing (~15 min) compared to drinking water
chlorination (days) will favor higher yields of these initial biomolecule-based
byproducts relative to the soluble byproducts. The corollary to the central
hypothesis is that biomolecule-based byproducts will remain in food while
soluble byproducts will partition to the washwater. These will be tested by
comparing the yields of soluble byproducts and initial biomolecule-based
chlorination byproducts in various systems including: 1) model proteins and
triglycerides, 2) lettuce, carrots, tomatoes, apples, and chickens treated under
conditions relevant to food disinfection, and 3) samples collected from food
washing facilities. The cytotoxic potencies of the amino acid- and fatty acid-
based byproducts will be determined and used to normalize measured
concentrations of these byproducts in foods for comparison to previous
evaluations of DBP toxicity in drinking water. Benefits to society resulting
from this research include broadening participation in STEM through support of
the dissertation research of an African American graduate student, engagement of
under-represented minority undergraduates through an REU program, and the
involvement of a high school science teacher and underrepresented high school
students in summer research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.