* 1935669
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing paleo-sediment flux from river deposits: toward quantifying sediment discharge from bedform to basin scale
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 04/30/2024
* USD 406,054.00

Constraining the quantity of sediment carried by ancient rivers provides a
window into landscape conditions throughout Earths history. It also facilitates
the prediction of where hydrocarbon, water, mineral, and geothermal resources
are buried in sedimentary basins. This project aims to advance our understanding
of how sediment is transferred through the beds, bars, and levees of rivers in
order to help i) answer questions about river response to changes in tectonics,
climate, and sea level, ii) understand controls on river movements on Earth and
other planets, and iii) predict the best places for underground energy
development, mineral exploration and aquifer management. This project is
providing training opportunities for students from underrepresented groups,
thereby helping to develop a diverse geoscience workforce. This research is also
producing large datasetsmade available via data repositories of experimental
bedform characteristics and scaled stratigraphic measurements that will be a
valuable teaching resource, and useful for geologists, geomorphologists, and
civil engineers alike. In addition, the researchers are developing mini-
tutorials and virtual field trips that can be used as classroom exercises for
students and outcrop-interpretation exercises for scientists, including those
with limited access to field experiences. Images and image interpretations are
being incorporated into the machine learning project to support the development
of automated outcrop interpretation tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
leveraging advances in geomorphology and sedimentary geology to quantitatively
connect the role of sediment supply in sediment-transport processes across
multiple scales to stratigraphic products. A combination of physical
experiments, modeling, and field observations is being used to refine physical
constraints on sediment transport rates of bedforms, bars, and channels, and to
quantify how the shape and preservation of these features in the stratigraphic
record relate to sediment-flux conditions at different scales. This insight is
being applied to deposits of the Spanish Pyrenees a system with robust basin-
scale sediment-flux constraints as a field calibration exercise. Subsequently,
the developed approaches can help quantitatively test hypotheses about sediment-
supply changes that occurred in response to the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum
climate-change event. These efforts are yielding new insight into how sediment
is partitioned between distinct but interrelated morphodynamic processes in
fluvial landscapes, and providing a guide to how environmental and land-use
change can affect river mobility on centennial to millennial
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.