* 1936861
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Emerging Disaster Engineering  Encompassing Human Directed Expert Systems (ERC-DEES)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Gregory Odegard, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 12/31/2022
* USD 99,752.00

Title: Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Emerging Disaster
Engineering &lt;br/&gt;Encompassing Human Directed Expert Systems (ERC-
DEES)&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jeffrey D. Naber, Michigan Technological University,
jnaber@mtu.edu&lt;br/&gt;Part 1: Nontechnical description of the
project:&lt;br/&gt;Disasters cause immense economic and human losses. The UN
reported between 1998 to 2017 that the world experienced financial losses of
$2,908 billion (US$) with the US recording the largest losses of $945 billon. In
addition, these disasters were responsible for killing 1.3 million people and
left 4.4 billion in need of assistance. Those persons in the communities most
significantly impacted are the elderly, disabled, and those economically
disadvantaged with limited resources and limited mobility. Concurrently, man-
made infrastructure is becoming more vulnerable due to aging and degradation,
while weather extremes and terrorism threats are increasing the occurrence and
impact of disasters. Thus, there is a critical need to have rapid intelligence
and an ability to deploy limited resources with maximum impact at the earliest
stage of the disasters. &lt;br/&gt;Vitally needed is improved situational
awareness in partnership with first responders and community stakeholders at the
emergence of disasters. The ERC planning grant is to develop the scoping,
organization, and management of an NSF ERC for Emerging Disaster Engineering
Encompassing Human Directed Expert Systems (ERC-DEES). The proposed vision is to
develop expert systems with autonomous agents directed by humans with rapid
response capabilities in partnership with, and in support of, first responders,
communities and their citizens, and local and federal agencies.&lt;br/&gt;Part
2: Technical description of the project:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed vision of the
ERC is to develop expert systems with resilient and connected autonomous agents
directed by humans with rapid response in partnership with, and in support of,
first responders, communities and their citizens, and local and federal
agencies. The proposed research includes seven areas integrating 1) resilient
autonomous systems able to operate for extended durations in unstructured and
extreme environments, 2) advanced sensing and perception, 3) remote sensing,
multi-mode communications, 4) social media that feeds expert systems, 5)
research and modeling of human and social behavior in emergency situations, 6)
data-driven methods for sensing, data mining, and telematics, 7) system of
systems predictive models and modeling methodology that integrate rapid
environmental change, human social system dynamics, and the corresponding
interdependencies. These technologies will enable the development of novel tools
to forecast and to anticipate tipping points in the dynamics of such systems by
combining forecasting with model-based approaches. &lt;br/&gt;Within the
planning grant activities we will explore new convergent research areas and
educational programs that link engineering, science, ethics, policy, and
societal factors. Outcomes of the workshops and discussions will focus around
convergence and pathways to inclusion and diversity. These outcomes will be
shared with the four partnering institutions as best practices and guidelines
that the institutions may incorporate into their programs. The planning grant
will bring together an expansive group of researchers and stakeholders to
discuss critical issues facing our nation and world. It will bring together
local, state and federal agencies with industries for discussions on the use of
advanced technologies including autonomous agents and expert systems. The
planning grant will additionally bring together experts in education, leaders in
diversity and inclusion, and STEM educators and researchers to explore methods
to remove barriers and increase pathways to workforce development, diversity and
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.