* 1936452
* Mechanics of Bioderived-Cellulose-Based Ultra-Strong and Ultra-Tough Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Teng Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 505,000.00

This research program will focus on exploring design strategies to achieve
ultra-strong and ultra-tough materials based on bioderived cellulose. Cellulose
is the most abundant biopolymer on Earth and has long been used to produce paper
products. Cellulose has remarkable mechanical properties, making it as a
promising building block for high performance functional and structural
materials. While plants are the common source of cellulose, it requires extra
physical and chemical processing to isolate and purify cellulose from plants,
and such processing can potentially decrease the mechanical performance of plant
cellulose. Moreover, trees often take years or decades to mature, posing
substantial time cost to plant cellulose. Bioderived Cellulose produced through
a microscopic organism enabled fermentation process is chemically 100% pure with
much better properties than plant cellulose and can be obtained at industrial
scale at a low cost within days. This research program aims to use both
experimental and computational studies to investigate the fundamental science
that governs the superb mechanical properties of bioderived cellulose. The
success of this research program can potentially lead to a low-cost and long-
sought solution in designing high performance engineering materials. The
research will also be complemented by establishing a well-rounded educational
and outreach program including research opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, internship for underrepresented minority high school
students, public outreach at the annual Maryland Day, and research dissemination
via cyberinfrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this
research program is (a) to explore a promising but largely unexplored strategy
to enhance the mechanical properties of bioderived cellulose materials via ion
infiltration, and (b) to decipher the fundamental correlation of the superb
mechanical properties of bioderived cellulose materials with cellulose fiber
length/alignment and water content. The research will be conducted via a
coherent research framework integrating experiments and multiscale modeling. By
revealing the fundamental science of the superb intrinsic mechanical properties
of cellulose, the project holds promise to drive a paradigm shift in the usage
of cellulose beyond its conventional way. The new knowledge generated from this
research program will shed light fertile opportunities to exploit the full
potential of the intrinsic superb mechanical properties of cellulose, the most
abundant biopolymer on Earth. The fundamental scientific understanding emerging
from this study can enrich the disciplines of mechanics of materials with
multiple tantalizing research frontiers and be readily adapted and generalized
to other material systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.