* 1936406
* Topological Straintronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Herbert Fertig, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 366,924.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor technologies have fueled the
explosive growth of information-age technologies over the last half century.
Further advances, however, are becoming increasingly difficult as devices
dimensions approach atomic scales. This challenge requires new approaches that
harness quantum phenomena. Novel electronic devices that exploit quantum
properties have the potential for better device reliability and lower power
consumption. Quantum technologies bring their own challenges. In particular,
environmental effects can corrupt quantum information and significant resources
are required for error correction. Topological materials offer great potential
to address this problem because of their unique properties. In particular,
quantum states are topologically protected by symmetries and are less subject to
corruption. In this project elastic strain rather than electric or magnetic
fields will be used to control electronic states in devices. Logic gates and
other electronic devices are expected to be more reliable and use less power
than conventional devices based on complementary metal oxide semiconductors.
Interactive and engaging educational outreach programs will be integrated with
the research project. These include Science Blog writing and Materials and
Device Exhibits. These outreach efforts will promote scientific literacy to the
general public and improve science appreciation by local K-12 students. This in
turn will attract such students to modern science and technology in the early
stages of their education. Finally, the participation of underrepresented groups
in scientific research will be
enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research project concerns novel strain-electronic (or
straintronic) nanowire devices built upon two classes of topological materials,
topological crystalline insulators (TCIs) and Weyl semimetals (WSMs), which host
massless Dirac fermions on their surfaces and Weyl fermions with definite
chirality in their bulk, respectively. These extraordinary surface or bulk
states are topologically protected by symmetries and are rather robust against
impurities, defects and disorder. Electronic devices exploiting these
quantum/topological states are likely to have significantly improved reliability
and/or reduced power consumption relative to conventional semiconductor-based
electronics. The overall objective of this project is to study and manipulate
the exotic quantum properties of Dirac and Weyl fermions in topological devices
utilizing controllable elastic strain towards low-power, highly reliable
electronic applications. In contrast to previous studies of bulk crystals and
thin films, the proposed research will focus on nanowire/nanoribbon-based
devices that harbor exceptional features for straintronic studies and
applications. The success of the project will be built on the two PIs' existing
collaboration, extensive familiarity with topological materials, and
complementary expertise on material synthesis, device fabrication, magneto-
transport studies, and theoretical modeling of electronic systems. The combined
theoretical and experimental studies of strain-driven topological phase
transitions and associated quantum transport properties will offer new paradigms
for fundamental, potentially exploitable physics in electronic systems. The
proposed research is also anticipated to represent a key step in establishing a
new research area, topological straintronics: the manipulation of topological
quasi-particles with controllable elastic strain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.