* 1936445
* Route to turbulence in Strongly Stratified Slope Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Inanc Senocak, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 370,773.00

Turbulence, or high-speed chaotic fluid motion, is the norm rather than the
exception in nature. Describing and predicting fluid turbulence is complex and
requires computer simulations. Many advances have been achieved in computer
modeling of turbulence under well-mixed atmospheric flow conditions. However, a
serious concern in weather forecasting has been inadequate modeling of
turbulence within a stratified atmosphere and in regions of complex terrain. In
a stratified atmosphere, buoyancy force (due to density variations) acts in the
same direction as gravity, hindering the formation of well-mixed flow
conditions. Stratified conditions are commonly observed during nighttime in
mountainous terrain and over large ice sheets and glaciers. Accurate prediction
of winds (air flow) over Antarctica and Greenland is an important aspect of
understanding the impact of climate change, because the strength and structure
of winds are directly connected to the ablation of ice sheet and the associated
sea level rise. Moreover, prediction of nocturnal winds in mountainous terrain
has important implications for air quality, agriculture, and defense operations.
This project is expected to lead to improved prediction of winds under
stratified conditions in computer models of weather. Outreach activities are
planned for existing precollege preparatory programs. The project will result in
open-source educational materials related to stratified fluid
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chief technical objective is to investigate
newly discovered fluid instabilities over sloping terrain and unravel their role
in progression toward an intermittent and patchy turbulent state. Inclination of
the surface alters the turbulence dynamics due to obliqueness of stratification
relative to flow shear, leading to further departure from a classical boundary
layer profile. The project will adopt contemporary techniques from hydrodynamic
stability theory and direct numerical simulations to arrive at an atlas of fluid
instabilities as a function of the surface inclination and the newly introduced
dimensionless stratification perturbation parameter. The investigation is
expected to reveal new flow features emerging at sufficiently high
stratification perturbation numbers and improve the comprehension of flow
intermittency in the form of bursting phenomena and patchy turbulence. The
project will culminate with a quantitative criterion to characterize
intermediate flow regimes that range from laminar to fully turbulent conditions,
thus filling the current knowledge gap pertinent to partially turbulent
stratified slope flows. The outcomes of this project are expected to lead to
future improvements of subgrid-scale parameterizations of stably stratified
conditions in numerical weather prediction models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.