* 1936523
* CHS: Small: Translating Compilers for Visual Computing in Dynamic Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Baishakhi Ray, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 20,300.00

This collaborative project is developing technologies to enable students,
scientists, and other non-expert developers to use computer languages that
facilitate rapid prototyping, and yet still automatically convert such programs
to have high performance. In this research, the PI and co-PIs focus on programs
that operate over visual data, such as programs in computer graphics, computer
vision, and visualization. Visual data is important because visual datasets are
rapidly growing in size, due to the use of cell-phone cameras, photo and video
sharing online, and in scientific and medical imaging. The intellectual merits
are that specialized program optimizations are being developed specifically for
visual computing and for languages that enable rapid prototyping, alongside
techniques that allow the computer to automatically search through different
candidate optimizations and choose the fastest one. The project's broader
significance and importance are that it will make the writing of computer
programs that operate over visual datasets more accessible to novice
programmers, make visual computing more accessible to a broader audience, permit
faster research and development over visual programs, and make such programs
themselves be more efficient.

More specifically, this research program is producing translating compilers that
are specialized to handle programs that compute over visual data. The group led
by the PI is researching new compilers that translate code from dynamic
languages into highly efficient code in a target language. Dynamic languages are
defined as those with a very dynamic run-time model, for example, MATLAB,
Python, and Javascript. The target language is a language such as C that permits
implementation of highly efficient programs. This research framework
incorporates ideas from compilers, graphics, computer vision, visual perception,
and formal and natural languages. The research will make a number of key
intellectual contributions. First, new domain-specific translations and
optimizations for visual computing will be formalized into manual rules that can
be applied to any input program. Second, the team will research a novel approach
of automatically learning translations, instead of using manually-coded rules.
This can take the form of learning translation "suggestions" from humans, who
can interactively suggest better output code. Third, a new search process based
on offline auto-tuning will be used to select the translations that result in
the fastest program. The success of the project will be verified against a
comprehensive test suite of programs from computer vision and graphics.