* 1936884
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I(RAISE): Network for Equity in the Era of Driverless Vehicles
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Olutayo Fabusuyi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 12/31/2020
* USD 948,182.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
identify how major recent transportation innovations, including ridesourcing and
driverless vehicles, can improve economic prosperity and the quality of life for
all Americans. Citizens and policy makers need knowledge-based, data-driven
responses to these massive disruptions of the transportation sector in order for
the U.S. to be at the forefront of technological advances and to be able to
provide equitable access to transportation. We propose to create an open
knowledge network (OKN) for transportation and the emerging mobility ecosystem
that leverages and links existing publicly available data (i.e. www.data.gov).
To do this, we will integrate perspectives and insights from engineering,
computer science, statistics, social and behavioral science, systems science and
public policy. Our transdisciplinary, convergence team is a partnership between
public, private and the not-for-profit sectors. The resulting knowledge network
will result in better public policy decisions on the deployment of driverless
vehicles, sustainable urban planning practices, and more equitable
transportation systems design. Data deliverables from the project will empower
our project partners and end users to develop innovation ecosystems specific to
their local needs and populations of interest. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the
deployment of innovative transportation technologies such as driverless vehicles
on the horizon, we need a more thorough and broader understanding of their
potential economic and quality of life impacts. Our project speaks directly to
this need by creating an open knowledge network to accelerate these innovations
while being aware of their broader implications on society. Our research will
link publicly available microdata and scientific inquiries on the impacts of new
mobility modes. The objective is to gain deeper insights into the factors that
prevent the development of transportation innovations but also to understand the
ways in which transportation innovations contribute to societal well-being. Our
proposed research addresses a myriad of factors such as ontology development,
entity matching, synthetic entity generation, data normalization and linking
strategies. The major tasks are 1) conducting a customer discovery process; 2)
building a transdisciplinary convergence team; 3) developing a robust OKN
research plan and 4) the creation of a minimum viable knowledge network (MVKN).
The MVKN is expected to provide crucial insights, particularly at city or
metropolitan level, to decision makers in the transportation
arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.