* 1936220
* I-Corps: Customer Discovery for a Neovaginal Stent
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Nicholas Kim, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact potential of this I-Corps project can be seen as a social
impact as well as a healthcare impact. Gender affirming care is known to
dramatically drop suicidality from 40% to 1.8%. Gender affirming vaginoplasty
surgery (surgical creation of a vaginal canal), and its associated post-
operative care, has remained largely unchanged since 1966. The complications
associated with vaginoplasty can be severe to the point where the patient will
require a repeat procedure. The current standard of care to prevent
complications requires that the patient lays down in a clean and safe
environment, completely relax their pelvic floor, and insert a hard plastic
dilator for 30 minutes. Patients are required to do this 3 times a day for the
first 3 months. This means that patients are dilating 270 for over 135 hours
during the first three months. The device developed here would reduce the number
of dilation events from 270 to 2. There were over 20,000 transgender women
undergoing this procedure worldwide last year and this incidence is growing at a
rate of 24%. With moderate modifications, this device would be appropriate for
cis-gendered women to treat radiation-induced vaginal stenosis, Meyer-
Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome, transvaginal septum, and hemi-vaginal
septum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a medical
device designed to prevent complications and reduce compliance barriers
associated with the surgical creation of a vagina. The vaginal stent is composed
of three distinct components: the rigid removable inner component, the semi-
rigid stent component, and the outer silicone component with integrated douching
mechanism. The device is inserted into the new vaginal canal during the
procedure; at this stage the innermost component is expanded and remains in the
patient for the first five days postoperatively before removal. The middle and
outer component are replaced every 30 days for the first 90 days postoperatively
to continue the expansion of the vaginal canal. Because the device is able to be
manipulated to match the needs of the patient through the different phases of
healing, this device can replace all aspects of current practices of post-
operative care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.