* 1936438
* Collaborative Research: Impacting Assessment Practices of Postsecondary Faculty Teaching Gateway Chemistry Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Kristen Murphy, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 04/30/2024
* USD 12,540.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
chemistry education. Assessing the nature and quality of students’ learning in
science courses is a complex process. Since students focus their learning
efforts on what they expect they will be tested on, high-quality assessments are
vitally important as drivers of student learning. Results of assessments also
inform stakeholders such as institutional accreditation boards and future
employers. However, faculty members who teach college science courses typically
do not receive training about how to create and use robust assessments in their
courses. This project will provide professional development experiences for
faculty members at two-year colleges to help them use robust assessment
practices in their general chemistry and organic chemistry courses. The project
will conduct a series of four three-day regional workshops for faculty members.
Each workshop will be followed by a yearlong virtual mentoring experience for
the participants, to support them as they implement what they learned in the
workshops. Attendees will be encouraged to participate in teams from the same
institution or geographical area to maximize local support and community
development. The professional communities and assessment plans developed
throughout the project are expected to have sustained impacts on faculty
members’ assessment practices and on students’ learning in their chemistry
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration between the University of South
Florida, Grand Valley State University, and the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee will design, implement, and evaluate professional development
experiences for faculty members at two-year colleges. Faculty workshop
participants will gain knowledge and skills in developing course learning
objectives, aligning course learning objectives with disciplinary frameworks,
articulating test specification documents, and writing and evaluating assessment
items. Throughout the subsequent academic year, participants will implement the
assessment materials they developed. Monthly online meetings will be held for
participants to share their implementation experiences and offer each other
support, and for the project team to provide mentorship. Throughout the face-to-
face workshops and online mentoring meetings, the project team will also collect
data to develop, refine, and evaluate a model of faculty assessment practice
change. The Teacher-Centered Systemic Reform model will serve as the guiding
framework. Case studies will be constructed for each participant based on
workshop and implementation artifacts, semi-structured interviews and surveys of
the workshop participants that highlight how personal and cultural context and
beliefs about teaching and learning are associated with enacted assessment
practices. A cross case analysis will be conducted to better understand the
impact of the workshops and online meetings including accelerators and barriers
of assessment practice change, role of community in promoting assessment reform,
and opportunities to improve postsecondary faculty professional development. The
workshop materials and research findings from the project will be incorporated
into future assessment workshops offered by the American Chemical Society’s
Chemical Education Examinations Institute. The success of the project will be
evaluated by an external advisory board. The project has the potential to
generate new knowledge regarding the impact of a community practice approach to
assessment practice reform in STEM education. This project is funded by the NSF
IUSE: EHR Program, which supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional
and Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform
and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and
disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.