* 1936250
* QII-TAQS: Topological Quantum Devices from Nanoscale Mechanical Control of Materials
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Hesam Askari, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,549,179.00

Advancements in computational power over the past fifty years have mostly relied
on shrinking the size of the transistor, the fundamental constituent element of
the integrated circuits that make up computers. As physical limits of how small
transistors can be are reached, further progress depends on exploring new
concepts. One of these concepts is quantum computing, in which the quantum state
of individual quantum bits (qubits) is manipulated to achieve exponential
speedup of computational performance. A critical challenge to quantum computing
lies in the stability and manipulation of qubits, which are highly sensitive and
easily perturbed by the environment. This project explores the creation and
manipulation of topological qubits, which are protected against external
perturbation by their topological nature. The project controls the
superconducting and topological nature of materials by applying stressors to
two-dimensional materials in a device geometry similar to a transistor. Since
the device geometry mirrors the conventional transistor, the potential exists to
create a new fundamental constituent element for an entirely new generation of
quantum integrated circuits that can be controlled using mechanical principles.
The project also seeks to ensure the growth of a quantum educated society and
workforce through educational course development at the pre-collegiate,
undergraduate, and graduate levels. The investigators plan to conduct a high-
school summer program on quantum science and engineering, as well as to
introduce new courses and certification programs at the university level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decoherence in quantum computing devices has been a long-
term problem. A potential solution is the use of topologically protected
Majorana bound states that may be fused and braided together to perform quantum
operations. This project explores the foundations of generating, detecting, and
manipulating such topologically protected quantum states through the mechanical
control of quantum materials. The primary goal of this research is to strain-
engineer materials for the exploration and manipulation of Majorana bound
states, by controlling the superconducting and topological nature of monolayer
materials. Device-scale stressors are used to create a fully solid-state device
where the properties of two-dimensional transition metal ditelluride alloys may
be manipulated with strain in a three-terminal transistor geometry. In doing so,
the basis is set for using strain as a new type of control knob for band
topology and superconductivity. The project applies strain-engineering concepts,
including using static stressors from thin film stress capping layers, and
dynamic stressors from piezoelectric oxides. Transition metal ditelluride alloys
have been shown experimentally and theoretically to contain a vast library of
strain tunable quantum phases. Through nanoscale strain engineering with these
phases, superconducting and other quantum devices can be nanopatterned and
controlled to explore Majorana bound state physics. Theoretical multiscale
modeling and simulation of the mechanical properties of these 2D materials and
devices will feed back to the experimental team to achieve the full potential of
strain-controlling quantum materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Quantum Leap Big Idea Program and the Division of
Electrical, Communication, and Cyber Systems in the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.