* 1936809
* EAGER: Data Science for Election Verification
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Birol Yesilada, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Election officials need evidence-based, scientifically valid tools to routinely
assess the quality of election systems, including technical and human factors.
Whether initiated by the election administrators or by the parties to an
election, election investigation is expensive and must be well prioritized to be
most effective. The project plans to provide tools for prioritizing
investigations for election officials and others. The expected outcome is
increased robustness of the mechanisms protecting elections that can give
Americans more justified confidence in election
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will help transform the way data
science is used to protect elections. Society does not yet have a sustainable
ecosystem of systematic data science to inform decisions by election
administrators, political parties and candidates about how to prioritize their
limited investigation resources. The peculiarities of elections may require
development of new techniques in predictive analytics. The goal is to predict
the behavior of a collection of elements, not the behavior of single elements.
The analysis must be done in the presence of local noise and overall trends
created by idiosyncratic effects of candidates, campaigns and cultural
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal is to bolster the actual and
perceived integrity of American elections. Election systems are critical
infrastructure. Protecting elections is part of national security. This will
increase the resilience of US election infrastructure by improving our ability
to detect and correct erroneous election results. In addition, because of the
high visibility of election security issues, the work will promote public
engagement with data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will collect
data on the technology fielded by election agencies across the country. This
data will be publicly available at www.VerifiedVoting.org/verifier. The research
will also create prototype analysis and visualization tools that will be shared
publicly. The research will progress from relatively simple analyses that have
had a demonstrable impact on real elections in a few jurisdictions to analyses
involving a wider variety of data, including census and election technology
data, and more sophisticated predictive analytics and machine learning
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.