* 1936125
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Advancement through Healthy Empowerment, Networking and Awareness (ATHENA) at University of Louisville
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Robert Cohn, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The University of Louisville (UofL) ADVANCE Adaptation project called the
Advancement through Healthy Empowerment, Networking, and Awareness (ATHENA) will
improve equity for STEM faculty. UofL is a state-supported research university,
with a mission to pursue excellence and inclusiveness in research, teaching, and
service. The project will lead to the creation of an ATHENA Center for STEM
Equity which will enhance UofL's institutional capacity in STEM equity research
and will help to sustain the ADVANCE Adaptation project strategies shown to be
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institution has done a self-study to
identify equity issues for STEM faculty by gender and have identified promising
practices from other ADVANCE grantees. Areas that will be addressed by the
ATHENA project include: 1) implicit bias; 2) recruitment and retention; 3)
differential time in rank for STEM faculty; and 4) professional isolation.
Strategies that will be implemented include: changing the search, recruitment
and hiring practices by adapting components from the University of Michigan's
Strategies and Tactics for Recruiting to Increase Diversity and Excellence
(STRIDE); creating a mentoring program with an emphasis on improving
opportunities for mid-career promotion based on Florida International
University's Faculty Mentoring Program (FMP); establishing a program to support
the career progress of faculty going through major life events; implementing
data collection to support evaluation and monitoring efforts; and educating
faculty about gender-by-ethnicity biases that affect the advancement of women in
STEM disciplines through theatre based workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institution of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.