* 1936778
* Identifying Marginalization and Allying Tendencies to Transform Engineering Relationships
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Darryl Dickerson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2023
* USD 630,386.00

Teamwork is critical to engineering professional work. While some aspects of
helping engineering students learn how to work in teams are well understood and
incorporated into instructional tools, others are poorly handled, such as
helping teams learn how to address implicit and explicit marginalization amongst
teammates. As in other areas of social life, teams can have teammates that
engage in marginalizing behavior towards other teammates, particularly those
from underrepresented populations; this can be detrimental to the work of the
team and potentially damaging to the individuals being marginalized. It is
particularly important for instructors of large undergraduate courses to have
tools that will make peer-peer or instructor-peer marginalization identifiable
at the classroom level so that they can interrupt discriminatory or
marginalizing behavior amongst teammates, and to help teammates learn how to
interrupt others' marginalizing behavior when instructors are not around. This
will help better prepare students for a diverse engineering workforce. The
workplace requires engineers to work together to solve important problems that
need the intellectual contributions of each team member. Therefore, engineers
need to know how to self-correct when teammates marginalize other team members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instructors and researchers need better insights on how to
detect, manage, and study marginalizing interactions to improve team experiences
for all team members. Existing research on teamwork, even that focused on
engineering students, has tended to focus on retrospective survey data reported
by teammates, not live classroom observation. The goal of I-MATTER (Identifying
Marginalization and Allying Tendencies to Transform Engineering Relationships)
is to develop a theoretically and empirically grounded framework and tool to
help instructors of large classrooms identify teams engaging in marginalizing
behaviors. This framework and tool will be developed through classroom
observation of large first-year engineering courses at a predominantly white
university, interviews with groups of underrepresented students, interviews with
instructors, and a study featuring qualitatively-analyzed diaries produced by
students from underrepresented populations. Findings will be incorporated into
an observation tool for instructors of large classes, and into a modification of
a web-hosted instrument called CATME which measures behaviors necessary for
effective team functioning. A field-tested instrument for classroom observation
will provide a research infrastructure and a protocol for identifying suspected
marginalization of students, and will enable large-scale improvements for peer
evaluation in engineering courses. The diverse networks of the research team and
the extensive use of the CATME system will facilitate widespread dissemination
of the research to influence instructors to support the goal of broadening
participation in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.