* 1936350
* QII-TAQS: Quantum Photonics at Telecommunications Wavelengths Based on Metal-Ion-Doped Materials
* MPS,OMA
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Andrei Faraon, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,370,200.00

The rapidly developing field of quantum information science exploits the unique
properties of quantum states to process, store, and transmit data in new ways
that are impossible to achieve with conventional information, communication, and
computer technologies. For these next-generation quantum systems to be
implemented in practical, real-world applications, there is a critical need to
develop chip-scale integrated components that perform all the functions required
for traditional information systems, but at the tremendously more demanding
quantum level. While many such individual components have been demonstrated,
current implementations have employed a wide variety of disparate, and often
incompatible, approaches that are not easily integrated with each other or with
the existing conventional technological infrastructure, such as optical fiber
networks and classical computer processors. To address the need for such
integration, this project brings together researchers with expertise in quantum
photonics and quantum hardware fabrication at Caltech, quantum theory and
semiconductor physics at Caltech, semiconductor growth and devices at University
of Texas - Austin, and quantum decoherence, solid-state chemistry, and light-
matter interactions at Montana State University. This interdisciplinary team
seeks to develop and design integrated quantum hardware by incorporating rare-
earth ions, which are one of the most successful quantum systems, with
semiconductor materials that can be easily integrated with existing optical and
electronic technologies. In addition to the direct impact in quantum information
science, this research also provides new insights into the nanoscale properties
of ions and defects in semiconductors, since the intrinsically fragile nature of
quantum states can be used as a uniquely powerful probe of interactions and
imperfections in materials. In turn, this information can be used to accelerate
the development of ion-enabled semiconductor technologies far beyond quantum
applications, such as electroluminescent devices, integrated electro-optic
components, and high-speed photonic signal processing and sensing systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rare-earth-ions doped into complex oxides have enabled
demonstrations of state-of-the-art technologies for optical quantum memories and
shown excellent prospects for implementing microwave to optical quantum
transduction and single quantum bits. In particular, Er3+ provides direct
optical addressing at 1.5 micron telecommunications wavelengths that allows
integration with existing infrastructure and commercial hardware. To enable
robust, scalable quantum photonic devices based on metal-ion-doped materials,
the technology would be based ideally on established semiconductor materials
that are easily fabricated with conventional processes rather than the existing
oxide materials that are difficult to incorporate into integrated quantum
devices. This research explores the quantum optical properties of rare-earth and
transition-metal ions with transitions at telecom wavelengths doped into III-V
semiconductors and uses these developed materials to build a scalable
nanophotonic quantum device platform. These materials show promise for combining
the excellent quantum coherence properties of the metal-ion centers with the
technological capabilities for growing high quality layered materials via
molecular beam epitaxy and fabricating high-performance, integrated
semiconductor devices. Specifically, this work investigates the low metal-ion
concentration regime that has not yet been studied for semiconductors,
particularly for the cryogenic temperatures employed in quantum information
science where many of the traditional mechanisms that can cause relaxation are
strongly suppressed. Furthermore, the optical and spin quantum coherence
properties of ions such as Er3+ remain entirely unexplored in semiconductors,
along with effects of materials physics unique to these host materials (charge
injection, Auger relaxation, strong lattice polarization, etc.). The project
addresses the critical need for scalable quantum photonic systems by closely
coordinating studies and modeling of material properties and chemistry,
nanoscale dynamics and decoherence phenomena, and quantum device engineering
along with the discovery and fundamental study of new decoherence and
interaction phenomena in this previously unexplored regime for these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.