* 1936432
* Lead-free Radio-pure Textured Piezoelectric Ceramics for Acoustic Sensors in Dark Matter Search
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Ilan Levine, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 12/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Currently most of the piezoelectric ceramic materials
utilized for actuator and transducer applications contain high concentrations of
lead, which is toxic for both humans and environment. If the products containing
lead are not properly discarded or recycled, then there is high possibility for
lead entering the soil and water streams. Further, there is health-risk posed
for humans handling the lead-based materials during manufacturing and
deployment. Thus, environmental regulations in many parts of the world are
requiring the elimination of lead from all consumer items. In applications such
as acoustic detectors, there is essential need to find lead-free piezoelectric
alternatives to achieve desired sensitivity. However, electrical properties of
all the known lead-free piezoelectric materials remains lower than those lead-
based materials. In this project, lead-free piezoelectric ceramics are being
studied to discover composition and microstructure with enhanced piezoelectric
response. Outcomes from this research stand to strengthen the US piezoelectric
ceramic industry leadership. Lead-free material formulations and specialized
ceramic manufacturing methodology are being provided to the US piezoelectric
manufacturers. Undergraduate and graduate students, high school science teachers
and postdoctoral researchers are being professionally trained in this project to
develop understanding of ceramic industry and piezoelectric applications. NSF
I-Corps program is leveraged to support the training of students to become
drivers of research commercialization. Furthermore, students are being exposed
to methods for transition of university-based technologies through partnership
with Ben Franklin Technology Partner’s
TechCelerator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: In this project,
(K,Na)NbO3 based high piezoelectric constant – high Curie temperature lead-free
piezoelectric material is being designed, synthesized and characterized.
Template grain growth process is used to synthesize ceramics with specific
crystallographic grain orientation. Using the grain-oriented materials,
extensive investigations are being conducted to understand how phase
transitions, domain structures, and local crystal structures influence the
piezoelectric response. Furthermore, the research focus is being placed on
understanding the influence of relaxor state on piezoelectric performance. Phase
field model is being used to investigate the role of local structural
heterogeneity on electromechanical parameters. Self-polarization due to grain
orientation along the spontaneous polarization direction is being quantified to
reveal its contribution in achieving large piezoelectric response in an
engineered material. Synthesized textured piezoelectric elements with requisite
electromechanical behavior is incorporated into acoustic transducers, subjected
to the extreme environmental conditions of the bubble chamber and tested for
performance in small environmental test vessels. Knowledge generated from the
project on lead-free material design and manufacturing is being provided to US
companies to expedite their progress in finding lead-free alternatives and
thereby developing next generation of applications such as medical imaging,
ultrasonic home appliances, acoustic detectors and precision positioning
systems. Undergraduate and graduate students are being trained in cross-cutting
multidisciplinary disciplines of piezoelectric ceramics, ceramic processing
science, multiscale characterization, acoustics, and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.