* 1936550
* Collaborative Research: CubeSat Ideas Lab: Space Weather Atmospheric Reconfigurable Multiscale Experiment (SWARM-EX) CubeSats
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Edgar Lightsey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 12/31/2023
* USD 497,677.00

CubeSats are miniaturized, low-weight, low-cost satellites. Due to these
properties, constellations of 10s-100s of CubeSats with specialized instruments
for studying the space environment provide a new exciting opportunity to
understand and predict space weather. The Space Weather Atmospheric
Reconfigurable Multiscale Experiment (SWARM-EX) project provides an important
step in the advancement of designing and building CubeSat constellations for
space weather. SWARM-EX will consist of three identical CubeSats with novel
technologies for radio communications between satellites, onboard propulsion,
advanced data downlinks, and autonomous operations within the constellation.
Each satellite will measure ionized and neutral gases in the Earth's upper
atmosphere, studying structures seen near the equator. The SWARM-EX mission
uniquely fosters opportunities for STEM education and enables a platform for
public outreach. SWARM-EX will establish the first Intercollegiate CubeSat
Mentoring Program - partnering institutions that have established CubeSat
programs with new programs to create long-term, project-based learning
environments across the nation. Teaching, training, and learning will also be
advanced through the inclusion of multiple graduate students, and undergraduate
students from the six geographically distributed university programs involved in
SWARM-EX. This project resulted from the Ideas Lab: Cross-cutting Initiative in
CubeSat Innovations, an interdisciplinary program supported by Geosciences,
Engineering, and Computer and Information Science and Engineering
Directorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SWARM-EX is a bold step towards addressing
outstanding aeronomy questions achieved through a global constellation of
CubeSat swarms making in-situ ionospheric and thermospheric measurements between
300 and 600 km altitude. The CubeSats in each swarm will range in separation
from 1 to 1000 km and this separation will be controlled by a combination of
differential drag and onboard propulsion. A pathfinder mission, supported by
this project will use 3 identical CubeSats to demonstrate the SWARM-EX key
technologies and address scientific questions related to the evolution of the
equatorial ionization anomaly (EIA) and equatorial thermospheric anomaly (ETA).
The specific aeronomy questions are 1) How persistent and correlated are the
plasma density and neutral oxygen in EIA and ETA features?; 2) Over what
timescales, less than 90 minutes, do we observe changes in EIA/ETA properties
due to non-migrating tides and geomagnetic activity? These CubeSats will
demonstrate novel technology including RF cross-links, propulsion, CDMA X-band
data downlinks and on-board autonomy. Additionally, each CubeSat will include an
atomic oxygen sensor and Langmuir Probe thus making the measurements required to
answer the proposed science questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.