* 1936799
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: New Directions in Public-Key and Identity-Based Encryption
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Mohammad Mahmoody Ghidary, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 11/30/2023
* USD 497,224.00

Developments in public-key encryption (PKE) and identity-based encryption (IBE)
have revolutionized the field of cryptography and secure communication in
general. PKE allowed remote parties to establish secure channels in front of
eavesdropping adversaries, and led to public-key directories storing parties'
public-keys. The stronger primitive of IBE eliminated the need for a large
public-key directory, though this comes at the cost of trusting a central
private-key generation authority. Decades after introduction of PKE and IBE, our
understanding of the complexity of these tasks, in terms of what they can offer
and the intractability assumptions needed for building them, is still very
limited. At a high level, the goal of the project is to make progress exactly on
these fronts. The project's novelties include a study of new cryptographic tools
that give best of both IBE and PKE as well as developing new techniques for
basing IBE and PKE on optimal intractability assumptions. The project impact is
through new ways to secure communication. In addition, the collaboration between
the investigators will help enhance the education of the graduate students at
both institutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the goals of this
project are pursued in two directions: (1) enhancements from minimal assumptions
and (2) identifying barriers and proving lower bounds. The first direction of
the project focuses on obtaining enhanced security for IBE and PKE from minimal
assumptions. The efforts above on designing constructions from minimal
assumptions would not be complete without having a formal understanding about
when we have achieved optimal results. The second principal component of this
project focuses on identifying those minimal assumptions. Specifically, the
project's goal is to prove black-box and non-black-box barriers and (efficiency)
lower bounds, complementing the results proved in the first
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.