* 1936343
* FDSS: Faculty Development in the Space Sciences at Montana State University
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Robert Mokwa, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,199,227.00

The goal of this 5-year Faculty Development in the Space Sciences (FDSS) project
is to enable a new faculty hire in the space sciences at the Department of
Physics at the Montana State University (MSU). The space sciences group at the
MSU routinely attract large numbers of high-quality undergraduates and a growing
number of graduate students to their groups, providing hands-on hardware
development, data analysis, modeling and testing research experiences. The
Physics Department at the MSU has a strong track record of integrating new
faculty into its fertile environment for involving students in research,
teaching effectively and outreach to the broad community. Collaborations between
MSU's engineering programs and the Department of Physics occur organically and
are common. The MSU has a strong commitment to involving diverse and under-
represented communities in STEM fields, at the student and faculty level. This
new faculty hire allows the MSU to significantly expand its course offerings and
research in the space sciences. The new hire is expected to be academically
excellent, with strong prospects for developing a self-sustaining, long-term
research group within the Physics Department. The call for candidates will be
broadly worded to accept a wide range of experimental space scientists
consistent with the goals of the NSF's FDSS program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this 5-year FDSS project, the new faculty hire in
the space sciences will expand the space sciences curriculum at the MSU. The
hire will involve undergraduate and graduate students in their research. Every
effort will be made that is consistent with University Policy to expand the
participation of under-represented groups in STEM fields at both the faculty and
student level of the hire. The hire will participate in established outreach
programs, and with outreach mentoring, build their own program of outreach. The
research and EPO agenda of this 5-year FDSS project supports the Strategic Goals
of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.