* 1936997
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Safe Skill-Aligned On-The-Job Training with Autonomous Systems
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Kurt VanLehn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 998,588.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project stems
from empowering the global competitiveness of our future workforce. Although
staying competitive requires the productivity of US manufacturing to increase
with the utilization of artificial intelligence (AI) and autonomous robotics,
advanced robotic systems currently require a workforce with, at the least,
4-year degrees in engineering, computer science or AI. The problem is amplified
by the fact that current robotics technologies do not inherently support
adaptability, safety and explainability. This project will address these issues
by creating autonomous on-the-job training platforms that use safe, self-
explaining, adaptive robots. In order to achieve these objectives, our team
employs a convergent approach drawing upon ideas and tools from research on
intelligent tutoring systems (ITS), AI, robotics, manufacturing processes, human
systems engineering, and cognitive science. The project's team also includes
experts on resolving legal and socio-ethical challenges of bringing advanced
technology to existing social infrastructure. This project synthesizes these
diverse approaches in coordination with multiple industrial partners to enable
an autonomous on-the-job training platform that would empower our national
workforce for working with autonomous systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Convergence Accelerator Phase I project aims to initiate the invention,
development and evaluation of intelligent training systems and self-explaining
autonomous systems for providing safe on-the-job training for work with
autonomous systems. Although autonomous systems have immense potential for
empowering a highly productive workforce, this potential cannot be realized with
the current state of the art. Training for work with today's autonomous systems
presents unique challenges not addressed by current training paradigms, which
are designed for operational systems characterized by fixed functionality and
behavior. In contrast, AI systems will, by definition, change from day to day in
their functionality and behavior. This interdisciplinary project will utilize
safe and taskable self-explaining autonomous systems to develop a new class of
intelligent tutoring systems that provide on-the-job training for work with
autonomous systems. In the process, it will also advance methods for creating
self-explaining autonomous systems, for the automated synthesis of task-specific
robot behavior that is safe and compliant with workplace regulations, and for
the evaluation of collaborative human-autonomy teamwork. In addition, it will
advance research in these areas through the development of reproducible testbeds
in consultation with industry experts in the domain of collaborative human-robot
advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.