* 1936530
* Supporting Antarctic Research with Ongoing Operations and Development of the USAP-DC Project Catalog and Data Repository
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Kirsteen Tinto, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Allen Pope
* 11/30/2023
* USD 647,797.00

Samples and data obtained by researchers working in Antarctica are valuable,
unique assets which typically require a substantial and expensive logistical
effort to acquire. Preservation of these data increases the return on the
significant public investment for acquisition, enabling future re-use for new
analyses, and ensure that data behind scientific publications are available for
others to review. The US Antarctic Program Data Center (USAP-DC) will provide an
open-disciplinary hybrid repository for project metadata and the diverse
research data obtained from the Antarctic region by NSF funded researchers for
which other data repositories do not exist. In addition, a Project Catalog will
provide a single online resource for the US Antarctic scientific community to
manage information about their research activities and will link project
metadata to the various distributed repositories where Antarctic data resides.
In doing so, the USAP-DC will follow community best practices and standards to
ensure data are citable, shareable, and discoverable. It will also facilitate
registration of data descriptions into the Antarctic Master Directory to meet US
goals for data sharing under the International Antarctic Treaty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With full open access to interfaces to search for and
download data, USAP-DC will make a wide range of data products resulting from
NSF funded research in Antarctica available not only to the research community
but also to the broader public. The data center is operated using community
standards for metadata and data access which helps ensure data re-usability into
the future. The new Project catalog, which is designed to support consolidation
of information on research products of USAP awards over the lifetime of a
project, will make it simpler for NSF program managers, but also for individual
researchers and especially larger collaborative research groups to keep track of
datasets and related information produced as part of their projects. Through
tutorials and meetings at conferences USAP-DC will contribute to raise awareness
and inform the research community, especially new investigators about data
management best practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.