* 1936671
* RUI: Groundwater occurrence and discharge at coral atoll and barrier reef systems
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Matthew Becker, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,420.00

Preservation of reef ecosystems in the face of climate change is one of the most
pressing challenges in natural science. It requires thorough understanding of
the interactions between terrestrial and reef environments. An important
interaction is the flow of groundwater to the ocean as a key driver of
environmental change in tropical island coral reefs. This study explores the
hydrogeology of reef systems and traces the flow of groundwater and related
chemicals to and through these systems. Results from this research benefit
society by providing needed information about the role of submarine groundwater
discharges on the health of reef systems. The project also serves to broaden the
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students in a primarily
undergraduate institution and partner with local organizations to increase
scientific knowledge among community members. A short video documentary will be
produced and distributed through media outlets and the National Geographic
OpenExplorer blog site to reach a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of this work is to map, measure, and image the hydrogeology of reefs on
a French Polynesian volcanic island (Mo’orea) and coral atoll (Tetiaroa) so that
the groundwater flow to reefs can be constrained and up-scaled. The research
integrates electrical resistivity profiling, radioisotope analysis, fiber optic
distributed temperature sensing, coring and dye transport studies, thermal
imagery, and numerical modeling, to trace groundwater movement to and through
the reef. Proxies for reef metabolism, total alkalinity and dissolved inorganic
carbon are analyzed to gage impact of submarine groundwater discharge on reef
ecosystem functioning in an acidifying ocean. The results of this work support
future strategic investigations of hydrologic impacts on both atoll and high-
island reefs, including the NSF-funded Mo’orea Coral Reef Long Term Ecological
Research (LTER) project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.