* 1936570
* Workshop on Gender and Diversity Analysis in Research across the Science Infrastructure
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Stephanie Adams, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2022
* USD 180,715.00

Integrating into research design and analysis new perspectives on the ways in
which biological and social categories intersect and overlap has led to
discovery and innovation across numerous disciplines. It also promotes rigorous,
reproducible and responsible science and technology. For example, car safety
systems were dramatically improved to increase injury protection for women after
national car crash data were separated for male and female drivers and female
car crash dummies were introduced to account for the effect of acceleration on
sex-specific biomechanics. To reap the benefits of the perspectives this
approach offers in science and engineering research, it is essential that three
pillars of academic research infrastructure coordinate efforts. This project
brings together researchers and administrators at universities, journal editors,
and funding agencies in two international workshops. The pair of workshops will
share perspectives and resources across the U.S. and Canadian communities with
the aim of fostering iSGDA in computer science and engineering research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much progress has been made recently incorporating
intersectional sex, gender, and diversity analysis (iSGDA) into medicine,
health, and life science research. The workshops will draw from those models
where relevant and focus on fields that are lagging behind. Attendees will
include researchers from all areas of computer science and engineering,
including artificial intelligence, machine learning, robotics, natural language
processing, mechanical, civil, and other engineering. The long-term goals of the
workshops are to: conceptualize methodologies for integrating iSGDA into
research design, processes, analysis, and interpretation of research results;
disseminate methods to researchers and staff across research institutions,
funding agencies, and peer-reviewed journals; train the current and next
generation of researchers who serve as peer reviewers for funding agencies,
journals, and hiring, tenure, and promotion committees, and train faculty on
best practices for incorporating these methods into core courses in their
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.