* 1936729
* Reconfigurable free-form metamaterials: a new design paradigm for integrated optoelectronics based on 2D materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Rajesh Menon, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 07/31/2023
* USD 411,381.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicon photonics is a rapidly growing
industry, potentially reaching an annual value of over a billion dollars in the
coming decade. In parallel, the complexity of photonic integrated circuits has
increased by more than an order of magnitude. The optical response of silicon at
wavelengths used for telecommunications, however, is relatively weak. Current
optoelectronic technologies therefore rely on integrating other materials with
the desired properties. In this context, graphene has emerged as an excellent
candidate to realize silicon-compatible optoelectronic devices. Graphene is an
atom-thick, two-dimensional material made from carbon. It is nearly 100 times
stronger than steel, conducts heat and electricity efficiently, and has unusual
optical properties. Recent experimental reports have already approached the
predicted performance limits of graphene-based devices. It is not obvious how
the device performance can be further enhanced while simultaneously reducing
device size. Thus, new paradigms in graphene-based optoelectronic devices are
required. This project will develop a new approach for realizing integrated
optoelectronic devices. Nanofabrication will be used to integrate graphene into
active devices and engineer the effective optical properties with nm scale
resolution. These devices will be fully compatible with CMOS technology and
promise dramatic reductions in device footprint and losses, while providing
fast-speed with low energy consumption. The project brings together a
multidisciplinary team of researchers from the United States, Northern Ireland,
and the Republic of Ireland through the NSF-US/Ireland R&amp;D Partnership.
International cooperation will provide exceptional opportunities for
international student exchange and research collaboration as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
aims to develop a new family of graphene-based CMOS-compatible optoelectronics.
The two premises behind the proposed approach are that: (i) via nanofabrication,
it is possible to spatially engineer the local refractive index of the device at
deep sub-wavelength dimensions; and, (ii) by integrating two-dimensional
material layers, it is possible to provide active functionality in a reduced
area. The operation of these devices relies on the coupling between a number of
resonant nano-photonic modes, which does not only make them robust to
fabrication errors but also enables broad optical bandwidth in a reduced
footprint. Three main research thrusts are identified: (a) development of high-
performance ultra-compact graphene electro-optic modulators. (b) Extension of
the proposed design concept to other optoelectronic devices beyond modulators
(e.g., phase shifters, active couplers, polarizers, and sensors). (c)
Monolithically integrate multiple devices on an optical chip and drive with
proper CMOS circuitry. The proposed research is highly transformative since it
combines two emerging research concepts so to overcome the main limitations of
current integrated optoelectronic technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.