* 1936071
* EAGER: Identifying Principles for Software to Support Daily Action Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Jason Wiese, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2021
* USD 116,000.00

Planning is an important activity for people to accomplish many common goals,
such as losing weight, saving money, or increasing productivity. Yet, planning
out concrete actions to accomplish these goals can be feel burdensome, tedious,
and time-consuming. Common time-management tools such as calendars and to-do
lists can help people keep track of their plans, but they do not encourage
making plans nor do they support people in the process of creating a plan. This
limits how many people regularly engage in planning. This project builds
innovative software that makes it easier to develop a daily plan to help people
achieve time management and productivity goals. By observing how study
participants use this new software to make daily plans to manage their time,
this project will identify ways that future AI-powered systems can support
regular planning and help people accomplish their goals. People who succeed in
making these changes can become more productive, healthier, and more financially
stable. All three of these outcomes have enormous impact for their individual
lives, and collectively for our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
builds on insights from preliminary work to design and implement software that
supports the planning process as a proof-of-concept. It then deploys this
software to conduct a small within-subjects pilot study to demonstrate that it
lowers the burden of making a plan in comparison to any other tools (paper or
digital) that participants wish to use. The project will evaluate participants'
experiences by collecting and comparing data through interviews, usage log data,
self-report data, and survey questions. Results from this early stage work will
provide a foundation to develop more generalized principles for technology to
support daily action planning in combination with other behavior change
techniques, which has the potential to further increase the effectiveness of
software-based behavior change tools for many domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.