* 1936006
* RUI: NSF/DMR-BSF: Nonequilibrium Quantum Matter: Timescales and Self-Averaging
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Gabriel Cwilich, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a theoretical and
computational research collaboration between a PI funded by the National Science
Foundation and a PI funded by the Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF).
The collaboration will combine complementary skills and resources to perform
computational and theoretical studies of systems comprised of many interacting
particles that are far from the state of equilibrium and which are described by
quantum mechanics. The properties of systems in equilibrium do not change in
time. In contrast the properties of nonequilibrium systems like, for example,
the electrons in a nanomaterial that has been exposed to a burst of light,
change. This research aims to advance understanding of how systems far from
equilibrium relax to achieve the equilibrium state. The PI's aim is to further
understand the dynamical behavior of quantum mechanical systems driven by
external fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the properties of many-body
quantum systems out of equilibrium is a fundamental problem of great interest to
many fields, including atomic, molecular, and condensed matter physics, quantum
information science, and cosmology. The team's studies may lead to:&lt;br/&gt;*)
the prediction and discovery of new phases of matter that only appear in quantum
systems out of equilibrium. New phases of matter are tightly connected with the
development of new materials needed in emerging technologies and to improve
existing device technologies. &lt;br/&gt;*) insight into quantum computing. The
models used in these studies are analogous to those used in the development of
technologies that manipulate quantum mechanical states to perform computation,
quantum computing. Advances in the understanding of many-body quantum systems
can lead to revolutionary developments in both computational capabilities and
encryption technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will foster the
participation of women in STEM fields by engaging female undergraduate students
in the research. It will help motivate young women to study physics by giving
presentations about what can be done with a degree in physics in venues like
open houses and visits to high schools for girls. The PI also aims to modernize
the curriculum at Stern College for Women by integrating computational
activities into the undergraduate science courses. Computer codes and tutorials
developed through this project will be posted online to contribute to the
integration of teaching and research at other institutions. The collaboration
will also benefit the undergraduate students of Stern College for Women, who
will have the opportunity to experience research at a PhD granting institution
in Israel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports a theoretical and computational research collaboration between a
PI funded by the National Science Foundation and a PI funded by the Israel
Binational Science Foundation (BSF). The collaboration will combine
complementary skills and resources with an aim to advance understanding of the
dynamics of many-body quantum systems, an outstanding challenge at the forefront
of theoretical and experimental physics. It bridges fields as diverse as atomic,
molecular, condensed matter, and high-energy physics. The widespread interest in
the subject is prompted by new theoretical and computational methods, and by
experimental access to ever longer coherent evolutions. Particular attention has
been given to the conditions for equilibration, thermalization, and localization
in interacting systems described by static and driven Hamiltonians, themes to
which both the PI and the BSF-PI have made several important contributions. Yet,
a challenging question that remains open refers to the time for these systems to
equilibrate. Existing results, often based on abstract models, are
contradictory. Also debated are: the time that marks the onset of universal
behavior, what Thouless time is in interacting systems, the duration of
exponential behaviors, and how these timescales relate with the heating
timescale of driven systems. To characterize these various timescales, the team
will consider realistic models and experimental observables, and will take
advantage of their experience with quantum chaos and random matrix theory to
identify general behaviors and derive analytical expressions. While the PI has
mostly focused on time-independent Hamiltonians, the BSF-PI will bring in his
expertise on driven systems. In addition to dynamics and timescales, self-
averaging will also be a central topic of this project. Contrary to ergodicity,
self-averaging in interacting quantum systems out of equilibrium has received
very little attention, despite its importance to the development of theoretical
models, as well as to experiments and numerical simulations, where access to
many realizations may be costly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.