* 1936383
* QII-TAQS: Quantum Devices with Majorana Fermions in High-Quality Three-Dimensional Topological Insulator Heterostructures
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kang Wang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,635,591.00

Quantum computers have great potential in important areas such as security and
the development of new materials. However, progress toward robust quantum
computing has been slow due in part to the issue of coherence of the fundamental
logic unit of the quantum computer - the qubit. Topological insulators are the
primary state of matter promising protection from loss of coherence but have not
yet found application due to materials quality issues. This project works toward
"topological quantum computing" by developing novel schemes for realization,
detection, and manipulation of the building blocks of a topological quantum
computer, viz. Majorana fermions, in heterostructures based on high-quality
topological insulators. These studies take advantage of the cross-disciplinary
expertise of the investigators (in physics, materials science, and electrical
engineering), and integrate with the investigators' education plan, involving
the training of undergraduate and graduate students in a collaborative setting
to be valuable additions to the quantum workforce. Special courses will be
developed by the investigators on quantum materials, phenomena, and computing
and their interplay. The excitement of quantum computing will be communicated
through novel outreach efforts targeted at the younger generation and
underrepresented minority groups, including social media efforts through YouTube
and bilingual English-Spanish outreach with local schools and museums. These
efforts build on already existing programs of the investigators and aim to
broaden participation in education and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to establish a materials platform toward the development of
practical topological quantum computing. Conventional qubits suffer from
decoherence due to the environment and the manipulation of the quantum state
itself. It is thought that the advent of topological quantum materials will
allow the realization of qubits that are topologically protected from both types
of decoherence. An important platform in which to realize topological quantum
computing is through Majorana fermions on the surface of 3D topological
insulators; however, previous efforts to experimentally realize this goal have
been impeded by materials quality issues. The multidisciplinary team will use
their recently demonstrated complementary high-quality topological insulator
platforms in the form of topological insulator-based van der Waals
heterostructures and molecular-beam epitaxially-grown heterostructures to create
device configurations of 3D topological insulators together with metals,
insulators, ferromagnets, and superconductors. The two approaches are used in
tandem toward a variety of Majorana fermions realizations using the same
building blocks, based on several different theoretical predictions of both non-
chiral and chiral Majorana fermions, modeling of quantum phenomena, and testing
of experimental signatures. The various realizations will be compared and an
alternative route explored in the form of high-temperature topological
superconductors. These experimental studies and device realizations will be done
in collaboration with the materials scientists and engineers on the team, taking
advantage of the materials modeling and simulation expertise of the
computational expert. Such a platform provides an alternative to nanowire
Majorana fermions, the prevalent topological quantum computing platform, and
promises superior coherence lengths up to millimeters, potentially providing a
significant leap toward the development of a topological quantum
computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.