* 1936534
* Enhancing and Sustaining the CISE REU Site Evaluation Toolkit
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Audrey Rorrer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2022
* USD 165,945.00

This project provides long-term support for external evaluation activities and
services for the Computing and Information Sciences and Engineering (CISE)
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) community. This project addresses
the ongoing need among principal investigators who are conducting CISE REU Site
program evaluation efforts by providing an evaluation toolkit that facilitates
evaluation reporting while strengthening research about undergraduate research
program outcomes. The primary purpose of the CISE REU Evaluation Toolkit is to
provide targeted resources and tools for quality program evaluation that balance
the desire for standardized assessment along with the responsibility to account
for individual program contexts. This project aims to enhance the evaluation
tools and resources and to provide for sustainability and maintenance of the
resources. Services associated with the Toolkit are providing a Common
Application for site recruiting, coordinating a Shared Applicant Pool for
principal investigators to share applicants across sites, delivering an online
student survey known as the A la Carte Student Survey,and providing an Alumni
Tracker tool to assist sites with tracking their students after their
participation in summer research at the site. The project also provides
aggregate and site-specific analyses to REU Site principal investigators. The
benefits of the Toolkit are in providing cost effective, sustainable evaluation
tools, a community forum for program evaluation, and aggregate measurement of
key program outcomes indicators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key contribution of
project is in the refinement of understanding evidence-based practices in
evaluating undergraduate research programs to help faculty successfully manage
these programs. The goals of the project include managing the various components
of the Toolkit, providing analyses and summative annual reporting of the
Evaluation Toolkit results, and providing timely, site-specific data packages of
student results. The strength of this project comes from the strong research
community of practice that has been nurtured by this project and the ongoing
commitment to support and enhance the resources through this funding. The
project contributes to understanding the impact of undergraduate computing
research programs for both students and faculty participants. The comprehensive
program evaluation will inform collective efforts to recruit and mentor
undergraduate students involved in cutting-edge research. The knowledge
generated by this study will also provide insights about how faculty engage in
REU Sites and the impact on their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.