* 1936956
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Unpacking the Technology Career Path
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Denis Nekipelov, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 09/30/2021
* USD 735,320.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
provide a tool for navigating career development in STEM fields. The proposed
solution has the potential to impact US labor supply by addressing the
increasing demand for technology talent, which has resulted from the rapid
digitalization and automation of the labor market. It can help bridge the gender
and diversity gaps in the high-tech industry by better equipping women and
minority groups in developing a successful technology career path. The
convergence of the project is based on the coordinated work of a multi-
disciplinary team, bringing together expertise in market design and econometrics
at the University of Virginia and the machine learning expertise and domain
knowledge in the field of technical recruiting at Riviera Partners. The team
will extend its collaboration to developing formal econometric models and an AI
application. The combined collaborative networking of the university and the
industry will facilitate broader dissemination of the designed tool and formal
project results in the academic community, high tech recruiting industry, and
career development forums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator
Phase I project will comprise research and engineering effort to build an
Artificial Intelligence (AI) tool for career management, targeted to help high-
tech talent in STEM fields by transforming information into quantifiable data
that can be analyzed and used directly in an econometric model. The goal is to
characterize the long-term impact of career choices in conjunction with
individual characteristics such as education, previous job experience, training,
personal goals, career interests, and other components and to provide insights
into the market value of various career choices. The final deliverable of the
project is a web application, with an embedded econometric model, that is
intended to be used by job candidates in technical fields. The proposed work
will use recent advances in structural econometrics and machine learning, such
as causal prediction and natural language processing, to create models that
incorporate rich, but previously overlooked, data which will be analyzed in the
econometric model. The tool that incorporates these causal relationships and
models will assist in the planning and evaluation of career path options, such
as switching careers, acquiring new skills, or taking a new position, providing
more value than commonly used compensation-based job
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.