* 1936836
* EAGER: Run-Time Hardware-Assisted Malware Detection Using Machine Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Houman Homayoun, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 10/31/2023
* USD 237,134.00

Malware, a broad term for any type of malicious software, is a piece of code
designed by cyber attackers to infect computing systems without the user
consent, typically for harmful purposes such as stealing sensitive information.
The ubiquity of information technology has made malware a serious threat.
Detecting malware in a system is a difficult task, particularly when the malware
is stealthy. Hardware-assisted malware detection (HMD) mechanisms seek runtime
detection of malware. However, several challenges exist with deployment of HMD
including limited availability of hardware registers, diversity of
microarchitectural events, and difficulty of anomalous behavior detection for
stealthy malware. Proposed research aims to find lightweight HMDs that are not
too costly to implement and provide continuous runtime
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core research agenda is development of
lightweight malware detection mechanisms using low level microarchitectural
behavior. Specifically, this project is interested in (i) developing effective
machine-learning classifier against malware that are relatively inexpensive to
implement; and (ii) development of tools and methods for evaluating
effectiveness and robustness of various solution
alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a societal viewpoint, this work enhances
the research, education, and diversity at University of California Davis (UCD)
by involving graduate, undergraduate, minority and female students, and enriches
several courses that are offered at UCD. The proposed research effort could
inspire and enable new approaches to securing computer systems, in particular in
emerging domains such as Internet-of-Things (IoT), where computational
requirement is constrained. Research results will be integrated in graduate and
undergraduate courses offered by the investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed solutions will be freely shared and broadly disseminated through public
portals, https://ece.gmu.edu/~hhomayou/publications.html and GitHub:
https://github.com/ASEEC/ML_classifier and
https://github.com/ASEEC/HPC_Trace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.