* 1936782
* Collaborative Research: IIBR Informatics: Keeping up with the genomes - Continual Learning of Metagenomic Data
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robi Polikar, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,706.00

Microbiomes are communities of microscopic organisms that are found everywhere
on earth and are important in help to digest food in the gut. In the intestines,
they can produce vitamins (good) or toxins (bad), so we need to understand what
organisms and genes are present in these microscopic communities. This project
uses artificial intelligence (AI) to identify organisms and their genes that
live in microbiomes. Existing works for this effort have been hampered due to
very rapidly growing amount of data, which often need to be repeatedly re-
analyzed as new data become available. Such a process is not only inefficient,
but is increasingly unsustainable, even for our growing computational resources.
This approach is unique because it uses less computing power. Instead of
continuously reentering massive amounts of data, the proposed state-of-the-art
system has the ability to recall and reuse prior information without requiring
reentering or re-analyzing prior data,saving substantial computing time and
ultimately money. The goal is to find AI methods that achieve the best cost
savings while not sacrificing accuracy. Many unidentified organisms are also
found in microbiome experiments and are discarded and never used to identify the
same organisms in other experiments. An AI based approach will keep, remember,
and reuse their information in case those new organisms show up in again later
in other experiments and eventually help in their identification. If the
organism is identified in the future, the method can automatically update old
data and the knowledgebase effectively and
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a dynamic, scalable,
and semi-supervised learning framework that continually updates a classification
model, with large unlabeled, experimental data. In addition to creating richer
models that can leverage both reference and experimental data, the primary
innovation is that the model will identify unknown organisms and proteins and
integrate them into reference database for future model updates. This framework
will be validated on the hundreds of metagenomic studies (composed of
potentially thousands of samples) annually submitted to the microbiome computing
website MG-RAST. MG-RAST is used by scientists to upload their microbiomes to
study and improve agriculture, diagnoses, medicine, making biofuels, and a
variety of other applications on which microorganisms have a deep effect. This
work will contribute to college student training on artificial intelligence and
its application to the microbiome. Results will be shared broadly with other
educators and researchers through summer workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.