* 1936986
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center: Aerospace Autonomy Center of Excellence (AACE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Brian Argrow, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in sensors like global position satellites
and computer vision, as well as in software-based flight control techniques have
accelerated the pace of innovation in the aerospace industry not seen in more
than 40 years. Onboard autonomy is such a transformative innovation. It is not
only seen in commercial aviation, but it is the lynchpin for growing commercial
drone services, emerging air taxi industries and many civilian space
applications. Aerospace companies are however struggling to develop, certify and
integrate new autonomous technologies into all aspects of commercial space and
aviation. They are hampered by the risks associated with current science and
technology of autonomy and by a shortage of a knowledgeable scientists and
engineers in autonomous systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF Engineering
Research Center planning grant lays the groundwork for the Aerospace Autonomy
Center of Excellence (AACE), which has the goal of transforming the aerospace
community by (1) advancing basic autonomy research and its application in
aerospace as well as developing new software security and certification
protocols, (2) educating a diverse workforce, (3) engaging the stakeholder
community, regulators, and general public, (4) creating an environment to
encourage technology transfer for autonomy systems, leading to innovations and
entrepreneurship in aerospace industries, and (5) making aerospace systems
better and safer for society. This center would enable engineering students and
faculty to work in close collaboration with policy and law students and faculty,
as well as regulators and industry to achieve an integrated policy-technology
program and curriculum in a diverse, inclusive setting of an ERC center. It
would facilitate exploration of the intersection among diverse areas and
disciplines, including computer science, cyber-human systems, aerospace
engineering, and control theory as well as policy and regulation for safe,
certified autonomous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.