* 1936560
* Research on modifying inverter controls in utility-scale renewables to emulate synchronous-generator voltages/currents under faults to retain existing protection infrastructure
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Pratap Mysore, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2022
* USD 506,650.00

For combating the climate crisis, generating electricity from renewable
resources, such as wind and solar, is essential. These resources are economical
primarily in large scales and are often located far away from the metropolitan
areas, hence need transmission lines. Protective relays are installed on these
transmission lines to detect faults caused either by lighting or other short
circuits, and disconnect faulted lines. The existing protection equipment is
designed for electricity that is generated in power plants using conventional
sources such as coal and natural gas. However, this protection infrastructure
will not work with the existing control methods used in renewables-based
generation. With many states opting to move towards hundred-percent generation
by renewables, all existing protective relays will need to be replaced. The
objective of the proposed research is to allow the existing protection
equipment, such as relays, to continue to be used even as the electricity
generation transitions from conventional sources to renewables, by controlling
the renewable-based generation such that it emulates the conventional generation
in the event of a fault. This will avoid incurring the huge cost of the system-
wide upgrade of the protection infrastructure. The proposed approach is based on
first determining the type of fault that has occurred and then to take
appropriate action such that the existing relays perform as they do in the case
of conventional sources. This research will be a very important step in keeping
the cost of renewables low in order to enhance their penetration into the
utility grid. It will be transformative in advancing knowledge in the critical
field of protecting the transmission infrastructure and becoming a norm used by
hardware equipment manufacturers. This research is at the intersection of power
electronics, power systems, and controls, and will be very educational for the
next generation of power engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to find a solution to the real and immediate need to enhance the
integration of utility-scale renewables. Existing inverters of utility-scale
renewable resources, such as PVs and wind, are controlled to generate balanced
three-phase currents even during unbalanced faults. However, to operate, the
commonly-used protection relays depend upon unbalanced currents that are
generated, such as by the synchronous generators of conventional power plants
during unbalanced faults. With the increasing penetration of such inverter-based
resources, toward the goal of hundred-percent renewables, the existing
protection schemes will not work. The proposed research is on injecting
appropriate unbalanced current during faults so that the use of the existing
transmission-protection infrastructure continues, without having to incur the
huge cost of the system-wide upgrade of the protection infrastructure. The
proposed approach is based on first identifying the type of fault that has
occurred and then to inject the appropriate currents to make the relays operate,
knowing only the inverter terminal voltages and the transformer-winding
configuration. The proposed control scheme is based on emulating the time-tested
behavior of conventional generators during faults, thus requiring no
modifications in the existing protection infrastructure, i.e., the inverters
operate based solely based on local measurements. This research will thoroughly
investigate and develop the control scheme by software emulation and hardware
verification. The research will also examine the impact of this control on the
inverter components. The aim of the technology transfer is that the control
scheme becomes a norm that can be mandated by transmission-system owners and
independent power producers, who in turn, would require it of inverter
manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.