* 1936680
* Workshop 2019: AI and Tensor Factorization for Physical, Chemical, and Biological Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Ludmil Alexandrov, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 24,381.00

The Workshop 2019: "AI and Tensor Factorization for physical, chemical, and
biological systems" will take place between September 17 and September 20, 2019
in Santa Fe, New Mexico. One of the main themes is discussion of the efforts
that are needed to close the gap between current state-of-the-art methods and
the emerging extremely large heterogenous data sets. The workshop will advance
our knowledge of explainable and robust Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Big-
Data Analytics methods targeting scientific discoveries. The discussions among
the multi-disciplinary participants will help to define the challenges and
questions arising because of the recent explosive growth in AI and Machine
Learning (ML) technologies and their Big-Data applications. The discussions
amongst the multi-disciplinary participants from around the world will help to
disseminate and define the challenges in the AI field and determine the
questions and directions that need to be explored to tackle the recent explosive
growth of data in the world. Inclusion of young scientists in the workshop will
bring fresh perspective to the discussions and foster their career development
through interactions and networking. Specific major outcomes of the workshop
will include the increased awareness of research, education, and technology
transfer related to the explainable AI and Big-Data Analytics; ideas enabling
the transformation of research and STEM education; partnership opportunities
among government, academia, and industry; and synergism for mathematical
activities in the applications of explainable AI and Big-Data Analytics
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will focus on two themes:
reviewing the mathematical and algorithmic advancements in AI with accent on
Tensor Factorization methods; and defining and demonstrating the power of these
advancements in a broad range of applications in various physical, chemical, and
biological systems. It will provide a forum for propagating information and
sharing ideas about the modern methods of unsupervised Machine Learning and
Artificial Intelligence with accent on Tensor Factorization methods and their
applications in the natural sciences. The workshop will contribute toward
defining important topics and identifying research directions and opportunities
that potentially can initiate new developments in the explainable AI and Big-
Data Analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.