* 1936810
* Studies in the Climate Dynamics of Moist Process Variability and Change
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* J. David Neelin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,112,585.00

Simulations of climate change show increases in the frequency of occurrence of
extreme precipitation as temperature rises, in general agreement with
observations. Increases in extremes are to be expected given that warmer air
typically contains more moisture. But the moisture-temperature relationship does
not by itself provide a theory to predict increases in the frequency and
severity of extreme precipitation in a warming climate. Moreover, a satisfactory
theoretical framework would address changes in the frequency of occurrence of
precipitation events of all magnitudes, from weak to moderate to
unprecedented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award seeks to develop such
a theoretical framework by treating convective precipitation as a random process
and applying the tools of statistical mechanics (the emphasis on convective
precipitation is reasonable given that convective clouds are the source of most
intense precipitation). The goal is to understand how the probability of
occurrence of convective precipitation events of a given magnitude or intensity,
referred to as the probability distribution, depends on temperature, moisture,
and other environmental factors. Earlier work by the PI and others shows
initiation and rapid intensification in convective precipitation as atmospheric
moisture increases beyond a temperature-dependent threshold, a sort of threshold
value of bulk column relative humidity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research supported
here extends earlier results by incorporating considerations of thermodynamic
energy, atmospheric stability, and the probability distribution of the column
moisture responsible for threshold behavior in precipitation. One novelty of the
work is the use of collocated data from the Global Precipitation Mission and
Radio Occultation receivers on the COSMIC and COSMIC-2 satellites to explore the
high moisture/heavy precipitation regime. Additional work uses these ideas to
develop representations of convective precipitation for use in models of the
interaction of precipitation and atmospheric circulation. Results of the
research are used to evaluate simulations from state-of-the-art climate models,
attempting to connect extreme precipitation behaviors in present-day simulations
to future increases. If robust connections can be found the present-day
simulations can be evaluated against relevant observations, and the success of
models in reproducing observed connections can be used as a benchmark to assess
the validity of their simulations of the response to anthropogenic
forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has societal relevance due to the
connection between warming temperatures and increases in extreme event frequency
and severity. Concerns over increasing damage from extreme precipitation have
prompted considerable effort in generating and analyzing future climate
simulations from global climate models and higher resolution regional models.
But results of this "brute force" approach come with substantial uncertainty
regarding the degree, geographical distribution, and other characteristics of
the increases. A solid theoretical framework would thus be quite valuable in
guiding the effort and interpreting its results. This project makes a direct
connection between the development of new theory and its application to the
analysis of climate model behaviors, thereby establishing an immediate
connection to the larger enterprise of climate change impacts assessment. In
addition, the project provides support and training for a graduate student, and
results of the work are used to develop classroom teaching
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.