* 1936947
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): A Universal Framework of Micro-Credentials for Nation-Wide Employment
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Samuel Abramovich, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 09/30/2021
* USD 417,026.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will be
to increase opportunities for American workers to earn recognition for specific
knowledge and skills in ways that connect them to jobs. This benefit will be
made possible by the creation of a micro-credentialing system that uses
partnerships between higher education and employers to co-develop industry-
valued skills and knowledge that can be taught and verified. A micro-credential
is a credential that focuses on specific high-demand competencies, can be earned
in online, work-based, or even informal settings, and can generally be earned in
less time and at less cost than conventional post-secondary credentials. This
system will employ a convergent approach, bringing together expert faculty,
researchers, employers and job-seekers from industries that currently include
talent and recruiting, data science, engineering, and others - all to address a
challenge that can only be met by collaborative efforts. The resultant system
for implementing micro-credentials will be scalable to ensure that diverse
institutions are able to efficiently and effectively collaborate with employers
to execute programs that directly address the needs of the workforce, thereby
impacting employability on a national scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Convergence Accelerator Phase I project addresses a need for a national talent
ecosystem that responds to employers seeking individuals with 21st century
skills. Success in an increasingly, globally competitive economy requires that
employers be able to quickly hire to match specific workforce needs - a process
that traditional credentials cannot address alone. This challenge is also a
significant opportunity to research the resources and strategies that are needed
to better match job-seekers with high demand skills to their future employers.
This project will form a partnership of job-seekers, educators, and employers to
co-design a universal model of a micro-credential program that can be deployed
at any higher education institution to accommodate regional or national
employment needs. Research will focus on the processes, procedures, and
resources that are necessary to implement micro-credentials, as well as how the
(multi-stakeholder) design teams operate, leading to creating theory and
operational findings on how micro-credentials can be designed to ensure quality,
sustainability, and stakeholder acceptance. Outcomes from the project will be a
network of openly licensed, scalable, and customizable micro-credential systems
and a research base that can support further development of improved
credentialing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.