* 1936016
* Band Engineering for High Gain Digital III-V Avalanche Photodiodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Avik Ghosh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Avalanche photodiodes (APDs) are widely used
to convert optical data into electrical signal and can be used in a wide range
of applications. These include optical fiber communication, medical
spectroscopy, infrared sensing, and applications needing high gains and
bandwidth such as quantum information networks. APDs provide very high
sensitivity through internal gain and carrier multiplication in a region of high
electric field in the device. This gain, however, comes at the cost of increased
shot noise. The noise arises due to the pair creation by separate electron and
hole currents that couple through a complex feedback mechanism. One way to limit
the noise while preserving the gain is to constrain one type of carrier to a
narrow bandwidth so that overall carrier multiplication stays primarily
unipolar. This proposal focuses on band engineering of digital III-V
heterostructures that can create minigaps selectively inside one band, thereby
constraining the corresponding carrier energy and reducing shot noise. The PIs
will undertake a detailed computational and experimental study of the materials
physics and interface chemistry in APDs based on digital III-V alloys with high
aluminum content. The successful fulfillment of the proposal will expand the
materials genome of stable III-V alloys and set design rules for high gain
photodiodes. These "designer" APDs will have ten to twenty times lower noise in
the critical telecommunications spectrum of wavelengths from three to five
microns and be capable of single photon detection. Investigators will
incorporate results into upcoming courses and books. They will also recruit
students and teachers from underrepresented groups through a variety of programs
and fellowships. Results will be presented at conferences and meetings with
industry and government members through affiliated cooperative research centers.
They will also be incorporated into demonstrations at annual Montessori events
for children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
will lead to the fundamental study of band formation and orbital chemistry in
III-V alloys, towards controlling carrier ionization coefficients, excess noise
and overall optoelectronic device design and noise reduction of Avalanche Photo
Diodes (APDs). The proposal will involve the development of multi-scale
computational models for electronic and optical transport of III-V alloy APDs
and creation of design rules for low noise APDs with high gain. Experiments will
focus on fabrication and characterization of digital and random III-V APDs, with
varying material composition, orientation, temperature, periodicity, and
roughness profile, and measurements of their electronic and optical properties
to confirm predictions from the theoretical study and isolate the effect of
competing mechanisms. Armed with these results, a Separate Absorption Charge
Multiplication (SACM) APD will be fabricated to combine the different alloying
needs for absorption vs multiplication, as well as high-speed Modified Uni-
Traveling Carrier (MUTC) photodiodes to explore carrier saturation velocity. The
ultimate goal will be to show operation at 25 and 50 Gigabit per second,
enabling high performance 100 and 400 Gigabits per second coarse Wavelet
Division Multiplexing Ethernet. Improving the performance of APDs for photon
detection will open up their use in a wide range of commercial, military and
research applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.