* 1936373
* FDSS: Implementing an Interdisciplinary Space Physics Program at Arizona State University
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* J Ramon Arrowsmith, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,488,347.00

The goal of this 5-year Faculty Development in the Space Sciences (FDSS) project
is to enable a new faculty hire in the space sciences at Arizona State
University (ASU). ASU is an ideal university in which to invest in geospace
sciences and space physics due to its large and diverse student population and
its emphasis on interdisciplinary research. Building on ASU's foundation and
leadership in providing inclusive education to all qualified students, and
capitalizing on the mathematical, statistical, astrophysics, geoscience, and
engineering research strengths already present, the new faculty hire will
implement an interdisciplinary space physics program. The new appointee is
expected to have expertise in space plasma and ionospheric dynamics, the physics
of the solar wind, and/or the general heliophysics environment and its response
to solar events. The hire will be selected on strong research performance,
commitment to teaching and mentoring, and the potential for collaboration, and
identified through a broad search. Theorists, numerical modelers, instrument
builders, and observers would all be considered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
5-year FDSS project will enable the new faculty hire at ASU, in collaboration
with the existing faculty there, to drive advances in space physics research and
foster a steady output of PhD graduates capable of becoming future leaders. The
new courses and curriculum to be developed by the new faculty will reach ASU's
diverse student community, which is reflective of the future U.S. population,
helping to improve representation of underserved groups in STEM. ASU has a
strong commitment to serve students from non-traditional backgrounds (returning
students, first generation students, and veteran students). The presence of a
strong space physics emphasis at ASU will --- in addition to training a new
generation space physics leaders --- enable the institution to further engage
the public. The new faculty hire will incorporate space physics into existing
3-D theater shows at ASU and add a new exhibit to their free public gallery.
Increasing ASU's capacity to reach K-12 students with engaging content will
strengthen the first-generation student pipeline. At the undergraduate level,
through mentoring programs such as Sundial, ASU has significantly increased
retention for STEM majors (especially for first-generation students). The new
faculty hire will provide an opportunity to increase underrepresented groups in
the faculty. The research and EPO agenda of this 5-year FDSS project supports
the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.