* 1936983
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for SAFTE: Convergent Team Development for Safe Autonomous Future Transportation Engineering (SAFTE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Amy Pritchett, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autonomous vehicles (AVs) inspire visions of new urban
landscapes, broad changes in transportation patterns, and energy-efficiency. AVs
are increasingly expected to be able to handle events and situations safely with
little to no human assistance and intervention. As AVs become more commonplace,
outside of the laboratory, AVs should conform to societal norms and improve
daily life. This project enables the planning of a transdisciplinary research
center to explore new concepts for a safe, autonomous, transportation
engineering future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a strategy for
creating a transdisciplinary engineering, research and education center, and
developing a detailed road map for safe future transportation system. The
approach for the center encourages a broader perspective for examining the role
AVs in society, for developing effective regulations, for urban transportation
planning, and for pragmatic demonstrations of AV technology. The center
integrates various perspectives, including ethics, law, communications, and the
social sciences. It explores the convergence of technologies for safe behaviors
in AVs using, e.g., machine intelligence, generally driven by computer science,
with specific sensors, models and methods, and vehicle engineering that has
focused on vehicle systems' dynamics and controls, generally driven by physical
models. The center integrates test beds into center-scale experimental platforms
to demonstrate autonomous ground vehicles, autonomous aerial vehicles, including
multiple connected vehicles, and future concept
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.