* 1936868
* 2019 Meeting of the Pan-American Society for Evolutionary Developmental Biology, Miami, Florida, July 30 - August 3, 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Daniel Medeiros, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2020
* USD 19,990.00

The field of Evolutionary Developmental Biology (EvoDevo) sits at the
intersection of Evolutionary Biology, Developmental Biology, Genetics, Genomics,
and Physiology. The main goal of EvoDevo is the same as these fields; to
understand how genotype gives rise to phenotype. However, unlike traditional
developmental genetics, which relies largely on a small number of model
organisms, EvoDevo utilizes naturally occurring variation between different
groups of organisms to link genotype and phenotype. To accomplish this, EvoDevo
workers apply modern developmental, genetic, genomic, and bioinformatic tools to
a broad range of model and non-model organisms. The mission of the newly formed
Pan-American Society for Evolutionary Developmental Biology (PASEDB) is to; 1)
promote and support EvoDevo in the Americas, 2) provide a forum for
communication and collaboration between workers in the field and related
disciplines and, 3) promote training and education in EvoDevo and related
disciplines. The members of PASEDB view the continued vitality and growth of the
EvoDevo community as essential to progress and innovation in several fields of
biology. PASEDB is also strongly committed to achieving appropriate
representation of women, racial/ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities,
and other individuals who have been traditionally underrepresented in science.
The main way PASEDB is addressing these concerns is by organizing a biennial
conference where established researchers and trainees representing a diverse
cross-section of the field can meet to exchange ideas, network, and establish
collaborations. The activity will support the attendance of new faculty and
trainees to the 2019 Biennial Meeting of PASEDB. In doing so, the project with
facilitate the exchange of ideas, collaborations, and sense of community needed
to advance knowledge and train the next generation of scientists. Due to the
highly interdisciplinary nature of the field, these benefits will extend to
related fields including Evolutionary Biology, Developmental Biology, Genetics,
Genomics, and Physiology. Attendees will also participate in several activities
designed to help promote appropriate representation of women, racial/ethnic
minorities, persons with disabilities, and other individuals who have been
traditionally underrepresented in science.

The activity will support attendance of 8 junior faculty members, 9 postdoctoral
scholars, and 20 graduate students to the Pan-American Society for Evolutionary
Developmental Biology 2019 biennial meeting. Attendees will participate in
several activities designed to help achieve appropriate representation of groups
traditionally underrepresented in science. These will include workshops for
persons of color and members of the LGBTQ community and a workshop for women in
science. Participants will also be chosen to achieve gender parity, and at least
30% of funded attendees will be from groups traditionally underrepresented in
science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.