* 1936450
* EAGER: Transactional Memory Foundations for Distributed Multiprocessor Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Gokarna Sharma, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 199,977.00

Being able to program with concurrency will be an important and necessary skill
in the future. Processor speeds are no longer increasing as processors are
hitting the ceiling of their physical limitations. The chip manufacturers
avoided this problem by putting more cores in a single processor chip. Each new
generation of processor chips are having an increasing number of cores. So in
the future, in order to get a computation to run faster, the computation has to
be split up into concurrent pieces and run in parallel as much as possible. The
major challenge is concurrency control: (i) how to coordinate accesses to
resources that are shared among concurrent pieces and (ii) how to ensure the
correct sequencing of interactions between the computing cores. This project
will explore the power and limitations of transactional memory which has emerged
as a paradigm for concurrency control. Due to conceptual simplicity, it is
believed that transactional memory will encourage non-expert users in writing
concurrent programs, reaching beyond the current use of concurrent programming
only among expert users. The outcomes of this project will have impacts on the
practice of concurrent programming. Industry is also embracing transactional
memory by incorporating it in their recent processor lines. The PI will make the
prototype system publicly available. Some results will be incorporated in
classes the PI teaches. The PI will also focus on the mentoring and education of
K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students in concurrent computing, including
female, minority, and first-generation computer science students. The PI and
students will seek out broad dissemination of the progress of research through
presentations at major conferences, workshops, and seminars. The PI will also
participate in outreach events individually and in collaboration with the
programs within Kent State University, such as K-12 science experience, summer
undergraduate research experience (SURE), choose Ohio first (COF), summer
bootcamp, Northeast Ohio Computer Science and Information Systems Colloquium,
etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transactional memory has emerged as an
appealing paradigm, addressing the downsides of traditional barriers and locks-
based techniques to this problem. However, the past research has examined
transactional memory mostly in the context of tightly-coupled systems,
consisting of a set of processors that share the same physical main memory. The
goal of this project is to study transactional memory in the context of loosely-
coupled systems, consisting of a collection of relatively autonomous processors
each having its own memory. Due to recent architectural and computational
trends, loosely-coupled systems are becoming increasingly popular and
transactional memory is predicted to be useful for concurrency control in these
systems. Particularly, this project establishes solid theoretical as well as
practical foundations under different execution models and practical scenarios,
significantly advancing the current understanding of transactional memory in
loosely-coupled systems. The specific goals of this project include: (i)
establishing impossibility and lower bound results for transactional memory in
loosely-coupled systems, (ii) designing and formally analyzing provably-
efficient scheduling algorithms with (near-)optimal performance guarantees for
both arbitrary and specialized workloads arise in practice, and (iii)
implementing a prototype distributed transactional memory system employing the
designed provably-efficient algorithms and evaluating it thoroughly using
diverse real-world benchmarks and applications to inform theory from practice.
The main challenge to overcome is that loosely-coupled systems have to deal with
non-uniformity in memory-access latency for processors, which was of no concern
in tightly-coupled systems. This non-uniformity affects the completion time of
concurrent pieces of code as well as other related network parameters such as
communication cost and congestion. The techniques for minimizing completion time
may not necessarily minimize other parameters, and alternatively, the techniques
for minimizing other parameters may result significantly worse completion time.
Therefore, a major challenge of this project lies in developing tools and
techniques to understand the effects of non-uniform latency in concurrency
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.