* 1936621
* BEE: RUI: Complementary approaches investigating local adaptation in common milkweed, Asclepias syriaca, using research and education networks
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Michele Koomen, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,036,758.00

As human activity increasingly impacts the natural world, informed decisions
must be made about how to manage and restore natural systems. Recent and
widespread declines in milkweed plant populations are causing alarm, in large
part because milkweeds are a critical food source for vulnerable populations of
the iconic monarch butterfly. Milkweed restoration efforts have been initiated;
however, the influence of seed source on subsequent plant growth and survival is
unknown. For example, if milkweeds are locally adapted to specific climates or
soil types, then moving them from one region to another could be problematic.
This project will engage educators and their students from across the range of
common milkweed in investigations to document patterns of local adaptation and
to identify the environmental factors influencing the evolution of the species.
The data gathered through this project should improve recommendations for how to
select seeds for milkweed restoration projects. At the same time, researchers
will document the impact of participation in this project on student learning
and motivation in science. The collaboration between researchers, educators, and
students will allow scientists to sample more populations than they could
otherwise study while engaging students in authentic research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers will use a
variety of methods to investigate biotic and abiotic factors that affect the
patterns of local adaptation in common milkweed. First, they will support
educators and students at about 30 different institutions to study patterns of
adaptation in experimental gardens planted at each site, and they will work to
expand this network to engage more educators and students in relevant
observational data collection. Educators will meet to improve and share lesson
plans and to integrate new protocols into the curriculum. Second, they will
plant three large experimental gardens at sites in Minnesota, Ohio, and Virginia
to identify which milkweed traits most affect fitness in each environment at
different life stages. At these three sites, they will not only study soil and
climate related factors, but they will also observe pollinators and manipulate
access to plants by herbivores to better understand the relative importance of
these different factors on the evolution of milkweed traits across populations.
Third, they will gather genetic data for plants from each population to compare
the patterns of natural selection on traits to the patterns of genetic
diversity. In addition to integrating these approaches for studying local
adaptation, researchers will assess the impact of engaging educators and
students in the research process, including evaluating student learning of
important scientific skills and concepts and measuring student motivation to
study science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.