* 1936843
* Physiological age versus chronological age: defining how temperature impacts the aging of the mosquito immune system
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Julian Hillyer, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 895,867.00

Insects fight infection by mounting immune responses. The effectiveness of these
immune responses is dependent on multiple factors. One of these is the
temperature of the environment, with different types of immune responses being
stronger at different temperatures. Another factor that affects the strength of
an insect’s immune response is age. As an insect becomes older, its immune
system weakens. Although this is accepted, an important question that remains
unanswered is whether the effect that temperature has on the immune system
changes – for better or worse – as an insect becomes older. Therefore, the goal
of this project is to understand how the immune systems ages, and the role that
temperature plays in the aging process. This research is important because
ongoing changes in the environment are shifting the temperature in which insects
live. Overall, this project’s findings will allow researchers to predict how
changes in environmental temperature alter the ability of an insect to fight an
infection throughout its entire life, which is significant because some insects
are essential for our food supply, and others are agricultural pests and
transmitters of disease. Conducting this project will also advance the education
of undergraduate students, graduate students and school-aged children, with the
goal of motivating them to pursue experiences and careers in science. Outreach
with high school students will be accomplished in partnership with the School
for Science and Math at Vanderbilt, and outreach with elementary school students
will be accomplished in partnership with Metro Nashville Public
Schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of an insect to fight infection is
modified by both the external environment and its life history. Two modifiers of
immune processes are temperature and age. That is, immune proficiency changes as
a function of the environmental temperature, and also declines as a function of
age, a phenomenon known as senescence. Although both temperature and age impact
immune proficiency, these two factors have always been studied in isolation.
That is, studies testing the effect of temperature on immune function have been
carried out at a predetermined age, and studies testing the effect of aging on
immune proficiency have been carried out at a predetermined temperature.
Therefore, the overarching goal of this project is to define how environmental
temperature modifies immune senescence. Focusing on the societally important
mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, this project will (i) define the infection-induced
effects of temperature on the aging process, (ii) determine how temperature and
infection interact to shape age-dependent humoral and cellular immunity, and
(iii) define how blood feeding impacts the effect of temperature on aging. When
completed, this project will uncover whether differences in environmental
temperature alter the rate in which the insect immune system ages, resulting in
a decoupling of chronological age and physiological age. The findings will
provide a more holistic understanding of how insects fight infection in a
changing landscape and should augment the robustness of models used to predict
the effectiveness of insects as pollinators, agricultural pests, and disease
vectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.