* 1936676
* GOALI:  Turbine Film Cooling Fundamental Physics and Improved Designs for Transonic Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Ardeshir Riahi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Gas turbine (jet) engines are used to power most large commercial aircraft. From
basic thermodynamic principles, gas turbine efficiency increases with increases
in the maximum temperature of the gas flowing through the core of the engine. To
enable engines to operate at higher gas temperatures, active cooling can be used
to protect the metal components within the engine. This cooling is accomplished
using internal coolant channels. The air coolant is exhausted through small
holes in the surface where the air then forms a thin layer (film) of lower
temperature fluid that protects the metal surface from the hot mainstream gases.
Recent studies have shown that most all current film cooling designs are
inherently flawed. This is because they are based on a presumption that
laboratory testing at low speeds will provide performance data that is
applicable to the high speeds that occur in actual engine operations. In fact,
recent studies have shown that that at the high gas flow speeds that occur in
the actual gas turbine engines, the performance is significantly different than
found with low speed testing. Consequently, this study will focus on developing
fundamental understanding of high speed effects on turbine film cooling
performance, and developing new film cooling configurations specifically
designed to operate at realistic engine speeds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this
research program, a new high speed test facility will be constructed and used to
test turbine cooling configurations at realistic Mach numbers. This test
facility will allow direct measurements of fundamental flow and heat transfer
mechanisms for film cooling using advanced shaped hole configurations operated
at transonic speeds. Computational techniques will be used to determine optimum
film cooling configurations that will mitigate the effects of supersonic flows
within cooling holes. Furthermore, new turbine cooling configurations will be
designed based on the wide range of geometrical configurations that are enabled
by new additive manufacturing techniques with metal powder. These new designs
are expected to substantially increase turbine cooling performance, allowing for
the development of the next generation gas turbine engines operating at much
higher core gas temperatures, with resulting higher efficiencies. The
educational goals of the program include course development in advanced
experimental methods, and fostering close interactions between students and our
industrial partner to provide students with insight into real world engineering
processes and techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.