* 1936123
* Chemistry of Atmospheric Aerosols at Pacifichem 2020 Congress; Honolulu, Hawaii;  December 15-20, 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Sergey Nizkorodov, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2023
* USD 24,724.00

This project supports the Pacifichem 2020 Congress, "The Chemistry and Physics
of Atmospheric Aerosols,?"to be held in December 2020. The conference is
sponsored jointly by the American Chemical Society, the Canadian Society for
Chemistry, the Chemical Society of Japan, the New Zealand Institute of
Chemistry, the Royal Australian Chemical Institute, the Korean Chemical Society,
and the Chinese Chemical Society. The Chemical Society of Japan is the host
society for the 2020 Congress. The Congress will emphasize the multidisciplinary
science of atmospheric aerosols and provide opportunities to network among Pan-
Pacific research groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will include the
following sessions: (1) Chemical composition of atmospheric aerosols, fog and
cloud water; (2) Multi-phase reactions of aerosols and environmental surfaces;
(3) Physical properties of atmospheric particles; (4) Impact of aerosols on
cloud formation; (5) Frontiers in modeling studies of aerosols; and (6 and 7 -
two evening sessions) Frontiers in aerosol analytical chemistry and
spectroscopy. This project will support the travel of graduate student
researchers, postdoctoral fellows, assistant professors, and junior researchers
who will present their research at the symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.