* 1936999
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Human Interactive Technologies (HIT)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Marco Schoen, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Many tasks are difficult to automate due to high levels of uncertainty in key
task details, such as the shape or size of an object to be manipulated or the
operating environment. Even when it is possible to design a robotic system to
complete such a task, the resulting system can be too costly and/or lack the
robustness required for industrial use. For example, the sewing process of
artificial heart valves remains a labor-intensive endeavor for the biomedical
industry because variability in the operating environment and shape flexibility
of the heart valve has thus far prevented the design of an economical automated
solution. Other examples can be found in numerous industries, including
semiconductor manufacturing, agriculture and healthcare. This Engineering
Research Center Planning Grant on Human Interactive Technologies (HIT) supports
preliminary efforts to build the capacity for fundamental research to advance
mechanical systems design and control in these situations. This will increase
industry?s ability to develop next-generation robust technologies, leading to
novel engineered systems with increased performance, improvements in
manufacturing and production, agriculture, healthcare and augmenting
technologies The planning activities will build the geographically dispersed
partnerships and a strategic plan draft for the proposed ERC. This will allow
the team to work in synergy to accelerate transfer of Human Interactive
Technologies (HIT) advances in knowledge, technology and systems to impact key
sectors of industry and professional engineering practices as well as academic
curricula. Innovative educational and outreach programs will create a cross-
disciplinary research-oriented online course for lower division undergraduates
taught jointly by faculty and industry, as well as initiate a joint Engineering
PhD program, to mentor talented underrepresented students and persons with
disabilities to continue for PhD degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering
Research Center Planning Grant supports preliminary efforts to build capacity
for the establishment of a convergent interdisciplinary center on Human
Interactive Technologies (HIT) to explain complex motion of engineered systems-
environment interaction and uncertainty, two critical foci not fully captured in
existing modeling and design methodologies. The proposed basic research strongly
correlates to one of the Ten Big Ideas for Future NSF Investment, The Future of
Work at the Human-Technology Frontier. The main goals of the planning grant are
related to team building, addressing current challenges and assessing success
activities through a number of one-on-one and online meetings of the assembled
team. The successful completion of the planning activities will allow the team
to go forward in the creation of an integrated diverse convergent research-
education-innovation framework that will yield a better understanding of the
future work at the human-technology frontier. The proposed HIT research is
expected to be a general tool for the robust modeling, design and control of
engineered systems with the ability to accommodate uncertainties across
environments, from novel robotic technologies that can collaborate with humans
to better understanding and predicting changes within living systems. The HIT
center will serve as a model for research scholarship and catalyze California
State University, Fullerton and Illinois State University?s transformation in
building research capacity, commensurate with the collaborating institutions
missions and long-term goals, while at the same time offer unique perspectives
in solving problems and encourage diverse research, educational and workforce
development paths at University of California, Irvine and Texas A&amp;M
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.