* 1936970
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I(RAISE): Empowering Neurodiverse Populations for Employment through Inclusion AI and Innovation Science
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Nilanjan Sarkar, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
dramatically increase the engagement of individuals with autism spectrum
disorders (ASD) in the workforce. While approximately two-thirds of 2.5 million
adults with ASD in the US have average intelligence, more than 50% of them
remain unemployed or underemployed. Many individuals with ASD have unique
capabilities that are in high demand across many job sectors; optimizing
workforce engagement for these individuals holds the potential to transform
great societal cost into great societal value. This project utilizes convergent
expertise in Artificial Intelligence (AI), virtual reality, robotics, together
with expertise in neuroscience, and behavioral and organizational psychology, to
develop intelligent tools and systems to facilitate employment of individuals
with ASD that have high potential for rapid commercialization and deployment.
Specifically, the proposed research will develop intelligent training systems
for interviews and other job relevant social interaction skills for individuals
with ASD, and skill assessment tools for employers to enhance recruitment and
retention. The entire project is based on the foundational idea that many people
with ASD have the potential to participate in the workforce in ways that
contribute to society while also sustaining personal success and well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I project presents a
comprehensive research plan to create new AI tools, systems, and predictive
models, inclusive of employer and stakeholder input, to connect people with ASD
to employers via embedded, technologically based, research-informed supports for
individuals and organizations alike. For people with ASD, inherent challenges
related to social initiation, engagement, and communication impede their
adaptive independence, including finding and keeping jobs. This issue has become
a top priority of the National Institutes of Health Interagency Autism
Coordinating Committee. The project involves six convergent, mutually
reinforcing research components: (1) a pipeline to employment for people with
ASD; (2) an affect-sensitive, closed-loop virtual reality interview training
platform to assess and intervene on skill deficits while also gathering
aggregate data relevant to employer training; (3) opportunities for home
assessment and practice outside of traditional educational settings through the
use of AI-agent mediated collaborative virtual environments and (4) closed-loop
interactive socially assistive robots; (5) novel computer vision and wearable
computing tools for assessment of real-world generalization of skills learned
within VR and robotic systems; and (6) customizable, innovative assessment tools
using data-driven visual AI to identify strengths, talents, and job-relevant
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.