* 1936794
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Language Abstractions for Reconfigurable Hardware Monitors on Manycore Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* David Juedes, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 515,449.00

Embedded system security is compromised when an attack exploits pre-existing
software flaws in order to gain control of program behavior. Even when the
software running on embedded hardware is trusted, an attacker can still insert
malicious code when the program is running to compromise system security.
Therefore, to mitigate such software attacks on embedded systems, it is critical
that both hardware and software are holistically combined into an effective
system architecture to safeguard and preserve our nationâ€™s interests. This
project will systematically and comprehensively explore the implementation of
dynamic security policies with high assurance on reconfigurable hardware with
significant reduction in power and latency. This research project will foster
new research directions in several areas, spanning programming languages,
security policies, computer architecture, reconfigurable hardware and
applications, with the potential to significantly transform the design of next-
generation embedded manycore architectures. All the research findings and
simulation toolkits will be disseminated to the community via conference and
journal publications, and a dedicated website. The research will also play a
major role in education by integrating discovery with teaching and training.
This project will continue to expand outreach activities and broaden
participation in computing by making the necessary efforts to attract and train
minority students in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design and
implementation of high-level language abstractions for specification,
verification, and implementation of reconfigurable hardware monitors, with
specific emphasis on low-overhead defenses against control- and information-flow
attacks is proposed in this project. The overarching goal of this project is to
dynamically update hardware in response to program behavior in order to monitor
precise security policies with minimal overhead (power, area, time). First, this
project will develop high-level language abstractions for implementing dynamic
security monitors, those that reconfigure at runtime to enforce precise security
properties. To provide high assurance, a verified compiler to an idealized
hardware description language together with associated tools such as a verified
equational theory will be developed. Second, this project will explore the
design and implementation of reusable hardware components against which the
high-level language abstractions can be compiled both in uni- and manycore
environments. The basic building blocks will be aggregated into coarse-grain
reconfigurable arrays (CGRA) that can be tailored to program behavior via state
and topology reconfiguration. Third, in software, this project will validate
security monitors implementing defenses against code- and control-flow injection
attacks, among others. In hardware, this project will extensively model and
simulate security monitors using simulation tools to evaluate latency, execution
time, power and area overhead on benchmark suites. Finally, this project will
validate that the proposed hardware monitors that are generated by the high-
level security policies will detect and mitigate attacks. This project will
result in (1) novel high-level language abstractions for dynamic security
policies implemented on reconfigurable hardware; (2) a verified compiler to an
idealized hardware description language together with an equational theory; (3)
the design and implementation of reusable hardware components (a basic block)
that retain state while allowing policy reconfiguration; (4) the aggregation of
basic blocks into CGRA that can be tailored to program behavior via state and
topology updates for uni- and manycore architectures; and (5) extensive modeling
and simulation of hardware monitors that implement defenses against code- and
control-flow injection attacks using benchmarks and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.