* 1936915
* RAISE: C-Accel Pilot-Track B1:DIRECT: A Framework for Diagnosis, Recommendation, and Training in Continuous Workforce Development
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Beverly Woolf, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 838,722.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
provide a software tool to guide individual workers in the US manufacturing
workforce through the process of job selection and upskilling in their entire
career. Due to the rapid development of workplace technology, such as robots and
computer interfaces to machinery, future jobs require skills that are not taught
in schools or standard training programs. Therefore, worker reskilling and
retraining as part of the lifelong learning process is critical to the US
economy and is a topic of national importance. The investigators will study this
problem by collecting and analyzing data from a large partner corporation in the
manufacturing industry and interviewing real workers and stakeholders; the
proposed approaches will be tested by workers both employed by the partner
corporation and recruited by a local partner city government. The investigators
will integrate their expertise on computer science, educational technology, and
social and economic analyses of the labor market to propose an effective, fair,
and scalable software solution that can help a broad segment of workers in the
US workforce, in both the manufacturing industry and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I project aims
at ultimately developing a framework that performs worker profile Diagnosis,
training program RECommendation, and intelligent Training platform development
(DIRECT) for the purpose of continuous workforce development. DIRECT is an
integrated software tool that helps workers identify desirable future jobs,
recommends training programs, and guides workers through the process of planning
future career paths. It consists of four consecutive and intertwined components:
(i) a skill level diagnosis and assessment component that uses cognitive models
to assess worker skill levels from on-job data, (ii) a training experience
development component that uses intelligent tutoring concepts to help workers
acquire new skills, (iii) a skill gap identification component that uses labor
market analysis to identify high-demand jobs and the skill gaps between a worker
and their desirable job, and (iv) a future job and training program
recommendation component that uses predictive artificial intelligence algorithms
to connect workers to future jobs and select training programs to acquire the
necessary skills. In Phase I of the project, the investigators will work with
industry and government partners to formulate concrete research problems,
identify data sources, develop prototypes, and conduct pilot studies to ensure
that DIRECT is effective and practical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.