* 1936519
* Elucidation of bioelectromechanics in cardiomyocyte proliferation after injury
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Hung Cao, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/29/2024
* USD 467,999.00

Gene modification is a potential therapy to heal an injured human heart. Injured
human hearts can create scarring, which may lead to negative cardiac remodeling
and heart failure. In contrast, zebrafish hearts can fully regenerate even after
severe injury. Interestingly, zebrafish cardiac genes are highly conserved in
humans, i.e., they have remained essentially unchanged throughout evolution.
Thus, zebrafish is a genetically controllable model for studying heart
regeneration. Despite intensive studies in zebrafish, a key regeneration process
involved in proliferation of cardiomyocytes (heart muscle cells) remains
unclear. The goal of this project is to develop novel devices and optical
systems to reveal the bio-electro-mechanical mechanisms that trigger
cardiomyocyte proliferation during cardiac regeneration. Using an advanced
flexible wireless ECG (electrocardiogram) jacket developed for zebrafish, the
investigators will continuously monitor electrical conduction changes and
evaluate the mechanical function during regeneration of the heart after injury.
Advanced imaging will reveal the detailed molecular events and make it possible
to measure biological changes along with the electrical and mechanical activity
recorded via the jacket. This multidisciplinary project will provide a unique
educational training experience for a diverse group of UT-Arlington’s
undergraduate and graduate students. Furthermore, the undergraduate students’
names will be included on resultant publications to promote their passion of
research involvement and to assist the students in their future professional
endeavors. Outreach will continue by sharing research findings with local high
schools through seminars or by providing a summer research
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to elucidate an
unrevealed bio-electro-mechanical mechanism that induces cardiomyocyte
proliferation during cardiac regeneration by using novel micro-devices and
optical systems. Although there are many reports about the molecular event of
Notch signaling in cardiomyocyte proliferation after injury, the
electromechanical aspect of promoting cardiomyocyte proliferation remains
unclear. Previous studies have shown that (a) Notch signaling is involved in
cardiomyocyte proliferation after injury, and (b) Notch signaling is
mechanosensitive and modulates cardiac electrical conduction. Studies are
designed to test the hypothesis that there is a closed feedback loop among
mechanosensitive Notch signaling, cardiac electrical conduction, and contraction
that induces expression of certain Msx homeobox genes to promote cardiomyocyte
proliferation during adult zebrafish cardiac regeneration. The Research Plan is
organized under three tasks. The FIRST Task is to develop ECG acquisition and
analysis from awake zebrafish during heart regeneration. The “fish ECG jacket”
with a wireless microelectrode array (MEA) of 4 gold electrodes and electronics
will be fabricated on parylene C membranes that enable continuous ECG
acquisition while minimizing irritation and discomfort to the fish during
regeneration. The ECG data of multiple fish will be sent to a cloud system with
integrated machine learning algorithms for data processing and ECG pattern
recognition. The SECOND Task is to develop high resolution multi-view fusion
with axially swept light-sheet based ultra-microscopy (MV-ASLUM) to image ligand
dependent-Notch and its downstream Msx expressions. MV-ASLUM will be integrated
with a tissue clearing technique (CLARITY) to image in toto adult zebrafish
hearts without physical sectioning. The THIRD Task is to modulate cardiac
contractility and Notch signaling to regulate cardiomyocyte proliferation during
regeneration via Msx expression. The Tg(hsp70:DN-MAML) zebrafish line and the
CRISPR/CAS9 technique will be used to silence Notch and therefore inhibit Msx
gene expression and cardiomyocyte proliferation and thereby verify the
relationship between Notch inducing Msx gene expression and cardiac regeneration
via cardiomyocyte proliferation. Contractility regulatory drugs (metoprolol,
BDM, and isoproterenol) will be used to test the relationship of Notch inducible
Msx gene expression during the regeneration process and nanoparticle (NP)
targeted delivery will be used to overexpress Msx gene expression for
regeneration after pharmacologically weakened cardiac contraction. This
collaborative micro-device and biomedical imaging approach meets at the
intersection of bio-electro-mechanics and cardiomyocyte proliferation during
regeneration with a pathophysiological significance to molecular events and
protection from myocardial infarction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.