* 1936902
* ADVANCE-IT Catalyst: Supporting the Success of a Diverse STEM Faculty at Brooklyn College
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Louise Hainline, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,523.00

Brooklyn College of the City University of New York will implement an ADVANCE
Catalyst project to conduct an institutional self-assessment to understand the
status of women faculty in STEM disciplines on the main campus. This project
will include the collection and analysis of STEM faculty data to uncover the
systemic gender-based inequities that exist at the institution. The project will
focus on individuals from underrepresented groups, including women, those from
racial/ethnic groups under-represented in STEM areas, and individuals with non-
binary gender identities. The project will add 10 years of historical data on
all faculty to an existing academic data warehouse including information on
salaries, rank at hiring, tenure decisions, history of progression in rank, and
work factors such as start-up funding, laboratory resources (space, renovation),
and workload flexibility for family needs. The data in the warehouse will be
used to determine how the target groups have fared historically in STEM and will
be the key resource for assessing equity needs and will provide a long-term data
collection system for monitoring the impact of the ADVANCE project as well as
other faculty focused efforts. This two-year project will prepare the university
for future data collection and data analyses of faculty equity which can be used
by institutional leadership to inform decision-making. The Catalyst work will
also prepare the institution to implement evidence-based strategies to enhance
the university climate for all faculty which will be outlined in a five-year
faculty equity strategic plan that will be produced as part of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional equity assessments
and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic plans at an academic,
non-profit institution of higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.