* 1936877
* Collaborative Research: Phenological mismatch between trees and wildflowers mediated by environmental variability and plant invasions
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Richard Primack, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2024
* USD 242,000.00

In temperate forests, most plant species are understory wildflowers. The
seasonal timing of biological events such as leaf out, flowering, and seed
production is especially critical for forest wildflowers that rely on high light
in the spring, before trees leaf out and reduce light to the forest floor. New
research suggests the timing of leaf out of overstory trees may shift faster
than understory wildflowers in response to warmer spring temperatures. Such
mismatches in leaf out timing of different plant species could reduce wildflower
populations and affect forest diversity and productivity. The early leaf out
times and dense foliage of nonnative, invasive shrubs could further reduce light
levels for native wildflowers. This project explores how warming temperatures
may cause a mismatch in lifecycle events of trees, shrubs, and wildflowers.
Specifically, the project measures whether trees, shrubs, and flowers respond
differently to temperature cues, whether this mismatch is a global phenomenon,
and how this affects the ability of wildflowers to grow and reproduce. This
project connects the public interest in forests to environmental variability and
invasive species. The public can access the results through popular media,
public lectures, and social media. The project team will develop training for
museum educators so they can infuse themes of forest change into exhibits and
conversations with museum visitors. In collaboration with museum educators, the
project will host K-12 teacher workshops to integrate forest monitoring and
local examples of environmental variability into school curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct measurements of the consequences of environment-
induced phenological mismatches between interacting species are rare, and
disruptions in non-trophic competitive interactions between plant species are
often overlooked. In addition, related impacts of species invasions are not well
integrated into phenological studies. The impacts of these phenological
disruptions may be contributing to widely-observed population declines and poor
performance of species that weakly respond to warming temperatures. This project
will uniquely combine historical records (observations of Henry David Thoreau),
contemporary phenological monitoring, museum herbarium collections, and field
experiments to document and understand ecological mismatches between forest
trees, shrubs, and wildflowers. Field shading experiments will simulate effects
of environmental variability, species invasions, and ecological mismatches on
wildflower performance. Field and growth chamber experiments will test
mechanisms determining leaf-out phenology. Thousands of recently digitized
herbarium specimens will be leveraged to quantify how overstory-understory
temporal mismatch varies across temporal, climatic, and biogeographic
gradients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.