* 1936393
* FDSS: Solar and Space Physics Development at the Institute for Astronomy
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Jeffrey Kuhn, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,184,175.00

The goal of this Faculty Development in Space Science (FDSS) project is to
enable a new faculty hire in solar-heliospheric physics at the Institute for
Astronomy (IfA) of the University of Hawaii (UH). The IfA is heavily involved in
experimental, observational, data analysis, and modeling investigations of the
magnetized solar atmosphere of the Sun, starting from the solar surface and
expanding outwards to form the solar corona and the solar wind. The solar
program at the IfA, which focuses on a critical-mass faculty and a recently
growing number of graduate and undergraduate students engaged in solar research,
is designed to have a broad educational impact as we develop a premier center
for solar and space physics education in the U.S. The UH is a minority serving
higher education institution. This 5-year FDSS program will have a significant
impact on UH's undergraduate as well as graduate programs. The engagement of
solar faculty in the undergraduate program gives them direct access to a highly
diverse group of students, with significant representation from minorities and
under-represented groups. Direct involvement with the IfA's graduate program,
together with plans for a new graduate course in solar and heliospheric physics,
solar faculty can engage graduates in the different aspects of solar research,
ranging from instrumentation, to DKIST, data analysis and modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past, the IfA's solar research programs in Manoa
and Haleakala have demonstrated major breakthroughs for advancing our
understanding of the structure and dynamics of the solar corona and solar wind.
By capitalizing on their unique expertise, members of the solar group at the IfA
are engaged in exploring the different facets of solar magnetism, and its role
in the dynamics of the Sun's atmosphere. With the advent of the Daniel K. Inouye
Solar Telescope (DKIST) first light in 2020, and with the two first light
instruments being designed and built by two members of the group, the IfA's
solar group is in an enviable position to achieve excellence. It is within this
environment that this group is receiving NSF's support to expand its diversity
and synergy by complementing their strength with a junior faculty appointment
with expertise in modeling and/or theory. This opportunity comes at an ideal
time not only for individual success, but also for the IfA's solar physics
graduate education program, which has been expanding markedly over the past two
years. Hawaii scientists are also in an enviable position of having 12.5%
guaranteed observing time on DKIST, a priceless commodity for propelling the
success of the new faculty. The research and EPO agenda of this 5-year FDSS
project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.