* 1936829
* Conference on Thermodynamic Formalism: Dynamical Systems, Statistical Properties, and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Matthew Nicol, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This award is for support of the participation of US mathematicians, mainly
early career researchers, at the Jean-Morlet Chair Conference on Thermodynamic
Formalism: Dynamical Systems, Statistical Properties and their Applications at
Centre International de Recontres Mathematiques (CIRM) in Luminy from December 9
until December 13, 2019. This conference will bring together many
internationally leading researchers in ergodic theory and dynamical systems and
will have a special focus on recent developments in the application of
thermodynamic formalism to dynamics. Up to 20 US mathematicians will be
supported by this grant and will learn of recent progress and novel techniques
in modern dynamical systems theory. In addition to the formal lectures there
will be plenty of time for discussions to foster new collaborations and maximize
interactions between participants. The interactions with international
colleagues will lead to collaborations and new research directions which will
benefit US researchers, their PhD students and their home
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ideas from statistical mechanics in the guise
of thermodynamic formalism were introduced into the study of dynamical systems
by Sinai and Ruelle in the late 1960s. The notions of pressure, equilibrium
states and entropy among others were successfully applied to classify and study
the statistical and geometric properties of hyperbolic dynamical systems. This
conference will continue this theme and focus on several topics that are very
active and fruitful, including: studying statistical properties using transfer
operators and anisotropic Banach spaces; the structure and properties of Gibbs
measures; moduli spaces, flows and applications to number theory; fractal
geometry and dimension theory. The conference website is at
https://www.chairejeanmorlet.com/2019-2-pollicott-
vaienti.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.