* 1936345
* QII-TAQS: All-Photonic Quantum Network
* MPS,OMA
* 09/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Alexander Gaeta, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,440,000.00

Development of quantum computers and networks will require large-scale
connections at the quantum level between many particles. These special
connections between the particles, known as qubit entanglement, are essential
for applications in quantum computing, communications, and sensing. Approaches
that have been intensely studied to generate such entanglement utilize neutral
atoms, ions, or superconducting circuits and rely on strong qubit-qubit
interactions. Successful entanglement of these matter-based qubits is
challenging due to deleterious interactions with the environment. Here an
alternative approach is explored using a photonic-chip platform based on silicon
nitride to realize highly entangled photon states. Such a platform has
significant advantages over other photonic-chip materials such as silicon by
offering record low losses in an integrated platform. Realization of an all-
photonic platform for deterministic generation of photonic states will have
broad impact across all quantum information technologies. For example, such a
scheme would enable measurement-based universal computation, where computation
occurs by performing single-qubit measurements on a highly-entangled resource
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to create an integrated
photonics platform that can generate highly-entangled states of light in near-
deterministic fashion at high rates and with high fidelity. These highly-
entangled states will serve as scalable photonic building blocks for generating
cluster states for quantum computers and quantum networks. The platform will be
based on a nonlinear multiplexing scheme in the frequency domain that allows
overcoming the poor scaling with loss associated with spatial and temporal
multiplexing. The rate of entangled photon generation will be dramatically
increased by leveraging recent advances in massively parallel photonic on-chip
devices that can (1) generate and convert photons within a well-defined spectral
grid with high efficiency and (2) store light on-demand for timescales on the
order of hundreds of nanoseconds with high efficiency, using massively parallel
micron-size devices. It is projected that the generation rate of entangled Bell
pairs can be increased over what is currently possible by at least two orders of
magnitude, from 1 microsecond to 200 microseconds. Ultimately, the work aims to
lead to a scalable platform for which the generation rate of entangled photons
scales only polynomially (as opposed to exponentially) with the number of
resources (detectors, resonators, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.