* 1936598
* Miniature Magnetic Devices-based Chip-scale Panofksy Quadrupoles for Focusing  Electron Beams
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Robert Candler, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2023
* USD 391,195.00

The project will investigate a new class of miniature magnetic devices that can
focus beams of electrons, similar to the way that lenses focus light. Magnetic
fields are highly effective for focusing beams of electrons, but current magnets
are bulky and expensive. The proposed work aspires to create a new class of
magnetic focusing devices that are at least one hundred times smaller than their
existing counterparts. Steering electron beams has a broad range of
applications. They are used in the world's most powerful microscopes, free
electron lasers, which can study the motion of individual atoms. These laser
microscopes can provide insight into the fundamental behavior of atoms and
molecules, which can have impact in everyday life, such as discovery of new
drugs. Additionally, electron beams are also used in treating cancer, with
electron beam therapy having the benefit that it can be targeted much more
precisely than radiation therapy. Miniaturizing magnetic focusing devices would
not only allow broader access to these electron beams for use as laser
microscopes, it would also allow electron beams to be put into places previously
inaccessible, such as catheters for cancer therapy. The fundamental issues that
will be studied in this work are the limits of miniaturization of these devices
(i.e., how small can these magnets be made while still effectively focusing
electron beams). To address the challenge of miniaturization, new designs,
fundamentally different from the current state-of-the-art, must be pursued.
Fabrication of these devices will require a combination of methods currently
used by microchip manufacturers with custom methods developed especially for
this work. Students at universities will be able to perform hands-on experiments
that were previously limited to beamline scientists at a handful of facilities.
The proposed activities will include being a faculty lead for "Santa Monica
College/UCLA" Summer Scholar Research Program, development of high-school
curriculum on magnetic devices, writing one article per year covering women in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide more detail, the
proposed research will create a new class of microfabricated electromagnet
quadrupoles for focusing electron beams. Electron beams have made profound
impacts in many application areas, ranging from the world's most precise
microscopes to targeted ablation of cancer. Until recently, all these
applications relied on large, expensive pieces of laboratory equipment to
generate and accelerate electron beams. For example, storage rings and linear
coherent light sources that allow for imaging with unprecedented temporal
(femtosecond) and spatial (Angstrom) resolution are often housed in facilities
on the scale of kilometers. Recent advances have enabled centimeter-scale
accelerators on-chip with the potential to accelerate electron beams to
relativistic velocities, comparable to those at kilometer-scale facilities.
While these results are promising, there remains a critical barrier: there is
currently no chip-scale method that can focus the beams produced by these next-
generation accelerators. Inspired by asymmetric quadrupoles, which use magnetic
field gradients to focus electron beams in a rectangular aperture, this work
proposes to design, fabricate, and characterize a new class of miniature
rectangular quadrupoles. However, the large-scale rectangular quadrupoles cannot
simply be directly miniaturized. New designs must be developed to adapt to the
fabrication constraints particular to small scale fabrication, and new
fabrication methods must be developed to build devices at a mesoscale size range
that falls between the regions where microfabrication and standard fabrication
can comfortably operate. The proposed devices will provide 20 times greater
focusing gradient and fit in a volume seven orders of magnitude smaller than the
current state-of-the-art rectangular quadrupoles. If successful, this will be
the first-ever focusing demonstration of a relativistic electron beam using a
chip-scale device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.