* 1936222
* Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling (SOCCOM2)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Jorge Sarmiento, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* David Porter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 14,079,937.00

The Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling (SOCCOM) project
seeks to increase our understanding of the crucial role of the Southern Ocean in
taking up anthropogenic carbon and heat from the atmosphere, and resupplying
nutrients from the abyss to the surface. An observational component, based on
deployment of profiling floats with oxygen, nitrate, pH and bio-optical sensors,
is supplying unprecedented amounts of new biogeochemical data that provide a
year-round view of the Southern Ocean from the surface to 2000 meters water
depth, including tracking ocean acidification, deoxygenation, and warming
processes. A modeling effort is applying these observations and enhancing our
understanding of the modern Southern Ocean, and reducing uncertainty in
projections of future carbon and nutrient cycles and climate. An extension of
this program from six to ten years is requested. This may allow illumination of
the Southern Ocean's role in climate that was not possible with a shorter time
scale and allows regional comparisons with sufficient floats and years of data
to elucidate the different processes that may operate in each basin. The project
will communicate data and results quickly to the wider community through
established data networks, publications, websites, and social media, as well as
through an active outreach program to classrooms, the general public, and
policymakers. A second goal is to train a new generation of diverse ocean
scientists versed in field techniques,data calibration, modeling, and
communication of research to non-scientists. A third goal completes the transfer
of new sensor technology and related software to industry partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the Southern Ocean serves as the primary gateway
through which the intermediate, deep, and bottom waters of the ocean connect
with the surface ocean (and thus the atmosphere), it has a profound influence on
the oceanic uptake of anthropogenic carbon and heat as well as nutrient resupply
from the abyss to the surface. The four year extension of the SOCCOM float
program proposed here will allow examination of the Southern Ocean's response to
critical modes of climate variability including ENSO and the Southern Annular
Mode. This also contributes to the development and analysis of fully coupled
climate and earth system models that can represent mesoscale processes in the
Southern Ocean, as well as corresponding models that assimilate observations to
produce a biogeochemical state estimate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.