* 1936557
* Collaborative Research: CubeSat Ideas Lab: VIrtual Super-resolution Optics with Reconfigurable Swarms (VISORS)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* John Hwang, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 09/30/2022
* USD 97,748.00

CubeSats are miniaturized, low-weight, low-cost satellites. Due to these
properties, constellations of 10s-100s of CubeSats with specialized instruments
for studying the space environment provide a new exciting opportunity to
understand and predict space weather. The Virtual Super-resolution Optics with
Reconfigurable Swarms (VISORS) mission supports the advancement of using
constellations of CubeSats for space weather through designing, building, and
operating three satellites that together form an ultraviolet telescope for
observing the Sun. VISORS has a transformative technological approach; it will
be the first distributed telescope using several breakthrough technologies,
including: novel photon sieve optics, precision formation flying, and
5G-inspired high data rate communications between the spacecraft. The
transformative optics utilized by the mission will allow high spatial and
temporal observations of nanoflares that are potentially an important source of
heating of the solar corona. The VISORS mission supports STEM education and
public outreach. Graduate and undergraduate students will actively participate
in all mission stages. The project will also develop an open-source software
toolkit to support the design and optimization of CubeSat that can be utilized
in classrooms. Further, a hands-on demonstration of the virtual telescope will
be developed for a science museum exhibit. This project resulted from the Ideas
Lab: Cross-cutting Initiative in CubeSat Innovations, an interdisciplinary
program supported by Geosciences, Engineering, and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering Directorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VISORS will provide a
transformational leap in addressing the origins of the processes heating the
solar corona by revealing filamentary coronal structures as narrow as 160
milliarcseconds and use the spatial and temporal characteristics of those
structures to constrain physical models of nanoflares much more powerfully than
the indirect methods used to date. In addition to addressing one of the most
fundamental open questions in geospace science, VISORS will validate several
breakthrough technologies. The technological innovations range from the
demonstration of the first distributed ultraviolet telescope with unprecedented
angular resolution, novel photon sieve optics, and CubeSat precision formation
flying, to the demonstration of sub-kilometer proximity operations on CubeSat
swarms, including low-interference propulsive maneuvers; navigation, control,
and autonomy; and 5G-inspired high data-rate inter-CubeSat swarm communication
and networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.