* 1936936
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Protecting and Advancing Water-Energy-Environment and Sustainability (PAWES)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Thomas Borch, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

As the US becomes a leading producer of hydrocarbons in the world, sustainable
practices are needed to leverage this new energy frontier while safeguarding
against predicted water scarcity and drought. The proposed Engineering Research
Center (ERC) will focus on the challenges related to hydrocarbon production. The
Center will specifically address increase in water demand and wastewater
sustainability as it relates to stakeholder concerns in rural and tribal
communities. The planning grant aims to design the transformative systems
approach needed to emphasize solutions that address social and environmental
issues. The focus area is driven by the energy industry, which is responsible
for up to 15% of total water withdraws worldwide. The planning grant will also
bring together experts in the fields of engineering, microbiology, chemistry,
environmental policy, economics, and community engagement. This team will
develop an economically feasible approach, sustainable energy practices and
policy, and revitalized rural communities. It will plan for an engineering
system that integrates community perspectives into research, decision-making,
and training with social justice, public perspectives, and multi-objective
decision-making. The proposed Center will be led by the University of Tennessee
with partners at Juniata College, Colorado State University, and Tennessee State
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed ERC tackles important, complex,
and socially-relevant topics such as water scarcity, energy security, and rural
and tribal community development. The Center will target the "moonshot"
initiative of treating hyper-saline O&amp;G wastewater for industrial uses at
$1/barrel. The major impact of this planning grant is to enable the effective
evidence-based discussions between interdisciplinary leaders and stakeholders
needed to achieve this bold target. Their input will be used to develop a
sequence of wastewater management treatments designed to maximize recovery of
O&amp;G wastewater for reuse. Implications on water conservation, energy
security, and rural and tribal workforce development will help country-wide
society. For the proposed wastewater treatment protocols to be successful, basic
research in microbiology, microbial ecology, environmental engineering,
chemistry, and material science aided by advanced computational models will be
needed. The planning process will be used to build effective and active
networks, strengthen ongoing research efforts, inform and empower Appalachian
and Tribal communities. In addition, the planning grant will be used to
establish an integrated approach to engineering education that will teach
students about community engagement, policy development, and science
communications. These findings could be applied to other types of industrial and
agricultural waste, expanding the Center's positive impact to other aspects of
the US water supply system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.