* 1936572
* EAGER: Liquid Foundation Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Michael Luby, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 11/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Internet traffic traveling over wireless networks, such as 5G and wireless mesh
networks, inevitably experiences loss, i.e., a fraction of sent data packets are
lost and never arrive at their destination. Loss is exacerbated when senders or
receivers are mobile. The current design of the internet inefficiently deals
with loss by workarounds such as retransmitting lost data. This project
envisions a redesign of the internet that will accommodate loss by fundamentally
reimagining how internet data is stored and transmitted, as well as an
investigation of smaller incremental steps that might be taken to facilitate
this larger redesign. Improving the capability of wireless networks in this way
will enable deployment of a more reliable, robust, responsive, and efficient
internet to underserved and rural communities around the world that rely on
wireless connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is to flesh out an
internet design based on a fountain code, i.e., all data stored or transmitted
within the internet will be fountain encoded data. A fountain code is an erasure
code that is scalable in two dimensions: (1) the size of an object which can be
efficiently encoded and decoded is essentially unlimited; and (2) the amount of
encoded data that can be generated from an object is essentially unlimited. A
fountain code has (nearly) optimal recovery, i.e., any portion of encoded data
(nearly) equal in size to an object is sufficient to recover the object. The
design will separate loss recovery from congestion control, incorporate
universal mechanisms to simply and gracefully handle packet loss, mobility, long
latency paths, and failing infrastructure, include mechanisms to address novel
security concerns, and take into account deployment
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.