* 1936741
* EAGER: Broadening Participation in Computing through Transforming Media and Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Casey Fiesler, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2023
* USD 257,773.00

This project investigates computational projects where participating members
transform media by producing new creative works that draw material and
inspiration from another source - often in order to critique and correct the
exclusion of certain types of characters or narratives from the underlying media
and to amplify underrepresented voices. Computational projects expand this
practice into the transformation of technologies, which subsequently provides a
path for broadening participation in computing, since these communities have a
large percentage of participation from groups that are traditionally
underrepresented in computing, such as women and people with disabilities.
Broadening participation is essential for ensuring that a diversity of
perspectives are involved in creating new technologies, and despite initiatives
aimed at bringing more diverse groups into computer science, certain groups are
still under-involved in formal computing spaces such as education programs and
the broader technology industry. In contrast to work that seeks to bring
underrepresented groups into these formal spaces, this research will examine
computational work already happening within communities that both experience
marginalization and where participants who may be outsiders to traditional
computing culture are engaging with computation in order to empower their own
communities. By studying this work, this research can lead to a better
understanding of how to overcome systemic barriers that marginalized and
underrepresented groups face when entering formal computing spaces.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research will take place across multiple case studies of
computational projects, in order to explore how they innovate and transform
technologies, with an emphasis on their involvement in projects by and for
marginalized communities. These case studies will involve interviews,
participant observation, and ethnography around the ongoing creation of new
content and platforms, including those that address privacy, safety,
accessibility, and other concerns specific to marginalized groups that are
overlooked on other platforms. This work stands to inform perspectives on
barriers to broadening participation in computing and how computing can empower
marginalized communities. The result will be a better understanding of how those
who are traditionally crowded out of computing are motivated to get involved in
computational projects - and how we might encourage and support them. This
research will provide insight into not only how computational projects driven by
underrepresented groups function and what their benefits are to marginalized
communities, but also what motivating factors make this kind of work possible
when efforts to broaden participation in computing often fall
short.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.