* 1936317
* I-Corps: An Artificial Intelligence Agent for Healthcare Negotiation
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Douglas Fisher, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is in reducing transaction costs
involved when negotiating reimbursements and claims coverage with health
insurers. Health insurers play a role in the majority of healthcare
transactions, but administrative regimes vary widely between insurance providers
and across state lines. This complexity results in less than optimal levels of
coverage for patients and creates a financial burden for consumers and providers
alike. From a commercial standpoint, this technology can increase the
reimbursements received by providers and reduce administrative overhead costs.
Ultimately, this means providers will generate increased revenues and consumers
will experience relief from healthcare related financial
liabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a
platform that synthesizes natural language understanding, argumentation, and
machine learning functionalities. Health care policy documents in natural
language are to be translated into schematic, logical representations that are
amenable to artificial intelligence (AI) automated inferencing. The platform
will be informed by composite patterns, some found through supervised machine
learning, with data definitions involving the degree of success and failure of
patient/provider claims as manifest in insurer decisions, insurer responses to
appeals, patient/provider characteristics, and schematized contracts that define
policy; thus a datum in the machine learning context will be extraordinarily
rich compared to other machine learning applications. Patient characteristics
and contracts are contextualizing information and provide theoretical
constraints with this machine learning methodology a novel instance of the
relatively new field of theory-guided machine learning. Collectively, the
platform will synthesize a number of AI
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.