* 1936303
* QII-TAQS: Quantum Control of Ultracold Atoms in Optical Lattices for Inertial Sensing for Space Applications
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dana Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,928,242.00

Knowing one's location on Earth is simply a matter of opening a Maps application
on a smartphone. This is made possible by the availability of the Global
Positioning Satellite (GPS) infrastructure. Knowing a spacecraft's position in
interplanetary or deep space, however, is a considerably more difficult
challenge. Spacecraft position information is presently obtained primarily using
radio signals sent between the vehicle and radio transmitters on Earth, and
sometimes by radio signals sent from the craft to a nearby object, such as a
planet or other large object. Such radiometric position sensing is costly and
slow. This research project, a collaboration between quantum physicists,
aerospace engineers, and control systems engineers, centers on the development
of new quantum technology that uses atoms as very precise inertial sensors to
measure accelerations and rotations of a spacecraft. Specifically, the new
quantum technology uses atoms that are confined and manipulated by laser beams
forming an optical lattice. Combined with a highly-accurate atomic clock, the
atomic inertial sensor serves as the core of a navigation system that does not
need any external references such as radio signals or images to provide position
information. Because atoms have mass, they are directly affected by forces that
cause a vehicle to accelerate and or rotate. Using quantum superposition, the
researchers take advantage of the quantum wave properties of atoms to measure
these forces very precisely. In interplanetary space, even the forces of impact
of very tiny asteroids can add up to change the trajectory of a spacecraft
significantly over time: no current technology is precise enough to track such
small forces. To know completely the position of a spacecraft that passes near a
massive body one must account for the effects of gravitational forces. This is
done by measuring acceleration forces on atoms at the same time at different
places within the spacecraft. Gravity gradiometry also provides a significant
means of monitoring the health of the Earth: for example, the Earth's gravity
field changes with shifts in the polar ice masses. This research in new quantum
technology is thus likely to lead to improved tools for Earth monitoring as well
as greatly facilitating space travel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
employs basic science and engineering toward the advancement of optical atomic
lattice-based inertial sensing for measuring acceleration, rotation, and
gravity, collectively referred to as inertial sensing. Quantum technology is
widely acknowledged to hold disruptive potential in applications of interest to
national security, science, and commercial industry. Navigation in a GPS-denied
environment, for example, is currently of great concern for the armed services.
In some cases, inertial sensors based on atom interferometry offer orders-of-
magnitude improvement in performance compared to classical technologies such as
ring laser and fiber gyroscopes. Indeed, laboratory systems have exhibited
groundbreaking performance. This work envisions applications where significant
size constraints are at play and the environment is sometimes highly dynamic. To
address such practical considerations, the investigation focuses on advanced
inertial sensors based on optical atomic lattices. An optical lattice is
produced using interfering pairs of laser beams to confine laser-cooled atoms in
periodic structures. Optical lattices can confine atoms with accelerations of
many g (the gravitational acceleration at the Earth's surface). New methods for
manipulating the quantum state of ultracold atoms by modulating the laser beams
forming the optical lattice will provide a pathway to an entirely new class of
quantum-enabled atom interferometric inertial sensors capable of operating in a
dynamic environment while maintaining a small form factor. Key innovations will
evolve from combining a deep understanding of the many-body physics of atoms in
lattices with the development of feedback-and-control methods that can be used
to optimally tailor the inertial sensor response to a given sensing scenario.
The domain of this work focuses on space applications such as monitoring of the
Earth's gravity and navigation of satellites in deep space. A primary purpose of
this research is the evolution of optical atomic lattice sensors from a purely
scientific endeavor to an engineering one. Strategically, this work represents
the first milestone of an inertial sensing quantum technology roadmap. The high-
level goal of this effort is to establish a sensor prototype facility that will
be made available to future generations of students and to industry as a
platform on which to develop and test sensor concepts. Over time, other critical
classical engineering disciplines will be brought into a collaborative effort to
advance the overall state-of-the-art at the system
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.