* 1936009
* Polymer Composites and High Performance Materials Workshop
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Abraham Joy, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2020
* USD 6,300.00

NON-TECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Polymer Composites
and High Performance Materials Workshop is organized through the Polymer
Chemistry Division of the American Chemical Society and will take place July
21-24, 2019 in Rohnert Park, California. It seeks to bring together researchers
from industrial, academic and government laboratories to discuss the state-of-
the-art in polymer matrix science for energy, biomedical, aerospace, marine and
infrastructure applications, and to define key materials development challenges
to meet the needs of emerging requirements in these
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is organized to facilitate
interaction among researchers, with a schedule consisting of short talks in
specific areas followed by panel discussions, morning and evening talks and
poster sessions, planned break-out discussion sections, and free afternoons for
informal networking. The workshop will specifically target interactions among
researchers with experimental, computational, and theoretical backgrounds to
help advance knowledge and prediction to accelerate implementation of new high
performance materials. The NSF partial support will enable graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and junior faculty to attend the conference and present
posters of their research. The faculty and graduate student participants will
gain perspective of current research advances in polymer matrix science and
emerging material needs to support the safety and health of our nation, and will
help develop broad professional interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
on Polymer Composites and High Performance Materials fulfills a need for a
focused conference in this important area involving technological materials that
are widely used in varied applications and will bring together researchers from
academia, government and industry. The workshop is expected to catalyze
interactions and sustainable collaborations between the participants. Selected
papers presented at the workshop will be published in ACS Applied Materials and
Interfaces. In addition, a summary of the workshop outcomes will be published on
the ACS POLY website.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.