* 1936241
* I-Corps: Microbial Corrosion Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2020
* John Senko, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is improving
corrosion monitoring through development of a microbial corrosion monitor. There
are over 2.6 million miles of pipeline in the United States and microbial
corrosion leads to substantial costs for the pipeline operators. Currently,
operators are alerted to a breakdown of product and begin corrosion testing
using a combination of microbially influenced corrosion (MIC) kits, corrosion
coupons, and laboratory testing. Results from corrosion testing can take weeks,
during which time the microbial community can change and the corrosion
mitigation strategy will be unsuccessful. Development of a probe capable of
immediately determining when microbial growth will cause corrosion could have a
significant impact on corrosion management. Such a probe could be of interest
for consumers in oil and gas, water treatment, food production, and
environmental monitoring. There is already great demand in the corrosion
monitoring industry for probes and monitors to access abiotic corrosion damage.
The next generation of corrosion monitors could very well be defined by the
ability to incorporate real-time monitoring for microbial growth and its impact
on corrosion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on an innovative
probe that is able to predict when microbial growth will lead to microbially
influenced corrosion (MIC), before the onset of corrosion. The MIC instrument
developed here is comprised of a probe that can monitor type and severity of
corrosion caused solely by microbial growth. This is unique to our probe, as all
other available probes cannot distinguish between abiotic and biotic corrosion.
The probe uses a combination of split-chamber/zero-resistance ammetry (ZRA) and
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy techniques. The data obtained by the
probe is analyzed with a new algorithm that gives real-time corrosion rate data
for biotic corrosion, determines the type of corrosion, and rates the biotic
corrosion from low to severe. The instrument can be used to quickly screen for
the corrosion-causing ability of different organisms that are isolated from a
sample. This will allow operators to quickly determine which types of organisms
are causing corrosion and allow them to deploy the proper biocide. Immediate
detection of MIC will allow for safer pipeline operation, decrease downtime, and
decrease the overall cost of pipeline operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.