* 1936998
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Exploring Human-Machine Integrated Systems in Digitally Intensive Manufacturing Environments (HMIS-DIME)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* James Davis, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
the current economic landscape stands, there are product designs and associated
manufacturing processes that can only be completed with human involvement. If a
path towards better integration of the human mind and machine to the emerging
smart manufacturing network is properly envisioned, then the resultant new
human-integrated manufacturing and control systems will improve productivity,
quality, and most importantly employee satisfaction, increasing the adoptability
and success of such smart systems. This planning grant explores research and
development needs inspired by the symbiotic convergence of humans and machines
in autonomous systems, and in particular how that relationship will require
change in technical, educational, diversity and innovation issues in the coming
decades. These questions have been initially motivated by considering "What is
the role of the human in digitally intensive automated world?", particularly in
the relationships between man and machine in industrial environments. These
questions inform the future of human-automation interaction, and the answers are
expected to be based in research converging across disciplines to considers
issues of interconnectivity, emotion, teamwork, self-edification and the need to
meet other higher-order human needs in human interaction with autonomous
systems. This project will explore how humans exchange information with and
interpret autonomous systems in functionally-engineered environments and the
emergent behaviors that result, with the goal of clarifying challenges and
enabling technology needs as the basis for a convergent research-based
Engineering Research Center. The activities would specifically explore the
concepts of interfaced systems of automated and human elements, with
consideration of the symbiosis of man-machine interactions and interfaces,
particularly at the interfaces that couple complex systems, the information that
flows through them, and how such concepts apply to the future of work. The
growth of digitally-intensive industrial automation environments and the needs
of decision-makers to augment them and be augmented by them is an issue that is
redefining the industrial landscape as we know it. The further interaction of
emergent and intelligent system technologies motivates a rethinking of this
system of systems, and how they interface and exchange information. There is
great uncertainty about the roles machines and humans will play in the future,
with people in some cases today displaying ignorance, apathy, or even
derisiveness for being threatened by the digital environment expansion
(particularly for manufacturing, where intelligent systems could displace wide
economic activities that underlie people's place and perception). This planning
grant will convene academic researchers, industrial leaders, workers, and
education stakeholders to consider the above questions, and to envision the
structure, governance, operation and activities of an NSF ERC that addresses the
interfaces between the coupling of large networks of complex, nonlinear and
uncertain cyberphysical systems in order to satisfy human needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in a better understanding of how
higher-order human needs can be effectively considered in the design of
synergistic human-automated manufacturing systems. Elucidation of the research
challenges underlying: design-motivated manufacturing processes, information
flow between humans and autonomous systems, and production control with
consideration for human integration will be critical in order for society to
rethink the incremental steps leading the current digital manufacturing
evolution, in order to identify which concepts when properly understood will
usher in a smarter, system-level revolution that embraces the relationship of
people to the digital domain, and addresses the complex interfaces of such a
system. This targeted movement in research frontiers embodies three of the NSF
10 Big Ideas: Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier, Harnessing Data
for 21st Century, and Growing Convergent Research. A center-based concept is
envisioned to focus on such convergent issues surrounding the integration of
people and technologies in a smart manufacturing world; this is warranted as the
research thrusts are heavily interdisciplinary; it is expected that
collaborations will encompass social sciences (Psychology, Sociology), Learning
Sciences, Life Sciences (Biology, Neurology), Engineering, Computing, and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.