* 1936735
* EAGER: Broadening Participation in Undergraduate Computing Literature Matrix Resource
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Linda Sax, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,997.00

The University of California--Los Angeles will develop a literature matrix
resource that will allow practitioners, researchers, non-profits, industry, and
others interested in broadening participation in computing (BPC) to identify and
assess relevant literature to inform their work. Currently, the Principal
Investigator Dr. Linda Sax leads a national, mixed-method research project (the
BRAID Research project) focused on efforts to recruit and retain women and
students of color in undergraduate computing majors. Through this work, Dr. Sax
and her research team have developed methodologies to identify and catalogue
scholarship that addresses topics relevant to BPC work. Building off that work,
the team will curate a library of peer-reviewed literature on the topic of
broadening participation in undergraduate computing that allows a user to search
the library's content by key fields(year, journal, discipline, methodological
approach, sample size, etc.) as well as review summary
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify pieces and create content for the
literature matrix, Dr. Sax and her team will draw on best practices for
reviewing and synthesizing literature. In doing so, they will be able to
leverage their social science expertise to develop a much-needed resource for
the BPC community. The resource will be useful to individuals with little
background in the social sciences who are seeking to understand more about best
practices to diversify computing. At the same time, it will be useful for social
science researchers, enabling them to conduct more thorough syntheses of the
extant literature to ground future research, identify gaps in our knowledge, and
develop new research products. It will make it easier for researchers and
practitioners alike to assess the available research. This work will be of
particular use to National Science Foundation (NSF) Principal Investigators
(PIs) working on proposals and awards from the Computer and Information Sciences
and Engineering (CISE) Directorate which is currently piloting a BPC requirement
for some of their submissions. The constructed literature matrix is expected to
be available through the BPCNet.org resource collection designed for those CISE
PIs, making it easier for them to identify those practices that are well-
established in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.