* 1936715
* RAISE: Bringing Together Diverse Perspectives on Water
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* shannon speed, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,299,998.00

Major knowledge gaps exist in STEM relating to water, including how and why
climate change will impact water, how hydrological changes will differently
impact different communities throughout the Southwest and elsewhere, and how
Indigenous communities have addressed water issues, especially with regard to
climate change adaptation and dispossession. But exploration of past and
present-day environments and uses and understandings of water can provide
critical information, transforming the ability to understand the processes
impacting water and the relationship to water and various cultures in the long-
term. Therefore this program will develop and braid together different strands
of research from multiple disciplines as new windows into the regional impacts
of rising greenhouse gas levels on the water cycle and climate. The research
will be transformative in that it will examine and share diverse perspectives on
the water cycle, including what water is and how people use, value, and steward
it, how different fields and people approach questions about water in the
context of environmental change, what different disciplinary and cultural
perspectives are on water sustainability and histories in a region, and how
these diverse perspectives on water inform the ways we think and communicate
about environmental futures. Taken together, these multiple interwoven strands
will help us construct a more comprehensive picture of how and why rainfall and
evaporation have responded to climate change and will thus provide a means to
evaluate climate model skill and representation, while gathering data on water
issues, past, present, and future, facing Indigenous communities whose waters
are in the region, and developing and piloting an inclusive science
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to bring together and share
diverse perspectives on water through convergence research, which is referred to
as braiding knowledge, which will help navigate towards solutions that could
address environmental challenges in the Southwestern United States. It also will
represent a model for convergence research on water in other regions, and
climate change more broadly, beyond this project. Knowledge of deep history,
obtained through geoscience, ethnography, and archaeology, can inform science,
support Indigenous sovereignty, and guide decision-making at tribal, regional,
and national levels. Knowledge of community water values and needs can and
should inform water management and science. Braided, this knowledge can support
climate change adaptation. The specific goals of the project are:&lt;br/&gt;- To
use novel interdisciplinary approaches to constrain how and why precipitation
and evaporation rates respond to changing climate forcing in different regions
of the Southwest.&lt;br/&gt;- To gather data on the water issues, past and
present, facing Indigenous communities whose waters are in, or are conveyed to,
the Los Angeles basin, and other regions.&lt;br/&gt;- To broaden participation
through inclusive practices with the adaptation and assessment of a new
inclusive science model to the geosciences and environmental
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.