* 1936896
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Thermal Energy Recovery, Refrigeration and Management (TERRM)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 02/28/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The ever-growing energy demand, escalating energy prices, and environmental
concerns compel us to look for cleaner and more sustainable energy sources.
Meanwhile, the need of portable power or on-demand production of electrical
power using locally available energy sources demands the development of compact,
efficient and cost-effective power generators. Economically viable technologies
for recovering and transferring waste heat generated by devices and integrating
these thermal management solutions will create the opportunity to develop new
industries and expand the US economy. The growing demand for high-performance
miniaturized electronics has accelerated the need to design and develop compact
heat management solutions that are silent, lightweight and comprised of
materials that can be recycled. The Engineering Research Center for Thermal
Energy Recovery, Refrigeration and Management (TERRM) addresses the National
Grand Challenge to ?Restore and Improve Urban Infrastructure? by providing
foundational technologies required for thermal energy recovery, solid-state
refrigeration, distributed energy supply and advanced manufacturing. It builds
on the foundation provided by NSF?s big ideas covering ?harnessing data
revolution?, ?mid-scale research infrastructure?, and ?quantum leap?. The ERC
testbeds will transform the way we design thermal energy based distributed
electric generation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested funding will be
used to conduct targeted national and international events to build a
comprehensive team related to TERRM. Workshops, site visits, industry
partnerships and conference sessions will provide a systematic roadmap for
thermal system design, manufacturing, testing and implementation. Planning stage
events will provide lists of grand challenges and time-dependent opportunities
which will assist in the development of thrusts targeting basic physics, working
principles, performance measurements, materials, and devices. During the
planning phase, the goal will be to identify the industrial base, technology
roadmap, technology barriers, regulations and standards, commercialization
partners, and intellectual property in all targeted areas of TERRM. Advanced
system designs for thermal management will be identified through extensive
interactions with industry partners. The planning grant activities will build a
multi-disciplinary engineering team to address the technology barriers
identified during the planning workshop and industrial
visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.