* 1936073
* Innovation and Entrepreneurship (I&amp;E) Summit: A Seismic Shift in Promotion and Tenure
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Karl Mundorff, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 526,122.00

The award will support the evaluation of the value and inclusion of knowledge
and outcomes derived from innovation and entrepreneurial (I&amp;E) achievements
as additional components in Promotion and Tenure (P&amp;T) decisions for
university faculty in higher education nationally. This work will promote the
progress of science and to advance national prosperity. The ability to more
effectively align the intellectual capabilities of university faculty with an
innovation economy will have profound, broad reaching impacts for society and
the American economy. This effort will engage the broad spectrum of higher
education - including primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to research 1
(R1) doctoral universities [including minority- serving institutions such as
historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs), tribal colleges and
universities (TCUs) and Hispanic serving institutions (HSIs)]. Key to this
objective will be the delivery of a multi-day summit for constituents from a
diverse cross-section of higher education to discuss possible the topic and make
recommendations for next steps. In addition, a pre-summit survey will be
performed to gain a better understanding the current state of incorporation of
I&amp;E criteria within existing P&amp;T guidelines across the Nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support for the planning and
delivery of a one and a half day event in Spring/Summer 2020 entitled
"Innovation and Entrepreneurship (I&amp;E) Summit: A Seismic Shift in Promotion
and Tenure (P&amp;T)." The purpose of this summit is to convene the broad
spectrum of higher education to discuss the value and inclusion of evidence-
based data, experimental knowledge and impact outcomes derived from innovation
and entrepreneurial achievements as additional components in P&amp;T decisions
for higher education nationally. The constituents to be involved in this Summit
range from primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to research 1 (R1)
doctoral universities [including minority- serving institutions such as
historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs), tribal colleges and
universities (TCUs) and Hispanic serving institutions (HSIs)], as well as
organizations directly impacting this community. The overarching goals of this
summit are to: (a) disseminate the current status of I&amp;E within P&amp;T
amongst universities from across the Nation; (b) provide case studies from
individual faculty, administrators and industry leaders demonstrating the impact
of I&amp;E within P&amp;T; (c) foster communication and information sharing
amongst the higher education ecosystem on I&amp;E; and (d) develop best
practices and road map for individual universities to augment their individual
P&amp;T guidelines to more inclusively support I&amp;E amongst their faculty.
Note: For the purpose of this document, the word "university" will serve as
encompassing all institutions of higher education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to more effectively align the intellectual capabilities of our
university faculty with an innovation economy will have profound, broad reaching
impacts for society and the American economy. Not only are faculty's
professional careers be positively impacted by this work in innovation and
entrepreneurship (I&amp;E), the universities will be better positioned to
accomplish their own institutional strategic goals focused around
I&amp;E.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.