* 1936730
* Workshop on Emerging Mathematical Foundations for Design; Washington, DC; Summer 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mark Fuge, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 09/30/2023
* USD 47,166.00

This workshop aims to expand the scope of mathematical tools available to solve
complex engineering design problems. Specifically, the workshop helps explore
and bridge language and conceptual barriers between three fields--Engineering
Design, Mathematics, and Computer Science--through the use of targeting
collaboration and writing exercises designed to uncover new growing areas of
mathematics and computer science can be adapted and applied to solved real-world
engineering problems. The workshop also seeks to train a new generation of
graduate students in these intersecting areas by strengthening educational
outcomes for students and providing a pathway for the US academic and industrial
workforce to grow and develop these new mathematical tools over future decades.
This workshop advances NSF's mission to promote the progress of science by
transitioning advanced mathematical tools into engineering research and practice
at an accelerated rate compared to what would be possible without the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This multi-day workshop will bring together
three groups of people: (1) Engineering/System Design Researchers, (2)
Mathematicians, Statisticians, and Computer Scientists, and (3) graduate
students from across those areas. The meeting's purpose is to perform a series
of "translation" exercises wherein Mathematicians, Statisticians, and Computer
Scientists with knowledge of subject areas not typically present in or used by
Engineering Design and Systems Engineering (EDSE) researchers, work in pairs and
small groups with EDSE researchers to "translate" key ideas or results from
under-explored areas of mathematics--specifically, from different areas of
Representation Theory--to a language that EDSE researchers can interpret in the
context of EDSE problems. These exercises include both targeted writing
exercises adapted from science communication techniques as well as introductory
lectures and example problem-solving exercises by graduate students from
representative and diverse engineering disciplines. The key goal of the workshop
is to spark new interest and connections between unexplored areas of Mathematics
and Computational Science such that (1) the EDSE research community has
concrete, easy-to-understand footholds into those new scientific areas; (2)
Mathematicians, Statisticians, and Computational Scientists see concrete
applications of their work in problems of broader EDSE interest; and (3) the
workshop promotes convergence research between the CMMI and DMS and CISE
directorates, expanding the pool of people interested in Engineering Design
problems and the available mathematical tools those researchers have to address
those pressing problems. The concrete deliverables from the workshop include a
set of white-papers that introduce the key ideas from one area of mathematics to
EDSE, and Mathematics and Computer Science audiences with examples of current
problems that occur when engineers design products or systems at the Human-
Technology Frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.