* 1936864
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Intelligent Sensing, Mapping, and Forecasting of Water Quality for Sustainable Coastal Ecosystems (iCoast)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* David Kaplan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Water quality degradation at the coast threatens environmental and human health,
with impacts through direct exposure (e.g., cyanobacterial blooms that create
neurotoxins, microbial water- borne diseases, metals, and other carcinogens).
Water quality degradation also threatens health through indirect exposure
through contaminated seafood or deteriorated ecosystems that no longer
sustainably provide clean air, water, and food. These water quality issues
directly affect 40% of the global human population that lives near the coast and
is exposed to coastal waters. In the context of climate change and the impending
sea level rise, it is imperative to take steps mitigating the growing
vulnerability of coastal ecosystems and coastal communities This can be done
through a better understanding the sources, fate, and transport of pollutants to
the coast. A better understanding of how they affect public health and welfare
and respond to both natural phenomena and human interventions is also critical.
The Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Intelligent Sensing, Mapping, and
Forecasting of Water Quality for Sustainable Coastal Ecosystems (iCoast) seeks
to revolutionize the monitoring and management of coastal waters by integrating
widespread, real-time, multi-scale monitoring with existing and novel public
health data streams to map and forecast threats to environmental and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iCoast planning grant will be used
to bring together diverse experts from the domains of coastal ecology and
restoration, watershed hydrology, public health, sensor and data science,
artificial intelligence, and smart networked systems. The planning grant will
pursue a well-defined set of activities, including a survey and two workshops.
The state of Florida with its vast coastline and increasing coastal population
is an appropriate location to perform this work and the proposing team includes
researchers long focused on coastal ecology and water quality and well-connected
to stakeholders. These experts will identify knowledge gaps, education and
training needs, ways to broaden participation, and promising technology
solutions for dependable, efficient, sustainable coastal water systems. It will
leverage previous NSF and institutional investment in smart systems,
coastal/estuarine science and engineering, and public health to modernize the
workforce and produce long-term solutions to water quality problems. Continuous
and effective chemical and microbrial monitoring of water quality in coastal
areas as well as in upstream watersheds requires deep integration of basic
science and engineering and convergence of knowledge from multiple disciplines,
innovative experimental platforms and tools, and well-designed studies leading
to new scientific understanding on complex relationships between humans the
marine environment. While it poses tremendous challenges, it also illustrates
the scale of opportunity for an ERC focused on coastal water quality that can
address one of the most pressing problems in modern
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.