* 1936378
* Tamamta Iqallupet Anirtungnaqlluki: Conceptualizing Indigenous Approaches to Salmon Science and Management in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Courtney Carothers, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 03/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

This project is centered on conceptualizing Indigenous Knowledge to better
understand historical and contemporary ways in which Alaska Native people
steward salmon, the cultural contexts connected to salmon stewardship, and
Indigenous approaches to current management practices and systems. Indigenous
people have served as stewards of Alaska lands and waters for thousands of years
yet have been largely excluded from science and management systems. This project
explores how Indigenous peoplesâ€™ and the knowledge they hold contribute to
fisheries science and management and how this contribution is critical to better
understand sustainability, climate change, and access to fisheries, especially
in light of the rapid changes ongoing in the Arctic. Addressing these challenges
in a holistic way will not only benefit Indigenous peoples, but all global
citizens, animals, and ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team builds
upon years of pilot research, soliciting guidance and creating relationships to
ensure a rigorous and diverse approach to the project. The specific objectives
of this project are: 1) to study and document Indigenous values, knowledge, and
governance of salmon in regions across Alaska and the adaptation of these
systems over time; 2) to assess and analyze current salmon science and
management systems; and 3) to better understand ways to incorporate Indigenous
peoples, values, knowledge, management, and governance mechanisms into current
systems. The project adopts Indigenous research frameworks and methodologies
that support cultural knowledge and strengthen research relationships. Driven by
Indigenous methodologies, dialogues and multi-generational interviews co-led by
Indigenous students in their home communities are the building block methods of
the project. These methods help the project team to explore the deep roots of
the relationships and stewardship practices, values, and knowledge of Alaska
Native peoples, as well as assess the current western science and management
system from Indigenous perspectives and identify areas to better incorporate and
dovetail these two knowledge systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.