* 1936640
* CAREER:  New Approaches to Mathematical Wave Turbulence
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Zaher Hani, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2023
* USD 373,504.00

Nonlinear dispersive equations model physical phenomena arising in quantum
mechanics, plasma physics, nonlinear optics, oceanography, all the way to
general relativity. The purpose of this project is to improve the mathematical
and scientific understanding of those equations via A) concrete research
projects aimed at studying the long-time behavior of solutions to such
equations, and B) an educational component aimed at introducing such problems to
a new and diverse generation of mathematicians. The main focus is on the study
of the so-called "non-equilibrium behavior" of nonlinear dispersive equations.
Such a behavior is exhibited in many physically important phenomena, like
turbulence in ocean waves or in the transmission of optical signals, to mention
only a couple. While this turbulence is easy to observe and has very strong
manifestations in nature, its scientific understanding is rather poor and the
mathematical justification of the involved phenomena based on the model
equations is rather difficult and is mostly still open. This project is aimed at
rigorously proving turbulence phenomenon for certain nonlinear dispersive
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important feature of the long-time
behavior of nonlinear dispersive partial differential equations (PDE) on compact
domains is out-of-equilibrium behavior or long-time instability. This means that
solutions do not exhibit long-time stability near equilibriums solutions or
configurations. Such questions can be addressed from a dynamical systems
perspective and from a statistical physics perspective, in what is often called
in the physics literature as "wave turbulence theory". The proposed projects
address this broad problematic from both perspectives. In terms of dynamics, the
aim is to construct solutions exhibiting the so-called "energy cascade"
phenomenon, in which the energy of a dispersive system moves its concentration
zone between characteristically different length scales. On the statistical
physics perspective, projects aimed at justifying the fundamental equations of
wave turbulence are proposed. These are effective equations for the dynamics
that are derived in the physics literature from heuristic considerations, and
have very important implications on the long-time behavior of dispersive PDE,
provided they are rigorously justified. The project also includes an educational
component aimed at raising the interest of a younger generation of researchers
in those fundamental problems through workshops, seminars, REU projects, etc.