* 1936969
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Hazard Mitigation and Community Resilience (HMCR)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* An Chen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Hazard Mitigation and Community
Resilience (HMCR)&lt;br/&gt;Many federal and state agencies, including the
National Science Foundation (NSF), have significantly invested on hazard
mitigation research as well as on improving the societal aspects associated with
disasters. However, the aftermath that unfolded following the recent disasters
confirm that the impact of past research in terms of improving community
resilience following a natural disaster is limited. This is believed to be due
to the research on Hazard Mitigation and Community Resilience (HMCR) not being
conducted holistically. Solving engineering problems protects infrastructure
from experiencing collapse. However, maintaining their functionality immediately
following a disaster and minimizing associated disruptions have paramount
importance for the affected communities. To overcome this challenge and
introduce transformative changes to the traditional practice, an HMCR program is
being initiated by using the complex societal problems that have been identified
in recent disasters and driving the research agenda based on the identified
problems. A key element of the effort to transform the HMCR initiative into a
research center is to design and implement a convergence research program and
integrated education and training efforts that will create more resilient
systems and communities. This NSF Engineering Research Center (ERC) Planning
project fosters the creation of an agenda to design the center for HMCR. The
properly constructed and well-funded ERC on HMCR with a convergent research
program can enable communities and organizations to be better prepared for
disasters, spend resources wisely to mitigate impacts, and recover quickly from
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hazard mitigation, as an adaptive resilience
strategy, is deeply embedded in complex and interconnected structural, social,
economic, and policy contexts. Dynamics of these processes influence the
effectiveness of hazard mitigation strategies, impacts of disasters, community
resilience, and directions of the post-disaster reconstruction. Understanding
this reality becomes a transdisciplinary agenda for research and education as
well as to create direct impact to the communities. The integration of research
and education involving multiple disciplines to solve current issues in disaster
prone areas with emphasis on community resilience is crucial as it will enrich
the workforce and guide the decision making process in the presence of future
disasters and recovery. This project focuses on better understanding the
processes and interdependencies of the different systems in the community. In
order to propel fundamental research with direct impact to community resilience,
a workshop will be organized for faculty from multiple disciplines (e.g.,
engineering, urban planning, business, computer science, political science,
economics, and sociology) together with stakeholders to generate collaborative
research that solve important problems in HMCR. A convergence research agenda
that integrates engineering with several other disciplines will consist of
multiple thrust areas. The topic may focus on: (1) hazard modelling and mapping,
(2) design for resilience, (3) system analysis of resilience, and (4)
socioeconomic patterns and policy. By gaining broad knowledge in HMCR, the team
will provide stakeholders with an improved understanding of their role, and will
be able to communicate how the convergence research agenda and its outcomes will
improve community resilience in disaster prone areas. It will promote
convergence research collaboration to investigate HMCR problems and enhance the
participation of underrepresented groups and stakeholders. It can also increase
the capacity across the engineering academic community to develop ideas,
facilitate team formation, and foster stakeholder community networks. In this
context, researchers will strengthen on-going partnerships and will build
additional ones with industry leaders and other organizations to increase the
innovative capacity and broader societal impacts of the research outcomes. The
program will engage underrepresented students by recruiting among the diverse
student population and will provide opportunities for faculty with diverse
background to work together and grow their academic careers and support the
formation of the HMCR Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.