* 1936968
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Toward Fair, Ethical, Efficient, and Trustworthy Crowdsourcing Platforms to Support Crowdworkers in Jobs of the Future
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Chuan Yue, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 09/30/2021
* USD 999,992.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is
multifaceted. Crowdsourcing has created a vast and rapidly growing online labor
market. However, today's crowdsourcing platforms cannot well support
crowdworkers, job requesters, and the healthy growth of this important online
labor market due to four major problems: fairness, ethics, efficiency, and
trustworthiness. This project is a convergence of the research and development
from multiple intellectually distinct disciplines including Computer Science,
Economics &amp; Business, and Humanities &amp; Social Sciences. By performing
fundamental research with rapid development advances through partnerships with
crowdsourcing platform providers, this project will deliver techniques that can
be used to create fair, ethical, efficient, and trustworthy crowdsourcing
platforms to support American crowdworkers. It will also enable job requesters
including researchers, companies, and government or humanitarian aid
organizations to receive high-quality and trustworthy task submissions for them
to confidently conduct their important studies and make important decisions.
This project will actively involve students from underrepresented groups
including female and minority students. It will train students on research and
on producing high-quality deliverables. It will widely disseminate its results
via activities such as publishing research papers and promoting the wide use of
the deliverables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I
project has significant intellectual merit. It addresses the critical
interdisciplinary challenges of creating a healthy crowdsourcing labor market
that is crucial to the important studies, computations, and decisions of
researchers, companies, as well as government and humanitarian aid
organizations. This labor market is vast and rapidly growing, but has four major
problems intertwined from the fairness, ethics, efficiency, and trustworthiness
perspectives in a very complicated manner. This project addresses the four major
problems by performing fundamental research with rapid development advances
through partnerships with crowdsourcing platform providers. It will (1) design
incentive structures based on economic theory to incentivize fairness in
crowdsourcing, (2) design research, training, and assessment mechanisms to
incorporate ethics into crowdsourcing, (3) design machine learning models to
improve the efficiency of crowdworkers, and (4) design machine learning models
to securely protect both crowdworkers and job requesters. It will integrate the
designed techniques at the client-side into a web browser extension, and at the
server-side into some industrial partner's crowdsourcing platform. Overall, it
takes a convergence approach to advance the scientific knowledge and
understanding of crowdsourcing and its closely related disciplines including
economics, business, humanities, social sciences, and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.