* 1936065
* Nonlinear electrokinetics at polarizable soft interfaces: implications for cell membrane characterization and nanopore transport
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Ruiguo Yang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 387,356.00

Polarizable soft interfaces such as biological cell membranes undergo
significant deformations in the presence of an externally applied field due to
their complex interactions with their environment. These interactions are
crucial for the development of microfluidic and lab-on-chip devices, as well as
other biomedical and bioanalytical systems, such as scanning ion conductance
microscopy (SICM) and patch-clamping. Such interactions are also critical for
electroporation-based drug delivery technologies, because the ability to
precisely deliver biomolecules into target cells depends strongly on
understanding the interactions between a cell membrane and applied field.
However, unraveling the physics of a cell membrane in the presence of an applied
field is challenging. This project will develop a systematic platform that will
enable the examination of multiple physical effects relevant to polarizable soft
interfaces with applied voltages. The research team will conduct mathematical,
computational, and experimental studies to uncover nonlinear electrokinetic and
hydrodynamic interactions of the polarizable soft interface. The effects of
these interactions on nanopores at the interface will also be investigated for
the precise delivery of target biomolecules into single cells. The project will
provide new knowledge in cell biology and and immunology, as well as new
insights into the initial molecular events associated with neurodegenerative and
heart disease. The project will involve undergraduate and graduate students, and
the team will conduct extensive outreach activities aimed at stimulating
interest in science and engineering among students at all academic levels
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines mathematical and computational
approaches with an innovative experimental platform to determine the nonlinear
electrokinetic effects on a polarizable soft membrane containing nanopores. It
will integrate induced-charge electro-osmosis (ICEO) for the nonlinear
electrokinetic phenomenon and electro-hydrodynamics for interfacial and fluid
dynamics to characterize the relationship between membrane properties and
nonlinear electrokinetics. At the membrane scale, the role of ICEO in
determining the topographical shape of the membrane surface will be analyzed
quantitatively, and the bending rigidity or stiffness of the cell membrane will
then be obtained. At the pore scale, the effects of ICEO on hydrodynamic flows
across nanopores on the membrane will be addressed, and the relationship between
a hydrodynamic force and membrane deformation will be obtained. In parallel,
microfluidic experiments using an innovative nanocapillary system will be
performed at both scales for various single cells to validate the underlying
models and assumptions. Armed with a quantitative model and innovative
experimental system, it will be possible to add new layers to a SICM imaging
process by creating a map of surface properties such as its charge and rigidity,
and more importantly provide details on the way in which these properties
influence the flow on the cell membrane. This project is jointly funded by the
Particulate and Multiphase Processes Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.