* 1936236
* 2020 Multifunctional Materials and Structures Gordon Research Conference; Ventura, California; 19-24 January 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Daniel Inman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 09/30/2020
* USD 29,680.00

This grant will provide funds for the registration fees for 11 participants and
partial domestic travel funds for 29 participants, including those from under-
represented groups, of the 2020 Gordon Research Conference on Multifunctional
Materials and Structures. This conference will encourage interactions between
researchers from physics, mechanics, engineering science, chemistry, material
science, biology, mathematics, and computational science and engineering working
on the fundamental science and applications in multifunctional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants will attend focused lectures
that include a guided discussion period and will present posters. The technical
sessions will cover the following topics: Materials of Architected Topology,
Biological, Biomolecular and Bioinspired Materials for Sensing, Structural
Remodeling and Morphogenesis, Brain-inspired Neuromorphic Networks, Structural
Power, Avian Inspired Morphing Systems, Metastructures for Dynamic Response
Tailoring, Reconfigurable Soft Robotics, and Multimaterial Additive
Manufacturing. This project will facilitate the interaction of scholars from the
variety of disciplines to address the fundamental scientific issues underpinning
the advancement of hierarchical multifunctional material systems from the
molecular scale to the macroscopic structural scale, and will provide an
environment to promote networking and the formation of collaborative research
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.