* 1936258
* NSF-BSF: Multiphase transport processes with phase change in stratified hypersaline lakes: A combined computational and field investigation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Eckart Meiburg, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 387,997.00

Earth's crust contains numerous large-scale salt deposits that are up to a
kilometer thick. These deposits are of great importance for engineering
applications such as mineral extraction and oil and gas exploration, and for
understanding the processes that have governed the oceans throughout Earth's
history. However, the formation and structure of these large salt deposits are
at present poorly understood. Today, the Dead Sea is the only deep lake in the
world in which salt crystals form and create a growing deposit on the seafloor.
This dynamic environment provides a unique natural laboratory for exploring the
multiphase transport processes with phase change that create such salt deposits.
This project will undertake a comprehensive investigation that combines an
extensive field campaign by the Geological Survey of Israel with detailed large-
scale computer simulations and theoretical analysis at the University of
California, Santa Barbara. The research will train US engineering and geology
students in the interdisciplinary areas of environmental model development,
computational multiphase fluid dynamics, and large-scale simulations on parallel
computer architectures. Student exchanges will take place between UCSB and the
Dead Sea Observatory, and the investigators will hold lecture series at both
institutions. An international workshop on the physical transport processes
governing the Dead Sea is planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore and quantify the nonlinear interplay of the convective and diffusive
transport of heat and salt. The project will explore how this transport is
modulated by (1) phase change between dissolved and crystalline salt within the
lake; (2) radiative heating/cooling, evaporation/salt rejection and wind
stresses at the lake's surface; and (3) inflow of freshwater, sediment and/or
brine. The governing dimensionless parameters will be identified, along with the
quantitative ranges that apply to the Dead Sea, and the respective balances that
govern the dynamics. In this way, the project will obtain quantitatively
accurate scaling laws for these processes, and enable predictions for the
evolution of the Dead Sea under a variety of different environmental forcings.
Results will provide a predictive tool for managing water resources and useful
information for advancing technologies related to mining and hydrocarbon
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.