* 1936221
* QII-TAQS: Spatially and Temporally Resolved Ultrasensitive Magnetic Sensing of Quantum Materials
* MPS,OMA
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Gang Xiao, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 12/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This research project aims to develop a quantum mechanical magnetic camera
(QMMC) for spatial and temporal imaging of ultra-weak magnetic fields that arise
on the surfaces of quantum materials. Such a camera will obtain detailed
information about intricate spatial correlations, providing novel information
about the nature of quantum states. The research aims to improve the magnetic
sensitivity of magnetic tunneling junction sensors and integrated sensor arrays.
The team of researchers in quantum materials science, magnetic sensing, and
semiconductor integrated circuits has the capability of synthesizing quantum
materials, fabricating devices, characterizing them with advanced resonance
techniques, and developing theoretical understanding of quantum mechanisms and
phenomena. The camera is intended to become a magnetic "visual" tool, not only
for exotic quantum materials, but also for any two-dimensional active object
emitting a spatial and/or temporal magnetic field profile. The expected outcome
is expected to be transformative in terms of a broadened scope of high-end
applications currently not available due to small field signals. The findings
will advance the fields of both strongly correlated-electron matter and quantum
information science. The research activities will also enable student
entrepreneurs to create start-up companies that convert the QMMC prototypes into
high performance QMMC products. In addition, the research team is
collaboratively developing a new quantum information science course and
organizing a summer workshop for graduate students and researchers in New
England and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together a
multidisciplinary team of researchers with expertise in quantum sensing,
nanoscale fabrication, synthesis and characterization of quantum materials, as
well as theoretical modeling, to develop a quantum mechanical magnetic camera
(QMMC), providing spatial and temporal imaging of ultra-weak magnetic fields
with unprecedented sensitivity and - in fully optimized implementation -
submicron spatial resolution over macroscopically large areas. The sensor is
based on magnetic tunneling junction (MTJ) technology. With QMMC, the research
team obtains detailed information about the intricate spatial correlations and
local polarization of the topological quantum states. These unique measurements
provide valuable tests of theoretical predictions of quantum correlations in
interacting electron matter and verify the potential of these materials for
construction of high-performance qubits with sufficiently long coherence times.
The key to the success of the project is to significantly improve the magnetic
sensitivity of the MTJ sensors and integrate sensor arrays with dedicated
readout circuitry. The research team will explore new quantum tunneling barrier
materials that reduce the intrinsic noise of the MTJ and design new multilayer
structure to enhance coherent magnetic tunneling. The MTJ sensors will be
integrated with CMOS read-out circuits so that both spatial and temporal
magnetic fields can be measured and processed. The QMMC not only allows emergent
quantum phenomena to be studied in quantum materials, but also expands the
applications of quantum magnetic sensors to modern metrology. The team is also
developing a unique probe for the study of spatial and temporal correlations on
the scales relevant for quantum phenomena. QMMC technology is a significant leap
from state-of-the-art technology, representing a paradigm shift in the
manufacturing engineering of arrayed quantum sensing devices. The research will
expand engineering knowledge in quantum magnetic sensing devices and integration
of modern MTJ metal-based cells with more conventional CMOS technology. The
research team will nurture student entrepreneurs to develop and manufacture high
performance QMMC products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.