* 1936703
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Modular, Efficient, Homomorphic Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Daniele Micciancio, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Modern computer applications require not only to protect data using encryption,
but also to perform computations on data in encrypted form, e.g., in a cloud
computing setting where private data is stored and processed on a remote,
untrusted server. Lattice cryptography is a fast-developing area of mathematical
cryptography which has the potential to deliver new and better solutions to many
complex security problems, and currently the only known technique allowing the
construction of fully homomorphic encryption schemes: encryption mechanisms that
allow to perform arbitrary computations on encrypted data. Lattice cryptography
also offers post-quantum security, i.e., it is believed to resist the future
threat posed by the development of quantum computers. The project's novelties
are the introduction of a new framework for the design and analysis of
homomorphic encryption functions, and its use to improve the understanding of
this important cryptographic primitive, as well as to improve its efficiency.
The project impacts are enabling better methods to securely share and use data
(in encrypted form), and inform ongoing efforts to standardize post-quantum
cryptography and homomorphic encryption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates a general framework for the modular design of complex cryptographic
primitives based on lattices, including fully homomorphic encryption (FHE).
Starting from a basic (private key) encryption scheme satisfying certain weak
linear homomorphic properties, a variety of known homomorphic encryption
schemes, as well as some new ones, are described in a unified, modular way,
compared, analyzed and combined. Within this framework, several important
problems are investigated. Specific questions considered in this project are:
the design of circular secure FHE schemes, the construction of more efficient
FHE schemes making use of amortized bootstrapping techniques, the use of hybrid
solutions combining together different FHE schemes as well as forms of secure
multiparty computation based on secret sharing, and the construction of multi-
use universally composable oblivious transfer based on
lattices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.