* 1936731
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Linking the Open Knowledge Network to the Web with End-User Programming
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Kyle Crowder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 09/30/2020
* USD 994,710.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future.

The broader impact and potential societal benefit of this Convergence
Accelerator Phase I project is to create tools that will make it easier for
anyone, including non-programmers, to contribute to an open knowledge network,
which is a nonproprietary, shared knowledge infrastructure that facilitates
searches and queries of all publicly available data. An overarching thrust of
NSF?s 2019 Convergence Accelerator program is to create an open knowledge
network (OKN) and this specific project?s efforts have the potential to improve
the development of knowledge networks in any topical domain. The project effort
will build upon the team's existing research to enhance a programming tool that
will allow people without programming expertise to acquire and use large,
complex datasets from the web, so that anyone can contribute to an open
knowledge network and help create a shared resource of broad value.

The motivation for the project is the need for researchers, decision-makers, and
the public to have access to more thorough and current data, focusing first on
data relevant to the broad fields of sociology, public policy, and economics.
The project seeks to create tools so that social scientists can enrich an
existing OKN containing government datasets with the dynamic view of the world
presented by website data. This project will produce programming tools that
allow social scientists (or any researcher) to create ontologies and link
datasets without extensive programming training. To create a truly open OKN -
that can be extended by untrained consumers, data providers, and other non-
coders - requires highly learnable programming techniques. This project expands
the team's prior advances in the field of learnable programming to build an OKN
interface around cutting-edge technologies that merge programming languages,
human-computer interaction, and programming-by-demonstration. Concretely, using
the tool this project will develop a user will be able to encounter a target
dataset on a website, the tool will demonstrate how to collect a small sample of
the data, show the user how to annotate the data with its ontology (connections
to other terms and ideas), then based on the user's input, the tool will write
the program to extract the next trillion data points from the website and enter
them into the OKN. The team also envisions that the tool can then suggest other
datasets that may be appropriate to link, and the user can enter into a
conversation with the tool to refine one or more linked scripts. The research
team will build on their existing partnerships to ensure usability best
practices for a range of target audiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.