* 1936263
* QII-TAQS: Characterizing and Utilizing 2D van der Wals Materials with Superconducting Qubits
* MPS,OMA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Philip Kim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,992,000.00

Quantum information technologies hold the promise to revolutionize sensing,
communication, and computing. Realizing this promise requires new approaches for
creating "quantum-ready" materials and manufacturing processes. The research
part of this project introduces a new class of materials called "van der Waals
heterostructures" to the manufacturing of high-quality devices for application
to quantum computation. Van der Waals heterostructures are a family of layered,
two-dimensional (flat) materials that - depending on their design - may assume a
wide range of properties, such as being a normal metal like copper, a
superconductor like aluminum, or an insulator like aluminum oxide. The advantage
of these materials is that they are crystalline and, therefore, have few (if
any) defects. The atomically sharp interfaces of these heterostructures also
provide a materials platform to build novel electronic devices. Defects limit
the utility of today's quantum devices, and this research aims to improve
quantum device performance by leveraging their crystallinity. The research
includes characterization of the electrical and optical properties of van der
Waals heterostructures, as well as their use to manufacture and test a range of
quantum devices useful for quantum information processing. The project also
contributes to the training of a new generation of "quantum engineers" who will
translate this work into industrial settings. The investigators are committed to
the mentoring and training of undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral associates - the next generation of science and engineering leaders
- as well as outreach to those already in the workforce and other members of the
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the characterization of van
der Waals (vdW) heterostructures - a family of layered, crystalline, two-
dimensional (2D) quantum materials including semi-metals, insulators,
semiconductors, ferromagnets, superconductors, and topological insulators - and
their application to quantum information technologies. While vdW materials have
been extensively studied via DC transport, few experiments have probed their
quantum properties in the microwave and optical regimes relevant for quantum
technology applications. In this work, the research team investigates 2D vdW
materials using coherent optical techniques spanning microwaves, terahertz, and
optical frequencies, including direct excitation and the use of circuit quantum
electrodynamics with superconducting resonators to mediate fast, ultra-sensitive
pump-probe experiments and detection. The team aggregates complementary
expertise in vdW materials, high-quality-factor superconducting resonators, high
coherence superconducting qubits, and their integration with vdW
heterostructures. Fabrication of these devices leverages a unique, state-of-the-
art hermetic device foundry developed in-house, as well as state of-the-art
superconducting resonator and qubit fabrication. Measurements are performed at
millikelvin temperature in cryogen-free dilution refrigerators with microwave
and optical access. The research targets transformative quantum information
applications, including high-coherence qubits, small-form-factor microwave
components, and the study of quantum spin models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.