* 1936401
* SBIR Phase I:  Switching-Free DC Voltage Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Matthew Lumb, POLARIS SEMICONDUCTOR LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be the introduction of a revolutionary new technology for
electrical components affected by electrical noise, electromagnetic
interference, large footprint, and high bill of materials costs associated with
certain components. This will have a major impact for noise-sensitive circuits
in demanding military, medical and communication applications. The dramatically
reduced footprint and component count will enable smaller, lighter and lower-
cost electronic circuits, positively impacting a wide range of technologies,
such as portable consumer electronics and Internet-of-Things devices. The unique
innovation developed in the project will enable integrated circuits with
improved performance at lower heating and higher system efficiencies. This novel
technology can be manufactured with existing processes, enabling high volume,
reliable and low-cost commercial components.

The proposed project will create the first demonstration of a voltage regulator
circuit able to provide efficient voltage up-conversion and down-conversion
without switching. The technology uses photons to multiply or divide voltage
within a novel voltage regulator architecture. The research will address the
main technical challenges to achieving high efficiency, including photon
generation, photon transfer and conversion to electricity within optoelectronic
devices. Minimizing optical and electrical losses is crucial to achieving a high
efficiency voltage regulator circuit, critical to many DC-DC conversion
applications. The research will study non-radiative losses in semiconductor
light emitters, photon management strategies to reduce optical loss, and
electrical device design to minimize carrier collection and series resistance
losses. Finally, these aspects will be combined into a fully functional voltage
regulator circuit, aiming to demonstrate purely DC voltage up-conversion with
efficiencies as high as 85%. To accomplish this, the project uses advanced
optoelectronic device design and modeling, commercial epitaxy, advanced compound
semiconductor fabrication, semiconductor material and device characterization,
and analog circuit modeling and development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.