* 1936849
* SBIR Phase I:  Multi-Sensor 12U Spacecraft with On-Board Data Fusion and Processing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Amit Mehra, NOVI LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2020
* USD 224,349.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to enable a new generation of small satellites to aid many
essential functions ranging from environmental management and law enforcement to
natural disaster evaluation and urban studies, improving forestry and
agricultural yields, oil and gas pipeline inspection, emissions and marine
pollution monitoring, land-use surveys and planning, and a host of other
commercial, industrial, environmental and humanitarian use-cases. The technology
will enable access to a $10B addressable market of new space applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a new approach to small
satellite constellation operations through integrated on-board data fusion and
processing. The technology is a first-of-its-kind, high payload volume bus
closely coupled with image processing and object detection techniques based on
neural net technologies. This is a deeply layered approach that create “edge-
intelligence” on the satellite itself. This project will: 1) use building
detection as a notional example to demonstrate a proof-of-concept deep learning
system fusing data from multiple sources (in this case, visible RGB and short
wave infra-red imagery); 2) assess the performance and compatibility of the data
fusion and processing algorithms on a low size, weight and power (SWaP)
processor customized for space-based applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.