* 1936797
* Workshop on Formal Language Theory in Linguistics: New Orleans, LA - January 2020
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Kevin McMullin, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 07/31/2020
* USD 18,490.00

This workshop will bring linguists and computer scientists together to discuss
recent advances in Formal Language Theory and its relevance both to linguistic
theory and to language technologies. Formal Language Theory (FLT) is a means to
independently assess how a given attested or predicted linguistic pattern
compares to other patterns in terms of the expressive power required to describe
it. A grammar formalism with the expressive power to generate all the
grammatical patterns found in the languages of the world without generating the
non-occurring patterns would facilitate the comparison of different linguistic
theories and allow precise claims to be made about the bounds of linguistic
complexity. This workshop has two aims. The first is to take stock of existing
work in FLT and its impact on theories of language and of its learnability, and
to showcase new directions in which this work is headed. The second is to bring
together linguists and computer scientists in order to establish deeper points
of contact between their goals and methods as they relate to how both humans and
machines can learn and use language, and to identify the most fruitful
directions for moving forward. Because of the general nature of FLT, this
research can also lead to practical applications broadly, from natural language
processing and artificial intelligence to bioinformatics and information
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will take place during the third
annual meeting of the Society for Computation in Linguistics (SCiL), which meets
as a sister society at the annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America
(LSA). SCiL is designed to be a common meeting for research on the computational
modeling of natural language from a variety of perspectives, particularly the
theoretical linguistics and the natural language processing (NLP)/machine
learning (ML) communities. The 2020 SCiL workshop on FLT in linguistics is
particularly responsive to the society's mission as the formalisms that FLT
research is based on are foundational to theoretical computer science. The
workshop events will include a keynote address, a panel of three researchers,
and two tutorials demonstrating some of the resources available for getting
started on research in FLT in linguistics. There will also be mentoring sessions
before, during, and after the workshop that pair young researchers interested in
FLT/NLP/ML work with workshop participants, creating an opportunity to build an
active network of young researchers as well as providing a venue for the
organizers to receive feedback and assess the success of the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.