* 1936940
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Simultaneous Knowledge Network Programming and Extraction
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Matthew Shapiro, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will
include better use and growth of knowledge networks. Today's knowledge networks,
for example Wikidata, include high-quality structured information about a very
wide range of topics. Knowledge networks make many new and compelling
applications possible, such as structured search engine results and voice
assistants. Unfortunately, today's knowledge networks and applications have been
very difficult and expensive to construct, making it extremely burdensome to
create them for novel topics. This project will take advantage of the research
team's expertise in data management, artificial intelligence, and economics to
create a combination of software and data that should make novel knowledge
network systems dramatically easier to produce. The first effort will be an
Economics-focused integrated knowledge network-and-tool system, which has the
potential to dramatically improve the ease of performing higher-quality economic
measurement and analysis. This knowledge network tool can improve economic-
oriented research efforts that will benefit national prosperity. However, the
even greater value of the effort will be a tool that allows knowledge networks
on any topic to be developed more easily and with less programming expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although knowledge networks are thought to be key to
future data-enabled discovery, knowledge network-driven applications have
generally not been developed using a reproducible system. This project will
begin to build a knowledge application development system that should make
knowledge applications easier to write, existing knowledge networks easier to
improve, and entirely novel knowledge networks easier to construct. The team's
effort is based on a novel and extremely succinct form of programming that they
have developed that allows simultaneous programming and extraction of relevant
information to contribute to a knowledge network. The proposed simultaneous
programming and extraction system will help construct knowledge networks, but
will also improve knowledge network data quality, by providing additional weak
supervision for the information extraction pipelines that are commonly used to
produce the networks. The system will be tested on real data and users in the
Economics domain. However, the methods and tools will not be topic-specific, but
rather should be widely applicable to knowledge networks in many topical
domains. This work will generate research as well as practical downloadable
software, datasets, and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.