* 1936913
* Synthesis, Structures, and Properties of New Mixed Oxy-Sulfide-Nitride Glassy Solid Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Steve Martin, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 12/31/2023
* USD 805,706.00

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project is conducting research to develop new
glasses than can be used in the development of new batteries that are safer and
more energy dense. While lithium batteries are powerful, they present a
dangerous fire hazard that have resulted in many injuries. In this project, new
glasses are being prepared and studied that will help create a new type of all
solid-state battery that cannot catch fire, and can hold10 times more energy
than lithium batteries. Graduate and undergraduate students working on the
project are learning how to conduct research, work in international multi-
disciplinary research teams, and present and discuss their research findings.
Students supported by this project will conduct informal science education to
K-Gray audiences numbering more than 2500 each year by using the Gaffers Guild
Glass Blowing Studio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: At the very core
of every lithium battery is a highly flammable organic liquid electrolyte. When
a lithium battery is overcharged, overheated, or draws too much current too
rapidly, the organic liquid electrolyte can catch fire and cause serious injury.
In this new project, fundamental research is being conducted to study new kinds
of mixed oxy-sulfide-nitride glassy solid electrolytes. The project will examine
the underlying structural chemistry of mixing oxygen, sulfur, and nitrogen to
explore three hypotheses: (1) That adding oxygen will improve the mechanical
strength and chemical durability of the glass by forming bridging oxygens
between the glass formers. (2) That adding sulfur will increase the lithium and
sodium ion conductivity by forming low basicity anion sites of low binding
energy. (3) That adding nitrogen will improve the electrochemical stability of
the glasses by forming strongly and covalently bonded two-fold and three-fold
bonded nitrogen. This research project trains graduate and undergraduate
students in state-of-the-art glass and materials synthesis, materials
characterization, and solid-state electrochemistry of solid electrolytes and as
such broadens the cadre of new knowledge workers in the critical field of energy
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.