* 1936422
* Novel Transition Metal Catalyzed Synthetic Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Vladimir Gevorgyan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 07/31/2020
* USD 205,000.00

In this project, Dr. Gevorgyan is developing novel transition metal-catalyzed
methods to synthesize organic molecules with structures containing rings.
Existing methods to synthesize these molecules produce unwanted by-products as
waste and/or require expensive reagents, and thus, the broad application of
these methodologies is often limited. To address this problem, the development
of novel catalytic methods for the selective, efficient, and general
construction of organic ring structures is being pursued by Dr. Gevorgyan and
his research group at University of Illinois-Chicago. The broader impacts of the
proposed work are providing new and effective routes to building block molecules
of importance to areas as diverse as biology and materials science, where they
are utilized in the assembly of more complex molecules and materials. Moreover,
this research is dramatically reducing the cost of chemicals and producing less
waste, and thus, this research produces chemicals with less environmental
impact. In addition, Dr. Gevorgyan is actively engaging in outreach activities
for recruiting minority undergraduate students from Chicago City Colleges into
research. Student involvement in research at UIC is projected to unlock the
students' potential talents and creativity, increase their retention in College,
and enhance their career possibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Gevorgyan of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois at
Chicago is developing a set of novel migratory cycloisomerization and
cycloaddition protocols toward assembly of multisubstituted carbo- and
heterocyclic molecules. The project includes several aspects: (1) development of
novel migratory cycloisomerization reactions toward fused carbo- and
heterocyclic cores; (2) development of migratory benzannulation reactions toward
densely substituted aromatic molecules; (3) development of innovative
transposition reactions; and (4) development of new types of transannulation
reaction. It is believed that these innovative reactions allow for a dramatic
increase of molecular complexity, thus giving easy access to important, densely-
substituted frameworks from simple precursors. This project, which is at the
interface of organometallic and organic chemistry and catalysis is providing
multidisciplinary training at undergraduate and graduate levels, and thus has a
broad impact on their continuing education. In addition, Dr. Gevorgyan is
actively engaging in outreach activities for recruiting minority undergraduate
students from Chicago City Colleges.