* 1936608
* Collaborative Research: Research Networking Activities for Sustained Coordinated Observations of Arctic Change
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Henry Loescher, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 06/30/2025
* USD 323,429.00

A range of national and international bodies have recognized the urgent need for
improved coordination of sustained observations of rapid Arctic Change. Such
coordination provides shared benefits to Arctic and non-Arctic nations, for
example in responding effectively to transformations in marine ecosystems,
improving prediction of extreme weather and environmental hazards associated
with Arctic change. Coordination of observations also advances our understanding
of the functioning of the Arctic system and the services it provides at the
regional, national, and global level. This project brings together experts from
different branches of science and engineering, along with Arctic Indigenous
experts and organizations to jointly advance coordination, design, and
implementation of sustained observations. Drawing on guidance from different
Arctic rights holders, decision- and policymakers, the Research Networking
Activity (RNA) focuses on the topic of food security in the Pacific Arctic
maritime sector. Food security, in particular for Alaska coastal communities but
also in the context of large-scale fisheries and other factors of national
concern has been substantially impacted by changing ice and ocean conditions
that have been most pronounced in the Pacific Arctic sector in recent years. The
project draws on different assessment, modeling, and observing system design
approaches to lay the foundation for a food-security oriented information
product integrating different types of coordinated observations. In
accomplishing project goals, Alaska Native scholars are active participants in
the work, with a focus on capacity-building within Indigenous Peoples’
organizations such that they can better steer and utilize Arctic observing data
and information products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project objectives are
achieved by tying into key goals identified by the Arctic Council’s and
International Arctic Science Committee’s Sustaining Arctic Observing Networks
(SAON) initiative. Specifically, the international community has developed a
joint vision for a connected, collaborative, and comprehensive long-term pan-
Arctic Observing System that serves societal needs. SAON has identified
development of a Roadmap for Arctic Observing and Data Systems (ROADS) as a key
starting point for implementing its strategy: to detail where observing and data
management efforts need to go and how SAON partners will jointly get there. This
RNA project establishes and maintains a collaborative network between U.S. and
international partner institutions to initiate and advance the ROADS process.
Specifically, the project transforms the Arctic Observing Summit (AOS) from a
biennial meeting into an ongoing process and resource to aid with coordination
of observations. The AOS in turn informs four different sets of project
activities that advance coordination, requirements capture, design development,
and information infrastructure. Each of the task teams under these four themes
draws on a combination of facilitated meetings, modeling and assessment
activities, formal and informal collaborations, and the expansion of the Food
Security case study into a broader resource and model for pan-Arctic observing
coordination and integration. The project draws on principles of co-production
of knowledge, observing system simulation experiments, and systems engineering
to determine shared benefits and quantitatively assess the impacts of optimized
observations relevant in a food security and marine ecosystems context. Data and
tools emerging from this work inform a food security information product shared
through the Group on Earth Observations observing system of systems
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.