* 1936187
* Evolutionary inference in the presence of gene tree discordance
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Matthew Hahn, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 700,618.00

Large DNA sequencing projects have revealed that there is not just one way that
species are related. Genes and pieces of the same genome can have different
relationships. Sometimes these relationships differ because of ancient mating
between species called hybridization. When hybridization occurs, important
traits can be shared between unrelated species. This project will develop new
methods to determine the history of traits shared between unrelated species. It
also will develop methods to more accurately determine the relationships among
species. The research will allow researchers to identify cases where key traits,
such as insecticide resistance, arise once and are passed between species. The
research combines mathematical modeling with new statistical approaches. These
will be combined to produce open-source software for carrying out the analyses.
The software will ensure that all scientists will be able to take advantage of
the tools developed by the research, adding to the national infrastructure by
enabling new biological discoveries. This work also will improve and accelerate
biological research with multiple societal benefits, including helping to
identify genes controlling important traits. This project will support the
training of a postdoctoral researcher, graduate students, and undergraduates
from groups that are underrepresented in science and technology careers.
Workshops will be developed to provide training in the use of the software
developed by this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species trees make it possible
to understand the evolutionary history of traits. Previous work has documented
how gene trees that are discordant with the species tree lead to inaccurate
inferences about the timing and direction of trait transitions, the number of
trait transitions, how often such changes are thought to be driven by adaptive
evolution, and even the species tree itself. This research goes beyond
documenting the problems of gene tree discordance, providing solutions to these
problems. The theoretical approach used will make it possible to incorporate the
multiple causes of discordance—including introgression—into a single framework,
allowing researchers to make statistically rigorous inferences about
evolutionary processes in the presence of discordance. Integrating these results
into a single software package enables these insights and methods to be applied
widely, for both binary and continuous traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.