* 1936075
* ADVANCE Adaptation:  Spartan Adaptations of Best Practices for Faculty Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro (UNCG)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Dana Dunn, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,807.00

The University of North Carolina Greensboro (UNCG) ADVANCE Adaptation project
will implement activities to improve equity for STEM faculty at UNCG, a
minority-serving institution with a diverse student enrollment. The institution
has done a self-study to identify equity issues for STEM faculty by gender and
have identified promising practices from other ADVANCE grantees as well as at
UNCG itself. The UNCG ADVANCE Adaptation project fits well with the campus-wide
Strategic Plan and will contribute to the need in the Piedmont of North Carolina
region for a well-prepared and diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
UNCG ADVANCE project is expected to result in an enhanced "culture of care" by:
1) making promotion and tenure and search committee enhancements and reviewing
exit interview data from faculty that leave the institution; 2) mentoring and
standardizing the review of external research proposals by the institution and
coordinating proposal preparation; and 3) increasing awareness, standardization,
and implementation of policies that promote career-life balance at UNCG. These
institutional change efforts will be supported throughout the campus by the work
of a trained, volunteer, group called Spartans ADVANCE Allies, who will
contribute to the creation of an overall "culture of care" at
UNCG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of
evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit institution of higher
education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.