* 1936873
* AMPS: Real-Time Algorithms for Power System Analysis: Anomaly, Causality, and Contingency
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Maggie Cheng, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2022
* USD 109,240.00

A large-scale blackout in power systems would result in millions of dollars in
revenue loss. It interrupts businesses, and even poses risks to environment and
public safety. Protecting power systems from large-scale outages is no doubt a
top priority. Early detection of random component failures and prediction of
cascading failures are critical to the prevention of large-scale blackouts, but
they can be achieved only when the power grid is equipped with adequate
capability for system understanding, situational awareness, and emergency
response. Modern power systems are becoming increasingly complex with the
addition of a variety of active controllers, renewable energy resources and
storages. With the complexity and uncertainty involved, traditional approaches
based on intensive computation to solve a system of model equations are no
longer suitable for real-time analysis and control. One graduate student will be
support in year 1 of this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we
leverage recent advances in data science to improve power systems reliability,
security, and resilience. In particular we propose to use deep neural networks
and data-driven uncertainty quantification, to advance the core algorithms
pertaining to the analysis and control of power systems. The proposed work
includes three major thrusts: (1) real-time power flow analysis, (2) real-time
anomaly detection and causal analysis, and (3) real-time contingency analysis
and optimal emergency control. The project is expected to make a significant
breakthrough in reliable energy delivery. It will not only benefit the power
system research and operation, but also advance data science research by
promoting physical law-assisted machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.