* 1936776
* Parametric Resonance as an Electromechanical Transduction Mechanism
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Molei Tao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 349,923.00

Parametric resonance as an electromechanical transduction mechanism This
interdisciplinary research project will explore and exploit parametric
excitation, a concept familiar to many as swings in playgrounds are driven by
the rider bending and straightening to increase the amplitude of motion. When
certain parameters of electrical circuits are modulated at a specific frequency
by a mechanical input, such as changing the distance between two metal plates of
a capacitor, energy can be transferred efficiently from mechanical to electrical
domain. Using ultrasound as the mechanical drive at frequencies that are
typically used for medical imaging deep in the body, and with proper design of
an electrical circuit, parametric resonance is expected to result in high
efficiency wireless charging of medical implants. The same concept can be used
to harvest energy from vibrations in the environment in a large frequency range
as well as to detect minute acoustic signals for underwater SONAR type
applications. This project will thoroughly and systematically investigate the
potential of this novel approach and will lead to demonstrative high-performance
ultrasound based charging devices and sensors. In terms STEM education,
experiments will be designed to instrument riders of swings with motion sensors
to illustrate the parametric resonance concept as well as to demonstrate
wireless charging of devices with ultrasound in water tanks to high school
students. Video clips on experimental results of the project will also be
prepared and broadcast through Georgia Tech's public video channel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project will be achieved by a)
analyzing parametric resonances of coupled mechanical and electrical resonators,
including noise in the analysis for sensing applications while evaluating novel
approaches such as piezoelectric resonator based inductor implementation, b)
designing and implementing proof-of-concept devices to demonstrate broadband
energy harvesting from low frequency vibrations, and low noise acoustic,
vibration sensors based on the modeling framework and design guidelines
developed, and c) fabricating and carefully characterizing wireless ultrasonic
power transfer devices for biomedical implants in the 0.5-2MHz range using MEMS
fabrication techniques. The complementary expertise of the research team in
analytical modeling of nonlinear complex systems with deterministic and random
excitations, device design, fabrication and characterization for applications
covering low frequency vibrations for energy harvesting to medical ultrasound
applications in the MHz range will be leveraged to achieve the targeted
outcomes. The project will formulate new analytical and numerical models and
will develop a new experimental framework for designing next-generation
electromechanical sensors exploiting nonlinearity and resonance in different
ways which can lead to a paradigm shift in transduction which heretofore
depended predominantly on linear, passive properties of capacitive and
piezoelectric devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.