* 1936901
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Novel and Efficient Seabed Ring Anchor for Omnidirectional Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Charles Aubeny, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/29/2024
* USD 271,484.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
support a research team to develop models for the loading placed on multiline
ring anchors subjected to wind, waves and other forces. A Multiline Ring Anchor
(MRA) is a ring-shaped anchor designed to be deeply embedded in offshore soils
for the purposes of anchoring multiple floating platforms. The increase in
offshore development in the wind energy, wave energy and aquaculture sectors
requires multiple closely spaced nominally identical platforms that need this
type of omni-directional anchor. This novel configuration differs substantially
from the typical oil and gas installation and allows consideration of sharing
anchors among multiple platforms, thereby driving down capital, material,
fabrication and installation costs and duration significantly. Previous
simulation-based research conducted by the research team has shown that this
concept is feasible but that truly leveraging the advantages of multiline
anchoring will require novel anchor designs that can be installed quickly and
inexpensively and that also deliver omni-directional capacity and resistance to
cyclic loading. To achieve this, the research team will develop models for the
loading placed on the anchors from wind, waves and other forces; perform
reduced-scale centrifuge tests to provide data on the behavior of MRA systems
under these loads; and develop numerical models to assess the behavior of the
anchors under multiple loading scenarios. This research project includes a
collaboration with an industrial partner, Vryhof Anchors, to ensure that results
are driven by the needs of industry and can move rapidly to further industry-
driven technology development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to demonstrate
proof-of-concept for the MRA, a series of research tasks are planned that will
quantify stochastic and time-varying loads placed on the anchor by wind, wave
and aquaculture platforms. Additionally, the team will develop conceptual MRA
designs based on finite element and plastic limit analysis and assess the
suitability of the MRA for sand and clay conditions by a range of methods
including centrifuge testing. These tasks will enable the development of
fundamental understanding of the response of embedded anchors to cyclic and
directionally varying loading. The team will deliver a system evaluation for
realistic installations that will provide the impetus for further demonstration-
scale research into the MRA. Fundamental advances in understanding the dynamics
of interconnected offshore systems as well as the response of deeply embedded
anchors in different types of soil to complex loading form the core of the
intellectual merit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.