* 1936494
* Collaborative Research: Crosslayer Optimization of Energy and Cost through Unified Modeling of User Behavior and Storage in Multiple Buildings
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Cristinel Ababei, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 166,650.00

The building sector is the largest energy consumer in the world, and in the
United States it accounts for more than 40 percent of the total energy
consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. Therefore, it is economically,
socially, and environmentally important to reduce the energy consumption of this
sector. The goal of this collaborative proposal is to develop novel machine
learning based algorithms to address the problem of energy optimization at the
building and district levels. These algorithms are integrated within a
simulation framework that combines user behavior with the collaboration between
buildings equipped with photovoltaic arrays, energy storage systems, and smart
grid meters. The proposed research is expected to lay the foundation for robust
multi-objective optimization for next generation district level distribution
systems. The proposed research is closely integrated with a broad and diverse
education and outreach plan aimed at inspiring young women to pursue careers in
STEM through summer programs for middle school. Additionally, the project will
train the next generation of engineers and researchers by involving graduate and
undergraduate students through the proposed research as well as through classes
taught by the PIs encompassing the proposed research methodologies. Overall, the
outcomes of this proposal are expected to significantly advance the areas of
energy optimization, electric power systems, and smart grid design, as well as
to have a positive impact on the academic and industrial communities and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes and integrates, within the
same software tool, novel machine learning models for complex user behavior at
the individual building level, for energy load prediction and energy storage
systems scheduling at the district level, and for cost reduction via energy peak
spreading. These models are used to formulate and construct algorithmic
solutions based on reinforcement learning, recurrent and deep neural networks,
and deep reinforcement learning suitable for implementation in the future
generation Virtual Power Plants. The methodologies employed for energy reduction
and cost minimization include: 1) alter user behavior through personalized
recommendations regarding changes in the appliance states (e.g., heating and air
conditioning settings), 2) district-level scheduling of energy storage systems
among buildings equipped with photovoltaic arrays and smart grid meters, and 3)
building-level scheduling of energy consumption events for smart appliances
equipped with smart Internet-of-Things controllers to take benefit of different
energy prices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.