* 1936205
* RAPID: Leveraging an experimental drought on mature trees to study mechanisms of drought mortality and legacies with radiocarbon
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Mariah Carbone, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2022
* USD 197,752.00

Global environmental changes have increased the frequency and distribution of
tree mortality. As trees die, they release stored carbon dioxide to the
atmosphere, creating a positive feedback on global change and accelerating
warming. To predict the future state of forest health, a predictive
understanding of how and when trees die is needed, but there are still major
uncertainties regarding the physiology of tree mortality from drought.
Investigators in this project, will measure the age of stored carbon (sugars and
starches) in tree tissues as they die from a severe drought. These data will
reveal novel information about how the connections between different tree organs
fail under severe drought. The hypothesis to be tested is that trees which
experienced drier conditions ahead of the drought will have altered stores of
carbon, and die more quickly, revealing a way to predict future mortality risk
in forest trees. Results from this study will be shared with local communities
on the Colorado Plateau, including students from the Navajo Nation, to help
provide scientific knowledge about the changes that will likely take place in
regional forests under future drought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A decade of tree
physiological research has focused on the dichotomy among two posited modes of
tree mortality from drought, hydraulic failure and carbon starvation, with
limited exploration of the interaction between these two modes. This project
will leverage an experimental drought treatment being imposed upon pinyon pine
trees at the Sevilleta LTER, to measure the age of non-structural carbon (NSC;
sugars and starch) stored in and respired from multiple tree organs under lethal
drought. By measuring the age of NSC used in trees under drought, the impacts of
hydraulic stress upon the use and mobility of different-aged carbon pools will
be revealed. Specifically, the project will address the role of stored (deep
sapwood and roots vs. shallow sapwood and branches) and recent NSC under lethal
drought. This experiment also includes a 'legacy' treatment, which will upgrade
an existing 75% precipitation exclusion treatment to 90% exclusion, allowing
evaluation of how previous drought stress influences the physiological responses
of trees to subsequent drought. NSC being respired from branches and the trunk,
and NSC stored in branches, different sapwood depths, and coarse roots, will be
sampled in order to measure the age of the NSC with radiocarbon techniques. The
expectation is that drought trees use older NSC as the drought progresses, and
that trees experiencing transport or phloem limitation will show divergence of
NSC age in use among different tree organs as the connections between deep
storage and metabolically active tissues (leaves) are
disrupted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.