* 1936277
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Nanoscale Computing and Communication (ACM/IEEE NanoCom)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2019,09/30/2023
* Massimiliano Pierobon, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The ACM/IEEE NanoCom conference series aims at creating a trans-disciplinary
forum to foster and develop new communications and computing paradigms for
nanoscale machines. The conference has been held annually since 2014 and has
become the premier venue for fundamental advances in nanoscale computing and
communication networks. NanoCom highlights research potentials, stimulates novel
and breakthrough ideas, and identifies the short and medium-term exploitation
goals. The conference features distinguished keynote speakers, invited plenary
talks and an open call for papers presented both in oral and poster sessions.
Novel theoretical research results, implementation-based solutions, and position
and roadmap papers are welcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support 10
students in the United States to attend ACM/IEEE NanoCom 2019, which will be
held in Dublin, Ireland, on September 25-27, 2019. Attending such high-caliber
technical venue is extremely valuable for future researchers. This is a truly
inter-disciplinary field, which requires close interaction and frequent
discussions with experts that span different areas. ACM/IEEE NanoCom 2019 is
aimed at becoming the forum for such discussions to occur. Students will not
only be exposed to the state-of-the-art in the field, but they will also have
the opportunity to interact with peers from institutions worldwide, meet with
leading researchers, and take part in discussions that are likely to shape the
future of the field. The travel grants will target undergraduate and graduate
students who will substantially benefit from attending this conference but have
limited travel funds. In particular, one quarter of the available awards will be
reserved to first-time attendees to NanoCom who do not have a paper accepted to
the conference, with priority to undergraduate and first-year graduate students.
Another quarter of the available awards will be reserved for under-represented
groups (women, minorities and people with disabilities), with or without an
accepted paper. For the remaining half of the available awards (not reserved for
the aforementioned categories), higher priority will be given to female students
as well as those from underrepresented minority-serving institutions that are
not traditionally represented in the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.