* 1936155
* RI: Small: Print and Probability - A Statistical Approach to Analysis of Clandestine Publication
* CSE,IIS
* 04/17/2019,02/28/2023
* Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2023
* USD 499,770.00

This Print and Probability project develops novel machine learning and computer
vision techniques to infer thousands of book and pamphlet printers whose
identities have eluded scholars for roughly 500 years. Before the modern era,
the book trade was often dangerous and secretive. For fear of persecution and
punishment, printers between 1473-1800 declined to attach their names to about a
quarter of all known books and pamphlets. However, now that over 130,000 books
have been digitized by the Early English Books Online (EEBO) project, defects
and variations in the printing tools of this era may hold the key to identifying
these printers. Once an individual piece of metal type is damaged, it creates
unique stamps. Since typesets belonged to specific printers, impressions of
damaged type can thus serve as the fingerprints to identify the printers of tens
of thousands of clandestine publications. The Print and Probability project
automatically detects and tracks these unique pieces of damaged type in order to
uncover new information about the history of books. The methods developed in
this project could be generalizable to other important tasks and domains - for
example, digital forensics and authorship attribution. In addition, the Print
and Probability project will train students in a multidisciplinary way, engaging
them in collaboration across multiple fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing
new techniques for visual anomaly detection, the Print and Probability project
detects damaged letterforms that create consistent aberrations. Based on these
damaged type extractions, the project develops probabilistic models of both
printer and damaged letter form identifications that allow direct inference of
printers at scale. This framework also incorporates other sources of evidence
into the identification model - most significantly, the spelling, punctuation,
and spacing habits of individual press-house compositors, whose distinctive
practices lend themselves to clustering and automatic attributions across all
pages of text in the collection. Integrating a new method for automatic
compositor attribution, this project develops a statistical model for printer
identification that leverages the same sources of evidence compiled manually by
scholars of rare books, but at a scale and speed never before
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.