* 1936926
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Innovative Materials and Processes for Antimicrobial Control Technologies (IMPACT)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Matthew Libera, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Proposal Number: 1936926&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning Grant: Engineering
Research Center for Innovative Materials and Processes for Antimicrobial Control
Technologies (IMPACT) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Part 1: Planning
activities are being pursued by this cross-institutional team to develop the
Engineering Research Center for Innovative Materials and Processes for
Antimicrobial Control Technologies (ERC-IMPACT). The mission of IMPACT is to
advance antimicrobial control technologies through innovations in science,
engineering, and education. It is motivated by the rapid increase in
antimicrobial resistant infections, which have become a major challenge to human
health. It is predicted that superbug infections will cause more deaths than all
cancers combined by 2050 if no effective controls are found. Microbes can
survive the attack of antimicrobials either through genetic elements (i.e.
superbugs) or by forming surface-attached biofilms. Addressing the grand
challenge of antimicrobial-resistant infection requires major collaborative
efforts of convergent research to understand the mechanism of antimicrobial
resistance, engineer more effective biomaterials and medical devices, and
develop better regulatory guidelines to ensure the safety of medical implants.
This multidisciplinary team will take the ERC planning opportunity to engage
stakeholders and prioritize the activities in research, education, industrial
collaboration, and outreach to build a solid foundation for a competitive ERC
application. The planning grant will enable team-building and structuring of
IMPACT that will subsequently lead to transformative broader impacts on
healthcare and biosecurity through innovation in microbial control technologies
and processes; development of cross-disciplinary expertise and workforce;
building academia-industry partnerships with a culture that encourages diversity
and inclusion; strategic engagement with national and global partners; and a
sustainable innovation ecosystem that can attract funding and resources for a
successful future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: The Engineering Research Center
for Innovative Materials and Processes for Antimicrobial Control Technologies
(ERC-IMPACT) will lead breakthroughs in science and technology to address the
grand challenge of antimicrobial resistant infections. Such infections come both
from mechanisms of natural selection and from biofilm formation. In particular,
the design of medical devices and biomaterials has to this point focused almost
exclusively on the main function of the device itself and safety to the host,
i.e., healing. The competing microbial factors from both pathogens and the host
microbiome are largely unexplored. Thus, the material properties that not only
promote healing but also resist infection over time are not well understood.
Similarly, there is a lack of effective biofilm control strategies. Currently
available antimicrobials were discovered using drug screening platforms that
only target the growth of planktonic (free-swimming) microbial cells. With the
conventional antimicrobials being ineffective, new treatment methods are
urgently needed, particularly in the context of tissue-contacting
biomaterials/devices that are so critical to human health. ERC-IMPACT will
bridge knowledge gaps and provide solutions based on rational design to address
the grand challenge of antimicrobial resistance and its role in device-
associated infections. ERC-IMPACT will: (1) forge convergent research to
understand and control the complex interactions between different microbial
species, host cells, and implanted biomaterials; (2) engineer new materials and
devices to actively sense and respond to microbial infections; and (3) develop
new control methods that do not require conventional antimicrobials or minimize
the use through synergistic activities. To accelerate the evolution of the
envisioned ERC, the team will engage with stakeholders in academia (university
partners including minority-serving institutions), industry (small and large-
scale companies, start-ups, research and development facilities), technology
translation (patents, manufacturing, scalability, entrepreneurship), education
(graduate, undergraduate, local schools, online learning), professionals
(postdocs, veterans), and the broader community. The planning team will develop
a strategic partnership that encompasses the four components central to the ERC
program model - fundamental research, workforce development; diversity and
inclusion; and innovation. The state-of-the-art ERC IMPACT center will build
long-term engagement plans for stakeholders to fulfill its mission of innovation
and to serve the community for better human health and a prosperous
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.