* 1936096
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Evidence-Informed Promotion of Inclusive Climate (EPIC) at IUPUI
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Kathy Johnson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,999.00

The IUPUI ADVANCE Adaptation project will improve institutional climate and
promote inclusive leadership practices to address inequities in the
representation, retention, and advancement of women, particularly women of
color, in the STEM faculty. IUPUI is an urban, public, research university in
Indianapolis. The Evidence-informed Promotion of Inclusive Climate (EPIC)
project will adapt evidence-informed equity practices to the unique context of
the IUPUI campus. The two project goals are: to develop strong, equity-minded
leaders to foster authentically inclusive environments; and to transform
department processes and practices to reduce inequities and improve climate. In
order to accomplish these goals, the project team will implement various
strategies including: quarterly half-day workshops that will become a STEM
leadership learning community; departmental equity profiles based on
quantitative and qualitative data and processes and practices to inform
departmental enhancement activities; and accountability structures and practices
to ensure that new practices addressing gender equity are implemented
successfully and that positive change is sustained.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project EPIC at IUPUI strategically integrates best
practices in a manner that is sensitive to the needs of the IUPUI campus. The
leadership training builds on the work of the University of Washington, which
used quarterly leadership workshops to gather department chairs across the
campus to discuss pertinent issues, capitalizing on the expertise of many
individuals across the campus and providing a venue for the cross-pollination of
ideas among colleagues in similar posts. This model will be expanded to include
formal and informal leaders at multiple levels. The departmental enhancement
activities build on the work of University of Colorado Boulder, where faculty
work on departmental-specific challenges as a community of practice. The IUPUI
project will test existing ADVANCE models in a novel context. Specifically,
IUPUI is a core campus of Indiana University (IU), and the project team will
share emerging best practices with the seven IU campuses, including the Schools
of Medicine. IUPUI is also engaged in the NSF INCLUDES project called ASPIRE
which has a goal of diversifying STEM faculty and promoting inclusive teaching
practices. The projects are expected to be complementary for IUPUI but also
provide an avenue for sharing project results with other institutions
participating in the NSF INCLUDES community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institution of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.