* 1936319
* Antimicrobial Resistance Genes in the Atmosphere: Emissions and Exposure
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Amy Pruden, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 337,999.00

Antibiotics are medicines used to treat bacterial diseases such as strep throat,
pneumonia, and urinary tract infections. Overuse of antibiotics has led to an
increase in bacteria that are resistant, meaning that the medicines are no
longer effective. Antibiotic resistance is considered one of the largest public
health challenges of our time. In the US, at least 2 million people become sick
with antibiotic-resistant infections and 23,000 people die from them each year.
The spread of antibiotic-resistant bacteria and their genes in soil and water is
thought to contribute to the problem. Their presence in the atmosphere is a
concern because wind can help them spread long distances. The first aim of this
project is to determine how many antibiotic-resistant bacteria and their genes
are present in the air in urban and rural areas. The second aim is to measure
how they are released into the atmosphere from sewage treatment plants and
farms. The final aim is to model how far they can travel through the air.
Successful completion of this research will allow us to assess the importance of
inhalation of bacteria and their genes as a transport pathway compared to
contacting them through water and soil. This information can be used to develop
policies and guidelines to minimize further spread of antibiotic resistance and
protect public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spread of antimicrobial
resistance genes (ARGs) in the environment is likely to play a role in
transmission of resistance to humans. Most studies of ARGs in the environment
have focused on water and soil, but ARGs in air are especially concerning
because of their potential for long-distance transport. The overall goal of this
project is to advance fundamental understanding about the sources, transport,
and fate of ARGs in the atmosphere. Specific objectives are to: (1) characterize
ARG concentrations and profiles in air, water, and soil samples representing
background, urban, and rural settings; (2) quantify ARG emission rates to the
atmosphere from wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) and animal feeding
operations; and (3) estimate the significance of inhalation exposure to ARGs.
This research employs an interdisciplinary approach that leverages state-of-the-
science methods in air quality engineering, microbiology, and aerosol science.
Through two field studies, we will obtain measurements of ARGs and other markers
of antimicrobial resistance in urban and rural areas, with a focus on WWTPs and
farms. Results will include size-resolved concentrations and profiles of ARGs in
air and how they relate to potential sources. We will also use data from the
field studies to calculate emission rates of ARGs from WWTPs and farms via an
inverse dispersion modeling approach and to assess the relative contribution of
air, water, and soil to total exposure to ARGs. New knowledge about markers of
antimicrobial resistance in air will be generated, including size-resolved
concentrations and abundances of specific ARGs and bacteria in air; metagenomic
profiles of resistomes in air, water, and soil; emission rates and emission
factors for ARGs from WWTPs and animal feeding operations; and estimates of
inhalation exposure to ARGs. This research will address major gaps in our
understanding of antimicrobial resistance in air by producing critical new
information about the prevalence of ARGs in the atmosphere, the magnitude of
exposure, and their potential for long-distance transport. By advancing
knowledge about ARGs in air, results will provide a more complete picture of
ARGs in the environment to help reduce their spread and manage
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.