* 1936586
* CCSS: Discovery of Individualized Disease Features for Personalized Health Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Behnaz Ghoraani, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 322,347.00

Parkinson's disease (PD) affects approximately six million people globally,
which is predicted to double by 2040. Therapeutic interventions such as
medication and Deep Brain Stimulation need to be progressively adjusted, from
three times daily in early stages to as often as every two hours in advance
cases. These therapeutic adjustments are based on the patients' response-to-
medication, which is gathered from patient interviews. However, the patient
interview can be unreliable and suffer from recall bias, resulting in over- or
under-treatment of the patients. Therefore, this project proposes to develop
methodologies and algorithms to be used along with wearable sensors (battery-
powered inertial measurement units) to monitor the response-to-medication of
Parkinson's disease patients in their natural environment. This proposal is a
significant contribution to Precision Medicine national efforts. Success of this
project may result in fundamentally new individualized therapy adjustment
strategies, thereby providing considerable improvement in both healthcare
delivery and quality of life for the millions of patients afflicted by PD. In
addition, an integrated education and outreach program is designed to promote
the research-informed education, dissemination, and engagement activities at the
Florida Atlantic University, a Hispanic-serving Institute, to increase a
pipeline of underrepresented minority students in electrical and computer
engineering and K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops novel
methodologies and algorithms to translate the wearable sensors data into
clinically actionable information about the response-to-medication of
Parkinson's disease patients enabling personalized therapeutic adjustments
outside hospital settings. The proposed approach is a major departure from the
current efforts as it will develop an integrated sensing and computational
framework to explore raw sensor data for identifying patient-specific disease
features. The proposed framework uses novel algorithms, combined with wearable
sensors, to update the disease features according to each patient's disease
severity as the patient is being monitored. The transformative design addresses
current technical obstacles. First, the project develops an innovative sensing
and computation framework to explore the multiset fused raw sensor data for
individualized disease features that could significantly improve response-to-
medication detection accuracy. This new approach integrates tensor decomposition
to explore raw, multiset sensor data for data-driven disease features and
reinforcement learning to derive decisions on when to update the individualized
disease features. Second, the project will extend the developed innovative
sensing and computation framework to support the implementation of the
algorithms with battery-powered wearable sensors. The new framework is based on
a distributed design (to off-load computationally expensive components of the
algorithms to a server) and a lightweight architecture (to reduce on-device
computation load) and enables the wearable sensor device to transmit the raw
sensors' data to a server only when the disease features are being updated. The
key transformative aspect of the proposed research is the advancement of data
analysis tools for personalized monitoring of PD patients while translating the
research into a clinically applicable system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.