* 1936575
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Sciences Institutes Diversity Initiative
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* David Banks, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2022
* USD 53,504.00

Cultivating diversity and broadening participation of historically
underrepresented groups in the mathematical sciences are national goals that are
essential components of the innovation engine that drives the nation?s economy.
It is a complex problem to solve, and doing so requires a concerted effort. The
Mathematical Sciences Institutes Diversity Initiative (MSIDI) is an ongoing
collaboration among the NSF-funded mathematical sciences research institutes
that aims to address this issue with a series of events targeting members of
historically underrepresented groups in the mathematical sciences, including
women of all ethnicities. There is no ?one size fits all? approach to increasing
participation from underrepresented groups. In this specific project, MSIDI
partners with a team of mathematicians from underrepresented groups to enhance
several conferences and workshops that aim to address this underrepresentation.
These special conferences and workshops are complementary to the core activities
of the mathematical sciences research institutes and are important for the goal
of increasing participation in key activities that are integral to a career in
the mathematical sciences, as well as to core programs at the associated
research institutes. Under this project, MSIDI will organize the following
events. The Modern Mathematics Workshop will be a pre-conference event at SACNAS
in Fall 2020 and planning will be led by the Institute for Computational and
Experimental Research in Mathematics (ICERM). The Blackwell-Tapia Conference
will be in Durham, NC in Fall 2020 and planning will be led by the Statistical
and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute (SAMSI). The Latinx in the
Mathematical Sciences Conference will be in Los Angeles, CA in Spring 2021 and
planning will be led by the Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM).
There will be another Modern Mathematics Workshop at SACNAS in Fall 2021and
planning will be led by the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (MSRI). And
Spring Opportunities will be in Princeton, NJ in Spring 2022 and planning will
be led by the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS). Details about these events can
be found at https://mathinstitutes.org/diversity/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern
Mathematics Workshops focus on contemporary research in mathematics and take
place in conjunction with the national meeting of the Society for the
Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS). These
workshops are for mathematicians at all levels and include some special
programming for undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers.
The Blackwell-Tapia Conference includes a mix of activities designed to inform
the next generation of mathematicians about career opportunities in the
mathematical sciences and provide a chance for them to network with mathematical
scientists who play a leadership role in their communities. During this
conference the prestigious Blackwell-Tapia Prize is awarded. This prize
recognizes a mathematician who has contributed significantly to research and to
addressing the problem of underrepresentation of minorities in the mathematical
sciences. The Latinx in the Mathematical Sciences Conference showcases the
research contributions and achievements of Latinx mathematicians and includes
activities for high school students, undergraduates, graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers, and faculty. The Spring Opportunities Workshop allows
attendees to explore what it takes to thrive in a variety of mathematical
careers. Collectively, the goals of these MSIDI activities are to recognize and
showcase the research of mathematicians from underrepresented minority groups;
disseminate successful efforts to address underrepresentation; inform students
and early career mathematicians about career opportunities in the mathematical
sciences; build a community around shared interests related to the problem of
underrepresentation; and provide networking and development opportunities for
current and future mathematicians at all points in the career
trajectory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.