* 1936152
* SBIR Phase I:  ThermaSat - A Solar Thermal CubeSat Propulsion System
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Troy Howe, Howe Industries LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2020
* USD 249,966.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
Project addresses the need for small, low-cost satellites in space to have on-
board propulsion capabilities. The advent of small satellites is opening space
to entrepreneurs and researchers to improve telecommunications, monitor climate
patterns, and conduct other activities. Unfortunately, many of these small
satellites have no method of maneuvering in space, and so their capabilities are
limited. Satellite propulsion allows for small satellites to achieve three major
goals. First, they can reach their preferred orbit without diverting the
launching spacecraft. Second, they can make minor adjustments to their orbits
for many years, ensuring they do not re-enter the atmosphere prematurely. And
third, at the end of the mission they can de-orbit themselves and avoid becoming
dangerous space debris. An onboard propulsion system will be necessary for the
satellite infrastructure of the future. By developing this technology now, we
can overcome a major obstacle in space exploration and assist humanity in
expanding to the stars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I Project is to develop a green, inexpensive, and
effective small satellite propulsion system. Equipping CubeSats and other small
spacecraft with onboard propulsion will drastically improve their technological
capabilities and ensure they deploy, function, and de-orbit safely. The system
functions by selectively filtering sunlight to heat water to high temperatures
by limiting radiative heat emissions. The high-temperature steam is exhausted
through a nozzle and can control the satellite with high efficiency. The major
goal of this effort will be to experimentally and computationally model optical
system performance. Other goals will be to validate that the thermal and
structural systems are suitable for ground launch and operation in
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.