* 1936024
* Causes and consequences of regulatory network rewiring under extreme environmental selection
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Amy Schmid, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

This project seeks to understand how gene circuits evolve under extreme
conditions. Microorganisms that live in extreme environments, called
extremophiles, are remarkable examples of life's resilience, thriving in hot
springs at boiling temperatures, in brine lakes saturated with salt, and in
deserts once thought to be sterile. This research uses halophiles, extremophiles
that live in high salt, as a test system to map complex gene circuits that
enable survival. Circuit maps are compared across halophile species resistant to
different levels of salt and stress to understand how extreme conditions rewire
gene circuits, and how rewiring enables adaptation in the face of stress. The
high salt extremophiles of interest are members of the domain of life Archaea.
Because the molecules that make up gene circuits in archaea resemble those of
other domains of life, this research has the potential to reveal general
principles of gene circuit evolution across the tree of life. The education plan
involves collaborating with students to build solutions for analysis and
visualization of archaeal data. The PI and her group mentor undergraduates
through the summer Duke Data+ program to create interactive web-accessible tools
for data analysis and visualization. Teams of Duke students contribute directly
to the research by developing these tools. The resultant graphical user
interface (GUI) serve as an entry point for experimental biologists into
computational biology in archaea, reducing the barrier for otherwise
intimidating genome-scale analyses. Duke Masters in Data Science (MIDS) students
and graduate students from the PI's lab co-mentor the Data+ team and provide
support for these tools throughout the academic year. This vertically integrated
mentorship structure provides critical training in research mentorship, team
project management, and communication skills. The team-based learning approach
encourages recruitment and retention of underrepresented groups in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to understand how
extreme environments select for regulatory network architecture and function.
Transcription regulatory networks (TRNs) vary gene expression dynamically in
response to stress. Such expression adapts physiology to improve fitness in the
short term and leads to phenotypic diversity over evolutionary time scales.
However, the selective forces causing such rewiring of gene circuits, and
whether such rewiring is adaptive, remain unclear. In recent work on halophiles,
hypersaline-adapted representatives of the archaeal domain of life, the PI
discovered archaeal TRNs that regulate critical cellular decisions such as
nutrient use and damage repair. Halophiles provide a unique model for
investigating the evolution of TRNs given their experimental tractability in the
lab and adaptability during continual exposure to multiple extreme conditions in
the natural environment. Previous research compared the architecture and dynamic
function of TRNs across related species of halophiles. More recent research has
led to the hypothesis that extreme conditions select for more highly
interconnected TRNs, enabling rapid physiological adjustment in response to
variable environments. To test this hypothesis, the research: (a) uses an
integrated experimental and computational systems biology approach pioneered in
the PI's lab to map and compare small-scale TRNs across four species of
halophiles; (b) jointly infers global TRNs across species using multi-task
machine learning to ctract-Sompare genome-scale networks; and (c) forces TRN
rewiring with in-lab evolution experiments. This approach combines genetics,
genomics, quantitative phenotyping, and statistical modeling, yielding rapid and
unprecedented insight into the dynamic function of archaeal regulatory networks
and their impact on cell physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.