* 1936696
* Single Molecule Studies of Topologically Complex Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Patrick Doyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 366,575.00

The majority of materials used in society are based on advances in the 20th
century related to linear polymers. The next century will take advantage of
materials which are composed of molecules with more complex geometries, such as
rings or "knitted" collections of rings. Watching single molecules using
advanced microscopes and cameras allows one to provide deep insights in the
molecular origins of material properties and in turn design more functional
materials. Therefore, the major aim of this project is to use DNA as a model
system to study ring-like polymers and collections of ring polymers joined into
a chainmail-like geometry. The project will also encompass significant
educational activities, including developing demonstration materials and
exercises to introduce young students to concepts of polymer topology, training
students in advanced manufacturing techniques, and structured mentoring of
under-represented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single molecule studies of
linear DNA molecules have provided rich insights in the fields of polymer
physics, soft matter, and rheology. There is an emerging interest in polymers
with more complex topologies which can translate to new or enhanced material
properties. This project will study the polymer dynamics and rheology of
topologically complex polymers, combining single molecule DNA experiments with
simulations and theory. The PI plans to first start with studies of single
circular polymers and then move on to ring assemblies, namely catenated DNA ring
net-works in kinetoplasts. The project has three specific objectives: (i) to
understand the role of self-entanglement in ring polymers, (ii) to study the
equilibrium dynamics of kinetoplasts in the con-text of a model two-dimensional
polymer system, and (iii) to study the compression and stretching of
kinetoplasts in microfluidic devices. An important feature of this work is to
establish kinetoplasts as a two-dimensional polymer system for single molecule
polymer rheology studies, akin to what has been done with great success for over
two decades with linear DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.