* 1936950
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Convergence Research to Meet Ocean Decision Challenges
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Kevin St. Martin, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 01/31/2021
* USD 987,955.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence
Accelerator Phase I project will provide the foundation for a suite of forward-
looking decision-making tools for fisheries. This project will develop an Open
Knowledge Network (OKN) to advance the transformation from ocean data to ocean
information to ocean knowledge, with the goal of producing outcomes that will
improve ocean resource decision making and business planning in the face of
rapidly changing ocean conditions. Fisheries in the Northeast contributed $7
billion to the regional economy and provided 172,000 jobs in 2016, as well as
contributing to the social fabric of coastal communities. This productivity is
threatened by the rapid changes underway in the northwest Atlantic ecosystem.
This project will produce tangible products that can be used by individuals,
businesses, and communities to make better-informed decisions about fisheries
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Fisheries OKN will support
transformative advances in fisheries decision making by integrating data across
atmospheric, oceanic, ecosystem, and human dimensions to produce forecasts and
conduct scenario testing that can inform near term tactical decisions, medium
term strategies, and long-term planning. The project will support a
transformation from a reliance on historical observations to forward-looking
decision making that considers the rapid changes ecosystems are currently
experiencing. The effort relies on data and insights from across the disciplines
of oceanography, ecosystem science, climate science, social sciences, and
computer science integrated to develop innovative tools and advance knowledge.
This effort also requires deep engagement with a range of decision makers
including fisheries managers and advisors, fishing industry, and the seafood
supply chain to understand their needs and to deliver actionable information.
This project seeks to produce fundamental new understanding of how processes in
ecosystems, climate and human systems interact. It will also develop new
statistical and computational approaches to enhance the impact of publicly-
available ecosystem and environmental data on management and business decisions.
During Phase I, this project will focus on three areas: 1) convergence team
building and integration across disciplines, 2) designing the data
infrastructure for the fisheries OKN, and 3) evaluating convergence
opportunities in core application areas. This research will add insights to
important questions about how individuals and groups of humans transform their
decision making in the face of environmental and ecosystem changes, and will
develop understanding of the kinds of data, information products, and processes
that enable decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.