* 1936533
* Geotechnical Engineering Faculty Teaching Strategies and Resources Workshop; Minneapolis, Minnesota; 25 February 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Patricia Gallagher, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 59,812.00

This award will fund a Teaching Strategies and Resources Workshop for
geotechnical engineering faculty to be held in conjunction with the 2020 Geo-
Congress in Minneapolis, Minnesota. The focus of the workshop will be specific
to geotechnical engineering education and the courses that most geotechnical
engineering faculty teach. The purpose is to help geotechnical faculty become
more effective and efficient educators, with the ultimate goal of improving
student learning. Recent research has shown that implementing active (or
student-centered) learning techniques in the classroom increases student
motivation, student achievement, and overall satisfaction with the learning
experience in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) courses
and may lead to increased retention of students, particularly women and
underrepresented minorities. As civil engineering is a multidisciplinary subject
at the intersection of science, math, communication, and leadership, educational
outcomes include fundamental knowledge as well as professional ("soft" or
"power") skills. Using active learning techniques in the classroom can enhance
students' learning outcomes for technical skills while fostering critical
thinking and professional skills such as leadership, teamwork, and effective
communication. Active learning classrooms may also encourage collaborative and
inclusive environments that enable students to build social support.
Geotechnical engineering is a small subfield within the larger field of civil
engineering. A perceived barrier for faculty to implement student-centered
learning techniques in geotechnical courses is the time and effort required to
develop new materials. As a highly specific discipline, it can be difficult to
find active learning resources to incorporate into existing courses. This
workshop will introduce faculty to existing geotechnically-focused active
learning materials and resources. This project serves the national interest by
better preparing the next generation of geotechnical engineers. In addition, it
will advance the field of engineering education by disseminating evidence-based
teaching practices to geotechnical engineering faculty. Implementing these
practices into geotechnical engineering has the potential to improve the overall
quality of geotechnical engineering education and thereby increase participation
in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Teaching Strategies and
Resources Workshop is to help geotechnical faculty at all stages become more
effective and efficient teachers, so they can become better educators and
improve student learning while maintaining high research productivity. Many
faculty members hesitate to employ new teaching strategies due to the perceived
effort required to implement them. The targeted outcome of the workshop is to
help faculty teach better and teach "smarter" by incorporating existing
evidence-based teaching materials and resources into their classes. The bulk of
this workshop will concentrate on providing specific examples, developing new
instructional materials, sharing geotechnical resources, networking, and
discussing challenges unique to geotechnical education. Materials and
presentations will be "take and go" so participants leave the workshop with
examples and copies of usable materials. In addition, this workshop will help
faculty better develop and implement outreach and education plans in research
proposals. This aspect of the workshop supports the goal of building a
foundation for a lifetime of integrated contributions to research and education.
The intellectual merit of the workshop is to provide resources for geotechnical
engineering faculty to become better, more effective educators with the ultimate
goal of improving student learning. Additionally, the workshop will provide
strategies for creating meaningful and achievable outreach and education plans
for research proposals that have the potential to increase interest and improve
student learning in the field. There are several broader impacts of the
workshop. Most importantly, implementing evidence-based teaching techniques into
geotechnical engineering has the potential to improve the overall quality of
geotechnical engineering education and thereby increase participation in the
field. Second, participants will leave the workshop with examples of materials
that have already been prepared and are available for use in existing classes.
Having these materials will enable faculty to immediately implement new
activities with little additional preparation. Finally, an exam database will be
developed and made available to workshop participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.