* 1936375
* QII-TAQS: A Chip-Scale Spin-Photon Memory Interface with Coherence Exceeding One Second
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,646,816.00

Quantum information processing provides a secure unbreakable network protected
by the physical laws of quantum mechanics. Quantum key distribution, for
example, provides fundamentally secure photon communication channels through the
no-cloning theorem and the one-time key pad between the sender and receiver,
wherein the eavesdropper in the communication channel can be immediately
detected. The general figures-of-merit in an optical quantum network are the
secure key rate (in single-photon qubits per second) and the channel physical
distance (up to ~ 100 km as the record). Various protocols in quantum key
distribution, such as through high-dimensional entanglement and chip-scale
photonic integration, have further increased the secure key rate. Improving the
qubit physical transmission distance, however, requires the development of a
scalable, long-coherence, and high-fidelity quantum memory for the quantum
network. Furthermore, a quantum memory module, in a two-node configuration, can
provide the long-awaited scientific milestone of a quantum repeater -- scaling
the quantum network distance to metropolitan and even continental scales. This
QII-TAQS project aims to develop a chip-scale silicon qubit memory based on the
nuclear spin-photon interactions of deep-donor selenium-77 in an ultrapure
silicon-28 background. The project is enabled by recent discovery of a hyperfine
nuclear transition of 77Se+ that is remarkably optically accessible (previously
thought to be forbidden from effective mass theory). Long coherence time of the
nuclear spin qubit up to a second has recently been reported. With the hyperfine
spin structure addressable by microwave modulation, on-demand photon storage and
dynamical improvement of the storage can even be possible. This scientific
effort brings a quantum network towards realization, supported in a silicon-
based architecture for quantum information processing. Complementing the
scientific tasks, the project has a broader educational effort that includes
diversity outreach, high-school science outreach, and hands-on graduate and
undergraduate pedagogical modules. The project involves collaborative work with
NIST and Argonne National Laboratory, providing a fertile training ground for
the cross-disciplinary training of PhD students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to advance the deep-donor 77Se+ in an ultrapure enriched silicon-28
bath, with optical-microwave simultaneous control and dephasing times T2 up to a
second, in a chip-scalable quantum memory interface. Firstly, the research team
seeks to implement the 28Si:77Se+ system in a photonic crystal microcavity,
significantly improving the radiative efficiency and photon extraction in the
nuclear spin- photon interaction. The team will examine the cavity Purcell
enhancement of radiative lifetimes, as well as seek to understand the non-
radiative mechanisms along with the zero-photon line bounds. Secondly, they will
examine the coherence lifetimes of the 28Si:77Se+ qubit through spectroscopic
methods. This involves spin-relaxation (T1) protocols, the inhomogeneous
coherence times (T2 and T2*), as well as qubit instantaneous diffusion. Thirdly,
they propose to implement the 28Si:77Se+ hyperfine spin-photon interface as a
quantum memory on the quantum node architecture. This scalable quantum memory
module enables a transformative platform in optically-accessible long nuclear
spin coherence, through a silicon quantum information processing architecture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Quantum Leap Big
Idea Program and the Division of Electrical, Communication, and Cyber Systems in
the Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.