* 1936440
* EAGER:Collaborative Research:Strategies for developing special education preservice teacher competencies in integrated mathematics+computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,936.00

This project brings computer science (CS) and computational thinking (CT)
content to students with disabilities. Approximately 6.7 million students with
disabilities receive special education services in US public schools. In order
to broaden participation their in computing, Michigan State University will
develop and implement CS/CT content within special education teacher preparation
to make CS/CT sustainable and integral parts of schooling. The project will work
with special education, preservice teachers so all learners have opportunities
to learn CS/CT ideas and apply CS/CT practices from an early age, as they do for
mathematics. This project proposes to explore ways to embed CS/CT into an
existing special education mathematics methods course and examine whether and
how it develops preservice teacher competencies in
CS/CT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Revise a special education mathematics methods
course around CS/CT to prepare preservice teachers to embed computational ideas
into their day-to-day classroom activities and to show how instructional
approaches and frameworks, such as Universal Design for Learning (UDL) can be
used to provide access for students with disabilities within integrated CS/CT
lessons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Examine whether and how CT-integrated
coursework influences special education preservice teachers' knowledge, skills,
and attitudes towards embedding CS/CT in their
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given that large number of course requirements
for teacher education students to obtain licensure makes it unrealistic to add
new curricula to teacher preparation, this research will inform how teacher
educators could embed computational skills within existing coursework. The CS/CT
integrated materials, activities, and assessments would be open-source and
disseminated to allow others to adapt them to meet their own teacher education
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.