* 1936733
* RUI: Role of Mechanical Forces Axial Torsion and Flexure in Chick Embryos
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ashok Ramasubramanian, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2024
* USD 380,978.00

The developing chick embryo undergoes a series of complex shape changes called
morphogenesis. Although the genetic and molecular aspects of morphogenesis are
well-studied, scant attention is paid to the mechanical aspects. In particular,
the driving forces behind the dramatic shape changes during embryo development
are poorly understood. This project considers two often-overlooked, but
critically important shape changes that occur during early embryo development:
(1) body flexion, which curves the initially straight embryonic body axis and
(2) body torsion, which rotates it. Flexion and torsion are necessary for proper
development of important organs such as the heart. The forces driving flexion
and torsion are not currently known and understanding them is the goal of this
project. This research will train numerous undergraduate students in all aspects
of research. Science outreach, particularly to under-represented minorities, is
another critical aspect of this project. It includes a formal collaboration with
Union College?s Science and Technology Entry Program, which introduces
underrepresented minority and economically disadvantaged students in grades 7-12
to STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combined experimental and computational
approach is used to determine the forces driving flexion and torsion. The chick
embryo is used as the experimental model. Light microscopy and optical coherence
tomography will be used to qualitatively and quantitatively characterize flexion
and torsion in the developmental stages under consideration. Atomic force
microscopy will be used to probe the mechanical environment of the regions
undergoing flexion and torsion. And chemical and biomechanical perturbations
will be used to study these processes further. The finite element method will be
used to develop the computational model which will be validated by comparing
experimental and model-predicted global and local shape changes. The validated
model will be used for hypothesis testing to determine the forces driving
flexion and torsion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.