* 1936857
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): AI-Based Decision Support for Linking Workers with Future Jobs and for Planning Work Transition and Career Pathway
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Nihar Mahapatra, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2021
* USD 483,686.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project relate
to the ways in which it will help American workers, employers, and the overall
economy face the impact of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and related automation
technologies on the future of work. It is estimated that by 2030 about 14% of
the global workforce may need to change occupational categories as the world of
work is disrupted by technological advances. Many current workers and those
entering the workforce lack skills that in-demand jobs and jobs of the future
require. Addressing this challenge requires a holistic understanding of
occupational categories and characteristics, their interrelationships and
changes over time, worker characteristics, and how to connect workers to future
jobs and help them transition from one type of work to another and plan their
career pathway. Our project involves convergent research in AI, data science,
and optimization, industrial and organizational psychology - specifically,
person-job fit, person-environment fit, employee selection and bias, and human
resources - specifically, workforce training and career planning. It will
leverage partnerships with a diversity of stakeholders: government
organizations, academia, industry, civilian, and military - to inform our
research and define objectives and deliverables that are suitable for
transitioning to practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator
Phase I project incorporates three elements to transform decision support for
linking workers with future jobs and for job transition, training, and career
planning. First, we propose a rich, holistic, fine-grained view of worker
characteristics and job, occupation, and cross-occupation characteristics
suitable for processing by data-driven AI systems. Second, we capture
interrelationships between different types of jobs as tasks and other
characteristics can overlap or be closely related. Third, we propose a data-
driven detailed model created in the form of an occupation knowledge graph to
provide AI-based decision support in career transitions and planning, by
capturing the temporal changes in jobs and their characteristics. We utilize
various natural language processing, deep learning, information extraction, and
optimization methods to develop these elements. The anticipated results will
yield a knowledge graph with a rich semantic understanding of the relationship
between concepts associated with different occupations, a model to assist
organizations in identifying workers for particular roles, positions, and work
contexts, and a career planning toolkit. These all tie into the occupational
challenges that the current and future workforce faces with advances in AI and
related technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.