* 1936527
* Spatially and Spectrally Resolved Semiconductor Single Crystal Arrays for Wafer-Scale Integrated Optoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Dali Sun, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/29/2024
* USD 495,284.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid metal halides are a remarkable class of ionic
semiconductors with great promise for device applications. Their optical
properties can be chemically controlled and they can form single crystals at low
temperatures. Single crystals are a highly ordered form of condensed matter and
enable high performance electronics and photonics. The aim of this project is to
fabricate low-cost, high performance printed devices based on high-quality
single crystals and single crystal microarrays of perovskites. The project will
focus on direct printing of semiconductor single crystal pixels with chemically-
tuned spectral properties on device-ready wafers. The PI will use a co-design
strategy to simultaneously tackle single crystal growth and device integration.
Direct writing of single crystal transistor and photodetector arrays on wafers
will be a crucial step toward next-generation optoelectronic devices and
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary
project seeks to advance the synthesis, processing, and device integration of
hybrid metal halide (HMH) semiconductor materials by enabling the direct ink-
based growth of single crystal-based optoelectronic devices and arrays thereof.
The salt-like nature of HMH materials makes them a unique class of
semiconductors with chemical diversity on par with organic semiconductors,
crystalline order on par with conventional inorganic semiconductors, and
superior transport and optoelectronic properties thanks in part to large spin-
orbit coupling. This project will focus on developing synthetic and processing
approaches which enable the formation of microscopic single crystals and arrays
thereof at pre-determined locations on device-ready substrates using readily
available printing and coating technologies. A co-design strategy will
simultaneously tackle material formulation, surface chemistry, spectral
properties and device performance to successfully and rapidly integrate
semiconductor single crystals into (opto)electronic device components and
arrays. A direct writing approaches will be developed to produce spectrally-
tunable single crystal devices, including field-effect transistors and
phototransistors, as well as conventional and polarization-sensitive
photodetectors. This will be expanded to demonstrate wafer-scale integration of
single crystal device microarrays. The scientific and engineering knowledge
developed in this proposal will enable solution-processing to ultimately deliver
materials of single crystal caliber without resorting to conventional ultrahigh
vacuum techniques or epitaxial growth. The implementation of single crystal
microarray fabrication through existing high throughput coating and printing
infrastructure designed for traditional thin film coating is pursued for two
main reasons: (I) mature platforms which co-integrate materials synthesis and
device integration on the same substrate are suitable for co-design, and (II)
broad adoption of manufacturing approaches is more likely given the available
infrastructure across the nation. The proposed co-design strategy will provide
intensification of experiments and assist in verifying scientific and
engineering hypotheses crucial to the intended outcomes of this project. The
research will raise a new generation of leaders in electronic materials
processing and optoelectronic devices. Future career opportunities in these
areas will be given to graduate and undergraduate students including women and
underrepresented minorities. Dissemination of the research will take place
through high impact publications, published datasets, and presentations for the
scientific community, as well as through social media and hands-on activities in
local K-12 schools, Citizen Science program at the North Carolina Museum of
Natural Science, and established outreach programs at North Carolina State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.