* 1936449
* I-Corps: Enhanced major histocompatibility complexes to improve the detection of immune cells
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2021
* Devin Lowe, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
established efforts that guide the design and test the effectiveness of
immunotherapies for patients suffering conditions like infection or cancer. From
a commercial standpoint, the technology provides the benefits of longer shelf-
lives, cleaner and more accurate results, enhanced customization options, and
improved delivery times to the customer. These value propositions work to
significantly improve and expand existing methods (such as flow cytometry and
microscopy) that utilize the technology to determine immune responses in pre-
clinical/clinical specimens. The primary customer segment for this technology
would include life science researchers in industry developing cutting-edge
vaccines or gene-engineering T cells. Altogether, the advances this technology
provides will directly impact patients and society by more effectively
facilitating the creation and adoption of clinically appropriate therapies.

This I-Corps project further develops a rapid method to produce superior
recombinant Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) molecules to survey the
immune system in a host. This information is ultimately important in
understanding fundamental aspects of the immune response during normal and
abnormal settings. The new developed approach quickly generates mammalian-
derived MHC molecules that are more stable and functionally superior to
conventionally produced MHC molecules. The technology also allows the synthesis
of a diverse range of MHC molecules that are not possible with the standard
production process. Overall, the technology will transform the field of
immunology by providing an ability to more accurately study established and
previously untargetable immune cells, which will expand knowledge and open new
areas for research discovery and innovation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.