* 1936603
* NSF Student Travel Grant for The 25th International Conference on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming 2019 (DNA 25)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Georg Seelig, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

Life operates on a hardware that is composed of cells enclosing molecular
components and a software encoded by information and programs written in
molecules. With the vision of understanding the natural molecular programs and
further establishing novel molecular programming rules for engineering and
developing synthetic systems inside or outside of living cells, the annual
International Conference on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming has been one
of the premier interdisciplinary forums where scientists with diverse
backgrounds (e.g.; experts in computer science, physics, chemistry, biology and
mathematics) come together to present their research and discuss new ideas. The
application of molecular programming include development of molecularly-defined
electronic and optical materials, the integration of molecular-scale recognition
and amplification circuits within analytical techniques for studying biology,
and `smart' therapeutics with programmable control over drug delivery. This
award provides student travel support for the 25th International Conference on
DNA Computing and Molecular Programming (DNA25), held at the University of
Washington, Seattle, August 5-9, 2019. By funding travel for students the
organizers are actively encouraging and incentivizing a new generation of
researchers to attend the conference. The travel awards will help to foster the
development of the next generation of molecular programmers, by encouraging
students to attend, present their work, and interact with other experts in the
field. Students who attend the conference will get exposure to early versions of
work that will go on to be published in top venues and, furthermore, they will
have the opportunity to interact with, and potentially collaborate with,
researchers who are producing work of the highest
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oranizers plan to support up to 20 successful
student applicants, who will be funded for travel and accommodation expenses.
The primary purpose of these funds is to provide assistance to women and
underrepresented minorities who are delivering oral or poster presentations at
the conference, and to graduate students who are otherwise unable to afford
attending this conference. The availability of the awards to US citizens and
students at US institutions will be included in conference announcements,
soliciting applications. A committee of three faculty will decide on awards
based on the above priorities. This highly interdisciplinary conference
emphasizes topics that bridge computation, biology, and nanotechnology and
attracting researchers in the fields of computer science, mathematics,
chemistry, molecular biology, and nanotechnology. The scope includes control of
molecular folding and self-assembly to construct nanostructures; demonstration
of switches, gates, devices, and circuits with biomolecules; molecular motors
and molecular robotics; computational processes in vitro and in vivo; studies of
fault-tolerance and error correction; synthetic biology and in vitro evolution;
software tools for analysis, simulation, and design; a range of applications in
engineering, physics, chemistry, biology, and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.