* 1936837
* SaTC: CORE: Small: RUI: An Exploratory Study of Technology Adoption in K-12: Educational Benefits vs Privacy Costs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Kristen Walker, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 230,960.00

This project explores technology adoption practices and interactions and the
digital data literacy of education technology adoption decision makers in
California K-12 public school districts. Data profiles constructed from the
comingling of data from many sources (school, home, mobile technology) can
follow the individual through his or her lifetime. Although there is an
increasing understanding in education about digital literacy, there is a general
lack of understanding about digital data literacy, or the ease and potential of
comingling of data exchanged online, despite its purpose or use. Current
regulations such as the Familly Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and
the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) may provide inadequate
protections for future inference or predictive uses. The goal of this project is
to explore the extent to which school technology decision-makers consider youth
privacy and the long-term use and dissemination of children's digital
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a sample of California school districts,
this project investigates educational technology procurement strategies and
processes. Research methods include in-depth interviews and a preliminary survey
to examine the digital data literacy of educational technology decision makers
in K-12, and whether, how, issues of youth and family privacy are addressed by
education technology adoption decision makers. The project will also involve a
formal review of privacy literature involving several relevant disciplines and
investigations of the marketing processes involved in educational technology
procurement. Understanding the complexity and impact of educational technology
adoption is essential. This project advances the discussion of privacy across
commercial, public policy, and education interests. Students will be involved in
all phases of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.