* 1936803
* Collaborative Research: A Strategic Vision for Incoherent Scatter Radar Workshop; Ithaca, New York; March 30-April 1, 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* David Hysell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 08/31/2021
* USD 4,542.00

This workshop to be held March 30-April 1, 2020 at Cornell University is to
identify pathways for the ongoing modernization and revitalization of the
geospace facilities and the community that runs and uses them. NSF's Geospace
Facilities program currently supports five incoherent scatter radars used to
measure the upper atmosphere. These measurements are unmatched by any other
technology and are essential to scientific investigations. In several cases, the
facilities are over 50 years old and require significant investment to maintain
operations. The plan will contain a roadmap for modernizing the facilities and
adapting them to meet the evolving priorities and needs of the community. The
goals of the workshop are to define a vision for these facilities, to highlight
what the community sees as the most important objectives for the Geospace
Facilities Program, and to develop a strategy for pursuing them. The workshop
will produce requirements for facilities consistent with the objectives,
including human-resource requirements, for the next 5-10 years. The results of
this workshop will also serve as resources for the Solar and Space Physics
Decadal Survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.