* 1936761
* Collaborative Research: MODULUS:  A synthetic biology approach to understanding environment sensing in multicellular systems
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Andrew Mugler, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2021
* USD 285,000.00

The goal of this research is to determine how collections of cells, for example,
a colony of bacterial cells forming a biofilm, coordinate their behaviors to
accomplish goals that are impossible for isolated single cells alone. In
particular, the project examines how cellular collectives cooperate to better
sense the environment in an effort to determine the spatial location of
important resources needed for survival. Computational and experimental methods
are integrated in investigations that examine the genetic interactions involved
in collective cell sensing. These investigations are used to produce models that
advance the understanding of the nature of the cellular interactions. The models
are then validated with experimental data. A better understanding of how cells
cooperate will inform methods for the construction of synthetic multicellular
systems that could be applied to biomanufacturing, environmental remediation or
tissue formation for regenerative medicine. In addition to the scientific
advances, this project provides societal benefits through curriculum
development, the training of students ranging from middle-schoolers to
postdoctoral researchers, and the public dissemination of science through mass
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of mathematical modeling and
experimental synthetic biology is used to overcome the challenges associated
with studying native cell signaling pathways and provide more precise control
over genetic and network components. Hypotheses are generated through
analytically tractable mathematical models. The resulting predictions are tested
on multicellular colonies with realistic, multi-scale agent-based computer
models. Next, synthetic gene circuits that contain the proper inter- and
intracellular regulatory mechanisms are constructed in Escherichia coli. These
gene circuits are then examined experimentally for their collective phenotypes.
Finally, the research team fits the mathematical models to the resulting data
and validates their predictions on separate sets of experiments. This award was
co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Mathematical Biology Program in the
Division of Mathematical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.