* 1936565
* EAGER:  New insights into the biology of cell transdifferentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Maria Pia Miglietta, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 329,190.00

The ultimate goal of regenerative research is to replace damaged cells in
response to injuries and aging. Transdifferentiation (or cell reprogramming), a
process through which a mature somatic cell transforms into a new type of mature
somatic cell, can achieve this goal. The mechanisms by which cells spontaneously
(in vivo) leave a differentiated state to become a new lineage are poorly
understood. This is due to the difficulties in inducing transdifferentiation in
live model systems. A new promising approach comes from the cnidarian
Turritopsis dohrnii. Most animals reproduce, age, and die. T. dohrnii has
escaped this fate. When faced with unfavorable circumstances, the jellyfish of
T. dohrnii avoid death by reverting to a younger life cycle stage, the polyp.
During the life cycle reversal, which covers a time span of about 24 hours, cell
transdifferentiation occurs. These characteristics make T. dohrnii a potential
new system for in vivo research on the molecular mechanisms of cell stability
and transdifferentiation. This project will produce genomic tools and assess the
potential of T. dohrnii as a system for the study of in vivo cellular
differentiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has three objectives: 1)
Produce transcriptome assembly and annotation of T. dohrnii. 2) Produce a hybrid
draft genome assembly and annotation of T. dohrnii. 3) Conduct differential gene
expression analyses of life cycle stages of T. dohrnii. The genomic tools (draft
genome and transcriptome assembly) will be crucial steps toward facilitating the
development of genome editing tools. The differential gene expression analyses
will provide insight on the specific genes that are associated with the
mechanisms of cellular transdifferentiation that occur during the reverse
development of T. dohrnii. This project supports outreach activities and the
creation of a portal that will contain information, up to date research, useful
links to scientific literature, pictures, and a high-definition video of T.
dohrnii's life cycle reversal. With numerous unscientific and inaccurate
websites on "the immortal jellyfish" these activities aim to populate the
Internet with reliable information and visual products on T.
dohrnii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.