* 1936228
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Hybrid Quantum Dot-Metal Nanocrystals for Photoreduction of CO2: Synthesis, Spectroscopy and Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Jing Zhao, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 149,991.00

Efficient, sustainable, and cost-effective reaction of combustion-generated
carbon dioxide to fuels and chemicals remains one of the leading technical
challenges of our times. Among sustainable technologies, the direct conversion
of solar energy to chemical energy, as accelerated by catalytic materials, is
one of the most attractive options, but is limited by the efficiency of the
solar-to-chemical energy conversion. The project will investigate a new
combination of catalytic materials, and methods for structuring those materials,
that has potential to further increase both the rate and efficiency of solar-
driven carbon dioxide reactions. The study also utilizes an ultrafast
spectroscopic technique that may shed new light on the energy conversion process
- knowledge that can be extended to a wide range of applications beyond
photocatalysis. The project will generate insight that supports technologies
critical to our nation's future energy security while decreasing carbon
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy sustainability and environmental
protection has created an urgent need to develop new methods that efficiently,
selectively, and sustainably convert carbon dioxide (CO2) into valuable
chemicals and fuels. Among existing technologies, solar-driven photoreduction
and transformation of CO2 into carbon-based fuels represents an attractive
method due to its sustainability and its minimal environmental impact. High-
performance photocatalysts are the key to achieving effective CO2
photoreduction. The collaborative project will perform proof-of-principle
studies of novel nanocatalysts for solar-driven CO2 photoreduction based on
hybrids of semiconductor core@shell quantum dots (QDs, e.g., CdSe@CdS) and gold
(Au) nanoparticles (NPs). CdSe@CdS core-shell QDs can efficiently capture solar
energy in the entire ultraviolet and most of the visible spectral range due to
their low bandgap of 1.9 eV as well as having a highly reductive conduction
band. Meanwhile, Au NPs show high CO2 binding affinity and excellent reaction
selectivity (e.g., CO2 to CO). Coupling CdSe@CdS semiconductor QDs with Au NPs
through direct epitaxial growth has the potential to greatly improve the overall
conversion efficiency of solar energy to chemical fuels. To this end, the
project will explore new synthetic methods towards synthesizing QD-metal hybrid
nanomaterials with precise control over size, shape, geometry, and lattice
strain. The unique HNC structures make it possible to efficiently transfer
multiple electrons as quantitatively detected by ultrafast transient absorption
spectroscopy, thereby providing fundamental understanding of the relationships
between structural parameters and charge separation/transfer processes between
the QDs and Au, as well as photocatalytic performance of QD-Au. Beyond the
technical aspects of the project, the investigators will collaborate in
organizing annual events such as workshops and outreach days featuring
nanoscience and clean energy at both universities. The outreach activities will
be designed to stimulate the interests of students from high schools in pursing
STEM-related higher education. In addition, scientific symposia will be
organized with the goal of highlighting research opportunities related to
photocatalytic CO2 reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.