* 1936173
* I-Corps: Multielectrode Array Biosensor
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Alexander Zestos, American University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project ultimately will
allow researchers to better understand the brain and improve the productivity of
neurological studies. The societal impact of this invention will help
researchers, scientists, and physicians alike make precise neurochemical
measurements in the brain to better understand complex behaviors, diseases, and
drug states. Carbon multielectrode arrays technology will enable measurements in
the brain to better understand brain heterogeneity and neurological diseases
that burden our society such as addiction/drug abuse, epilepsy, depression and
anxiety. These multielectrode arrays will perform complex measurements of
neurotransmitters in multiple brain regions simultaneously. The commercial
potential for this novel technology is substantial in that, currently, there is
no existing device that can simultaneously measure neurotransmission in multiple
brain regions. These benefits should be of value to investigators, clinicians,
and researchers in government, academic, and research institutions as well as
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will use carbon coated metal
wires and carbon fibers as electrode materials to design, develop, and engineer
multielectrode arrays. These multielectrode arrays will be used as electrode
materials to detect neurotransmitters such as dopamine, serotonin,
norepinephrine, and others in multiple brain regions simultaneously. This
technology is cutting edge as no other neurological device has been developed
with carbon fiber multielectrode arrays to be utilized as biosensors. This
research will utilize fast scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV) to detect
neurotransmitters in preclinical models. A changing voltage will be applied to
the electrode material to measure neurochemical changes in vivo in animal
models. The technical results on which the project is based arise from
laboratory experiments that have further developed these multielectrode arrays.
The carbon fiber multielectrode arrays have been immersed in prepared
neurotransmitter stock solutions in the laboratory and have successfully
measured dopamine and other neurotransmitters using FSCV and data analysis
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.