* 1936677
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Spatially-Explicit Models, Methods, and Services for Open Knowledge Networks
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Wenwen Li, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 999,547.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will
be to help connect the vast community of geographic information systems users in
industry, government agencies, academia, and the broader public, to knowledge
graphs. Knowledge graphs consist of interlinked pieces of information about our
world. By connecting data across different domains, multimedia formats, and
perspectives, knowledge graphs enable users to ask more complicated questions
and arrive at a more holistic understanding of complex physical and social
processes. This project focuses on the tools needed to identify and link space
and time for knowledge graphs. These tools are important because everything
happens somewhere and at some time and because knowing where and when things
happen is critical to understanding why and how they happen. Currently
geographic information systems in use in academia, industry, and governments are
not yet well integrated with knowledge graphs. This project's highly
interdisciplinary team (representing four major universities, three industry
partners, and two government agencies) will demonstrate how to develop common
models, methods, and services to enable the publication, retrieval, reuse,
analysis, and inference of spatial and temporal data for knowledge graphs across
domain boundaries. The team plans to will apply the techniques developed to
applications such as soil health, hydrology, and urban planning. Expected
project results will give domain experts and the broader public free and open
access to data and analysis functions that will link otherwise disconnected
knowledge about extreme events, soil health, smart farming, and urban planning
together. The open knowledge network envisioned in this effort has the potential
to provide easier access to knowledge graph data which may improve opportunities
for many sectors that rely on connecting to geographic information system data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Places connect people, entities, and events together and,
thus, are a densely interconnected part of all general-purpose knowledge graphs
to date. Nonetheless, individual domains have developed their own (often
incompatible) ways to represent places as well as space and time more generally.
For instance, there is no agreed upon method to spatio-temporally restrict
statements such as changing national boundaries. Similarly, established machine-
learning techniques used to infer new knowledge graph statements or to summarize
existing ones typically ignore spatial and temporal aspects and, thus, fall
short of their full potential. Finally, existing efforts cannot handle numerical
or multi-modal data such as satellite imagery. The overarching theme of this
Phase I project is to reach convergence on how to efficiently represent,
retrieve, and analyze the spatial and temporal aspects present in almost all
datasets irrespective of the individual disciplines they originate from,
resulting in interoperability instead of domain-specific and potentially
incompatible solutions. During phase I the team will review state-of-the-art
methods, models, and services; harmonize them across domain boundaries; develop
spatially and temporally explicit machine-learning methods and tools to better
represent, analyze, and infer spatial and temporal data; and provide best
practices for other open knowledge networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.