* 1936359
* QII-TAQS: Enhancing Quantum Coherence by Dissipation in Programmable Atomic Arrays
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Nanfang Yu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,995,000.00

Quantum systems with robust coherence are essential in the quest for
controllable and scalable quantum technologies. For example, highly coherent
quantum systems are needed for the construction of quantum sensors, which can
measure time, electromagnetic forces, and gravity with the highest precision,
and for a future quantum computer, which promises to speed up data processing to
levels unachievable with conventional silicon-based computer technology.
However, most of today's quantum applications rely on the limited coherence of
individual quantum systems, such as nuclear spins, electron spins, or electronic
excitations. This project will demonstrate that coherence can be boosted beyond
the limitations of individual quantum systems. The researchers will exploit
collective effects in ordered atomic arrays, in which individual atoms will be
trapped in close proximity. In this special arrangement the atoms will interact
and are expected to display subradiance - a quantum mechanical effect that
prevents the atoms from losing internal quantum excitations - which will boost
the coherence of atomic quantum systems. To realize these novel concepts
experimentally, the researchers will develop and implement a novel nanophotonic
platform to trap and position individual atoms with optical tweezers, miniature
traps made out of laser light. The project will train undergraduate and graduate
students in experimental and theoretical atomic physics, quantum optics, and
nanophotonics, and thereby contribute to a highly trained workforce in quantum
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team combines
expertise in theoretical quantum optics, experimental atomic physics, and
nanophotonics. The experimental system will rely on arrays of laser-cooled
strontium atoms trapped by optical tweezers with sub-micrometer spacings. The
tweezer array will be generated via projection through a holographic spatial
light modulator that will allow for independent control of both the intensity
and phase of the trapping light field and enable the generation of optical
arrays with unprecedented accuracy and high-speed tunability. With interatomic
distances comparable to the atomic resonance wavelength, interference in photon
emission gives rise to strongly correlated atomic states that are protected from
decay, and thus have substantially longer coherence times than a single atom in
free space. The researchers will develop protocols, both theoretically and
experimentally, that enable accessing and exploiting the unconventional physical
properties of these exotic quantum states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Quantum Leap Big Idea Program and the Office of
International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.