* 1936334
* BEE NSFDEB-NERC: The eco-evolutionary dynamics of age-specific resistance to infectious disease
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Emily Bruns, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 571,647.00

When a disease epidemic sweeps through a population of plants, animals, or
humans, the youngest individuals in the population are often hardest hit. This
is because juveniles are typically more susceptible to infectious disease than
adults. Indeed, the spread of many human diseases such as measles and chicken
pox is largely driven by children. Likewise in many wildlife species, the spring
‘pulse’ of new highly susceptible young can drive epidemics, including diseases
that risk spilling over into human or livestock populations. However, we lack a
basic understanding of why juveniles are inherently so susceptible, even after
accounting for prior exposure to disease. This research will use mathematical
models and experiments with a model plant system to investigate the fundamental
ecological and evolutionary processes driving the evolution of age-specific
susceptibility. The results will substantially increase our understanding of the
feedbacks between resistance evolution and disease spread, which will improve
management strategies for wildlife disease, and inform crop breeding for disease
resistance. The research will also increase public understanding of science and
enrich local biodiversity records and museum collections through new citizen
science outreach activities that are integrated with the basic research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of why juveniles are so susceptible to
disease is puzzling from an evolutionary perspective because infection prior to
reproduction would seem to have a much greater negative impact on a host than
infection later in life (after the host has had a chance to reproduce). Natural
selection should therefore favor individuals that are less susceptible to
disease when they are young. This project will test the novel hypothesis that
juvenile susceptibility is maintained by feedbacks between evolutionary change
in host resistance and ecological change in disease abundance. These “eco-
evolutionary” feedbacks occur because the evolution of disease resistance at any
age in the host population, can in turn reduce the intensity of disease
epidemics. Critically, lower disease-levels make it less likely that a host will
encounter disease as a juvenile, thereby allowing the maintenance of juvenile
susceptibility. The researchers will build on this novel eco-evolutionary
framework to develop a predictive mathematical theory for understanding key host
and pathogen traits, and the feedbacks driving the evolution of age-specific
disease susceptibility. Then to establish how these age-specific selection
pressures are instantiated in a real-world system and to test key predictions
from the model, the research team will utilize the model plant-disease system,
anther-smut (Microbotryum) on white campion (Silene latifolia) to quantify the
fitness costs, benefits, and evolutionary potential of age-specific resistance
under a range of disease frequencies. To increase the broader impacts and
societal benefits of the proposed work the researchers will engage local natural
history societies in original scientific research on the distribution and
diversity of ‘micro-fungi’, and provide meaningful research opportunities for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.