* 1936558
* SBIR Phase I:  Navigation Independent Relative  Positioning System
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Val Parker, NON-INERTIAL NAVIGATION TECHNOLOGY
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2020
* USD 215,181.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve of aerospace exploration. In aviation, the capability of
the Navigation Relative Positioning System (NIRPS) working with GPS as a
reliable interoperable mutual backup system will significantly reduce the need
for ground control, hence providing flight safety and the ability to reduce the
massive cost of ground support services. In space applications, NIRPS will
significantly improve guidance and control of many space operations, from Low
Earth Orbit to Beyond Earth Orbit space missions. It will enhance autonomous
rendezvous, improve accuracy of position sensing, and increase the capability of
docking without humans in the loop. It will significantly reduce dependence on
ground-based tracking, ranging, trajectory/orbit/attitude determination and
maneuver planning support functions, and complexity of the flight control
algorithms. By continuously holding position information on trajectory, NIRPS
will provide programmable capabilities to allow the spacecraft to act
independently from ground control, devising real-time actions in response to
environmental conditions as well rejecting possible hijacking attempts. NIRPS
will enable classes of missions which would not be previously
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address the problems of
aerospace navigation by providing onboard reliable real time autonomous
cybersecure navigation for aerospace applications. Due to the latency and
instability of inertial navigation, aerospace navigation relies on GPS, beacons,
and flight/mission control systems. Contrary to inertial navigation utilizing
forces of spinning mass or propagation of light inside rotational media, the
proposed NIRPS utilizes collinear displacement of the inertial frame in relation
to the independent propagation of light within. The Phase I project encompasses
the feasibility of deploying photonics methods of fabrication of the NIRPS key
component, the Non-Inertial Velocity Detector (NIVD). Silicon photonics is
becoming the leading technology for Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs) due to
large-scale integration, low cost, and high-volume production enabled by the
Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS) fabrication process. In this
Phase, we will research materials and their possible interactions in varying
environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.