* 1936674
* The Developmental Biology of Hybrid Incompatibility
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Scott Rifkin, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 775,000.00

Nontechnical description of the project: Over the course of evolution, species
often become divided into subgroups, and members of different subgroups may
become unable to produce healthy offspring with each other. Instead, the
offspring can be sick or sterile or even die before reaching adulthood. At that
point, scientists consider these subgroups to be different species. When they
die, their deaths result from mistakes made during development, and the goal of
this project is to determine whether there are general rules that explain why
these hybrid offspring die when and how they do. Perhaps these mistakes are
idiosyncratic, with each individual dying in its own way. Perhaps hybrids
between two species die in one way but hybrids between two others die in a
different way. Or perhaps, within a group of related species, the same pattern
of when and how hybrids die is repeated over and over because some parts and
phases of development are more sensitive to disruption than others. To test
which of these is the case, this project will use a group of related roundworms
which look very similar but whose hybrid offspring tend to die as embryos. This
investigation of species incompatibility will also form the basis for two hands-
on science modules aligned with the California secondary school biology
standards. In one students will test for themselves whether different species
can mate, and in the other they will trap roundworms in the wild and use their
DNA to identify the species or to discover that they are new to
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description of the project:
As species separate during evolution, incompatibilities at the genome level can
accumulate and ratchet the process forward. These incompatibilities often play
out during development and render hybrid offspring inviable or infertile. The
developmental biology of this process is relatively little studied. Recent
advances in microscopy have made it possible to quantitatively and
comprehensively measure key aspects of development in real time in an increasing
range of organisms. This capacity makes it possible to test hypotheses about the
variability of the cellular processes that construct organisms, to compare these
both within and between species, and to dissect exactly what is disrupted when
development goes wrong. Through a combination of systematic crosses, high-
resolution 4D microscopy of developing embryos, and targeted measurements of
gene expression, this project will test three primary hypotheses about the
developmental biology of hybrid inviability using the Caenorhabditis roundworm
genus as a model system. These nematodes are ideal for this kind of study
because their normal development is stereotyped and repeatable, different
species will often mate with each other even though their embryos die, and the
genus includes at least two species pairs that are in the process of speciating
and remain partially interfertile. The study will determine when and how hybrid
embryos tend to die, where and when the first defects in development appear,
whether these defects are caused by abnormal cell movement or by abnormal cell
fate decisions, and whether these patterns are systematic across the genus or
idiosyncratic for each embryo or species pair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statement of
Merit Review,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.