* 1936336
* FDSS: A Faculty Position in Space Sciences at New Mexico State University (NMSU) to Integrate Research and Education in Solar Magnetic Fields
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Enrico Pontelli, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,149,152.00

The goal of this 5-year Faculty Development in the Space Sciences (FDSS) project
is to create and support a new tenure-track assistant professor position at the
New Mexico State University (NMSU) in the space sciences focused on diagnosing
and understanding the magnetic structure and thermodynamics of the Sun's
atmosphere. The new faculty member will be provided with all the support
required to develop a solar and space sciences research and education program at
the NMSU, integrate their research topics of the space sciences in an
interdisciplinary setting, and establish partnerships between the NMSU and the
academic and research communities across the U.S. The long-term goal is to
advance and transform the participation of the U.S. academic, research, and
operational institutions in diagnosing the fundamental physical conditions in
the Sun's atmosphere. As the world's largest solar telescope, designed to study
the fundamental sources of solar magnetism, the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope
(DKIST) provides a career-defining opportunity for the successful candidate.
This 5-year FDSS project describes a detailed roadmap for the successful
integration of a faculty position into a comprehensive research and education
program that: (i) strictly aligns with the university's new strategic mission;
(ii) executes the near- and long-term vision of the Department of Astronomy by
complementing current research in a high-interest area for graduate student
research; (iii) exploits a major NSF facility investment (DKIST), while building
expertise that will contribute towards other observatories, that advances our
fundamental understanding of solar magnetic fields and with a clear impact on
research in heliophysics; (iv) connects to national priorities as put forth in
the National Space Weather Strategy and Action Plan and decadal surveys; and,
(v) clearly addresses NSF's concerns about the loss of faculty at academic
institutions that train future generations of space
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the most powerful and well-equipped solar
telescope available, DKIST allows for the field of solar physics to make
transformative advances in our understanding of phenomena that have puzzled
space scientists for decades, such as the coronal heating problem, the
fundamental mechanisms and scales of magnetic energy release in flares and
coronal mass ejections, and the physics of the solar wind. All components are in
place for the new faculty member at the NMSU to build a career in leading a
group of students and collaborators to exploit these breakthrough opportunities
to carry out research in these areas. The Department of Astronomy has a vibrant,
productive, and student-centric research, education, and outreach environment at
a Hispanic-Serving Institution. Fruitful current collaborations between
Astronomy and other Departments at the university, and with national
laboratories and institutes, will be expanded into new areas of research
convergence. Although DKIST is the prime focus, additional observational
facilities related to this project, particularly the Dunn Solar Telescope (DST)
operated by the NMSU, will play critical roles in high-impact research and
student training in space sciences. The NSF's DKIST, the NASA's Parker Solar
Probe, and the ESA/NASA's Solar Orbiter, working in sync, will lead us into an
exciting era of multi-messenger space science that will transform our
understanding of space weather throughout the heliosphere. This 5-year FDSS
project provides a key component in this large-scale collaboration, by building
up areas of expertise not readily available in the U.S. space sciences academic
community. New insights into the solar atmosphere have immediate ramifications
for studies of other stars and the planets they may host. As a fundamental part
of these efforts, the new faculty position will lead to training of students at
a Hispanic Serving Institution in important aspects of big data and
instrumentation while using NSF facilities. The research and EPO agenda of this
5-year FDSS project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.