* 1936368
* GOALI: Deformation and Cracking Behavior of Oxide Glass under Indentation
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Liping Huang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 02/29/2024
* USD 637,938.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Crack-resistant glass is of paramount importance for
a wide range of applications such as personal electronics, automobiles, solar
panels, buildings, and submarine communications cables. This project aims to
advance fundamental knowledge on crack initiation in glass under impact (e.g.,
dropping a smart phone with cover glass onto a solid floor). This project gains
this knowledge by integrating in-situ experiments with virtual mechanical tests
in large-scale computer simulations. An integrated education component is to
develop computational modules for a required undergraduate course “Computational
Materials Design”. Students involved in the project have opportunities to
interact with researchers at Corning Incorporated in characterizing the
structure of glasses and solving practical problems in the industrial setting.
In carrying out this project, graduate and undergraduate students are trained in
frontier areas of glass science and technology. On-going efforts are being made
to inspire and encourage K-12 students to pursue science and engineering as a
career path, by igniting curiosity in young minds and instilling confidence in
women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
Despite extensive studies, what controls crack initiation in glass under sharp
contact loading remains elusive. The difficulty arises mainly due to the
experimental complexity associated with in-situ investigations at a local scale
(tens of microns) under complex and non-uniform stresses. In this project
multiple in-situ optical diagnosis techniques such as Raman, optical microscopy
and Brillouin light scattering are used simultaneously to characterize the
evolution of structure and properties of glass under uniform stress states
(e.g., hydrostatic, uniaxial compression or a mixed state) in a diamond anvil
cell to provide the reference data necessary for understanding the glass
response to sharp contact loading. Micro-Brillouin spectroscopy is used to map
the residual densification underneath an indent and the residual stress field
around an indentation with a spatial resolution of ~1 um. These results provide
key insights in understanding the deformation and cracking behaviors of glass
under indentation, and critical data for fitting potential parameters for
molecular dynamics simulations of multi-component glasses and for validating
computer models. Based on these reliable potentials, virtual mechanical tests
such as 3D nanoindentation in molecular dynamics simulations with well-
controlled parameters are carried out to provide a detailed understanding of the
dynamic structural changes, the deformation modes, and the critical stress
states that lead to the initiation of different types of cracks under
indentation. Simulated 3D nanoindentation tests are providing the key missing
information in experiments that has limited one’s understanding of how glass
cracks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.