* 1936522
* SHF: EAGER: Towards Self-Adaptive Dynamic Analysis for Distributed Software
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Haipeng Cai, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 166,000.00

Due to growing demands for computing performance and scalability, distributed
software systems are increasingly developed and deployed. Most of the critical
software and services being used today, such as financial systems and medical
networks, are distributed systems in nature. The quality, including various
factors (e.g., reliability and security), of these systems is thus of paramount
importance to the modern society and economy. Dynamic program analysis, a
methodology that models and reasons about the behavior of programs using their
execution information, has been a key enabler for powerful quality assurance
tool support. However, conventional dynamic analysis is known to suffer from
scalability challenges due to its substantial overheads. It also has been a
standing challenge to balance the effectiveness (e.g., precision) and cost
(e.g., time) of the analysis, as reflected in many analysis techniques that are
efficient but do not provide a practically useful level of precision and those
that are usefully precise but at unacceptable cost. To dynamic analysis of
distributed software, these challenges are exacerbated because of the typically
large code size and greater complexity of those software systems, in addition to
unbounded execution information as a result of the fact that distributed systems
commonly run as continuous (uninterrupted) services. This project will address
these challenges by investigating self-adaptive dynamic analysis, a
fundamentally new paradigm of dynamic program analysis, which continuously
adapts its cost and effectiveness to the optimal tradeoff within user-specified
budget bounds. The state of the art in dynamic analysis will be significantly
advanced by this new paradigm and its superior scalability and cost-
effectiveness optimality, especially in the challenging context of distributed
software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the foundational
underpinning of self-adaptive dynamic analysis, including (1) the formulation of
an integrated dynamic analysis infrastructure featured by hybrid dependence
modeling and a built-in cost-benefit model, and (2) the design of self-adaptive
and distributed dynamic-analysis algorithms focusing on dependence abstraction
as empowered by the infrastructure and guided by the cost-benefit model.
Compared to conventional dynamic analysis, which commonly adopts a fixed
algorithmic configuration throughout the entire analysis, the studied framework
exploits differences in the complexity, and accordingly those in the analysis
overheads (for the same level of precision), of different regions of programs
and different segments of program executions. These differences will be sensed
through various monitoring utilities in the infrastructure and leveraged to
adjust the algorithmic configuration (e.g., granularity and selection of the
dynamic data used by the analysis). With intelligent uses of assorted program
information and analysis configurations, the new framework will provide flexible
cost-effectiveness balances to meet diverse budgetary needs. Meanwhile, it will
attain high scalability through automatic, distributed control of the
distributed analysis. By making smart decisions at runtime, the analysis will
achieve and sustain optimal cost-benefit tradeoffs with respect to given
constraints (e.g., resources limits) and changing run-time environment
conditions during continuous system executions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.