* 1936793
* Collaborative Research: Improving the Performance and Design of Potentiometric Biosensors for the Detection of Extracellular Histones in Blood with Deep Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Francis Miller, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2022
* USD 88,355.00

Point of care (POC) sensors aim to provide patients and medical practitioners
with diagnostic information when and where it is needed. Potentiometric
biosensors, which output a voltage as a function of target biomolecule
concentration, are ideally suited for POC use in which sensitivity, speed of
detection, portability and compatibility with low-power read-out circuitry are
all paramount. Unfortunately, most demonstrations of such sensors stall during
the translation from testing well-controlled laboratory solutions to operating
in serum or whole blood. The objective of this research is to overcome this
hurdle by using a class of advanced artificial intelligence techniques known as
Deep Learning to recognize patterns and relationships in the complex data that
is collected from blood-based tests to improve sensitivity and drive the design
optimization of these sensors. This approach will be applied to the detection of
circulating histones in blood, which contribute to the development of Multiple
Organ Dysfunction Syndrome (MODS) in critically ill patients. It is estimated
that 15% of all intensive care unit (ICU) admissions in the United States result
in MODS, costing the healthcare system billions of dollars. Currently, there is
no biomarker to identify those patients at increased risk of MODS. The
successful development of the proposed Deep Learning-enhanced histone sensor
will allow for the early identification of patients that will benefit from more
aggressive and targeted therapies to prevent MODS and related complications.
These concepts will be integrated with wearable device challenges for high
school students, and data will also be included in undergraduate and graduate
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research consists of answering the
following scientific and engineering questions: (1) What is the conventional
limit of detection and speed of response of RNA aptamer-functionalized
potentiometers to circulating histones? RNA aptamers specific to histones will
be used to functionalize gold sensing electrodes to establish, for the first
time, the limit of detection and speed of response of extended gate
potentiometers capable of early identification of MODS. These devices will be
evaluated in buffer, serum and whole blood as benchmarks for POC deployment. (2)
How can Deep Learning improve the performance of potentiometric biosensors
beyond their conventional limits when assessing whole blood? Potentiometric
biosensor performance relies on several factors (e.g., electrode choice, surface
functionalization, sample type, etc.), which make their translation to blood
analysis a major challenge. We will leverage deep learning techniques to reveal
intricate relationships and trends to compensate for the conventional losses in
sensitivity observed in blood-based tests. These findings will also drive the
optimal design of the potentiometric sensors, thus establishing design rules
that can accelerate the development of these sensors across the community. (3)
What is the optimal method to develop training data for deep learning? A major
obstacle to the application of Machine/Deep Learning techniques to biosensing is
the generation of adequate training data. A multiplexed potentiometric
biosensing platform, made possible by the use of the extended gate approach,
will be developed in order to identify time- and resource-efficient approaches
to algorithm training. This effort will establish a standardized protocol that
other researchers in the field can leverage in order to accelerate the adoption
of potentiometric biosensors in new applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.