* 1936785
* I-Corps: Cellulose Nano-fiber Composites for Biomedical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Michael Mason, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project includes new
biomedical devices based on the use of cellulose nanofiber (CNF), a green,
renewable, value-added product, as the material to usher in the new age of
biomedical structural materials. Small surgical fixation devices (plates,
screws, and pins), bone scaffolds/spacers (orthobiologics), surgical support
devices, orthotics, and large wound therapies (negative pressure wound therapy)
are all strong potential applications. Currently these markets are collectively
valued at ~$20 billion and predicted to grow rapidly by 2025. Preliminary
feedback indicates current materials are of inferior quality, not meeting the
needs of doctors and patients, are difficult for surgeons to work with, and
generally too costly. Titanium alloys are the most prevalent orthopedic
material, but they demonstrate significant flaws including excessive stiffness,
extreme density, questionable biocompatibility, and the inability for bio-
resorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a
technology platform that makes it possible to produce porous solid forms derived
from composites of the naturally derived fibrillated nanocellulose (CNF). Under
the appropriate processing conditions, porous CNF solid-forms can be produced
with impressive mechanical properties (porosity, strength-to-weight ratios,
modulus, machinability, durability, biocompatibility, dissolution rate),
exceeding that of modern plastics. Based on preliminary results, this material
system may exhibit the desired properties for use in a number of healthcare
related applications. Current research seeks to explore the feasibility of this
material system to meet the specific requirements of these application areas.
Through the I-Corps program this project will focus on identifying the specific
needs, including material and design constraints, of medical and healthcare
related stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.