* 1936687
* SBIR Phase I:  CapScan: Non-Invasive Sampling and Analysis of the Human GI Tract to Advance Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Tidhar Shalon, ENVIVO BIO INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2021
* USD 224,079.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a tool to non-invasively measure
inflammatory markers, microbes and metabolic profiles inside the human
gastrointestinal (GI) tract for a variety of medical conditions. Initially, the
device can be used for the diagnosis and management of inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD). This device and the data it collects will be used to improve the
treatment of obesity and related metabolic disorders, such as type II diabetes,
that cumulatively cost the US economy over $200 billion per year. Given the
centrality of gut physiology to human health, there will likely be additional
uses of the technology in monitoring human health, eventually making it as
routine and informative as a blood test is today in the practice of
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will deliver a pill-sized device to the distal small intestine region of
the human GI tract and trigger the collection of the luminal contents in that
region. The device will need to accommodate tremendous variation in the
physiology of the human gut. The sampling device will encounter a biochemical
environment ranging from pH 1 to pH 8. The time required for normal peristalsis
to deliver the sampling device to the desired region of the GI tract will vary
from 3 to 10 hours. Furthermore, cost and safety constraints strongly favor the
use of a passive device with no actively powered sensors or actuators. A
multidisciplinary approach using mechanical and material science innovations can
meet these challenges and make the proposed device a platform sampling
technology for IBD, and GI disorders in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.