* 1936888
* NSF ERC for Green Air Transportation
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Gecheng Zha, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not The Planning
Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a pilot
solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as part of
the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to plan for
convergent, center-scale engineering research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project enables planning of a transdisciplinary research consortium for electric
aircraft with broad community stakeholder involvement, to explore innovative
next-generation aircraft concepts for vertical and short takeoff/landings. These
new electric aircraft designs offer ultra-high efficiency, very low noise and
zero-direct air pollution emissions; i.e., a green alternative over conventional
aircraft and their supporting infrastructure. Electric aircraft can provide city
planners with new options for mixed urban transportation systems. This
consortium serves to conduct convergent, multidisciplinary research for electric
aircraft, engage the public on their community benefits, educate students from
all walks of life, train the next-generation workforce, and foster an innovation
ecosystem based on green aerospace technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
next-generation electric aircraft concepts, this project develops a
multidisciplinary strategy for protecting the environment and enabling increased
transportation mobility that has significant advantages over conventional
transportation systems. Through a series of workshops, the project develops a
roadmap with experts from many disciplines and professions, including
aeronautics, material science, acoustics, autonomous control, public policy,
law, and the aerospace industry. Building upon the technology for coflow jet
active flow control, the planning for the consortium addresses technical
challenges for electric aircraft, including aircraft noise mitigation via
reduced propeller disk loading, interactive virtual simulations of full electric
aircraft systems, high-energy density batteries and high-power supercapacitors,
lightweight high-heat conductivity materials, high-power density and efficient
micro-compressor actuators, distributed propulsion, flight control, and safety
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.