* 1936541
* EAGER: Microscale Fingering Instabilities in Drying Colloid and Polymer Films
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,04/30/2022
* James Gilchrist, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 04/30/2022
* USD 185,578.00

When a viscous fluid such as oil is trapped within a porous material like soil
or sand, it is very difficult to remove. Trying to displace the trapped oil by
forcing air into the material fails, because the lower viscosity air will
penetrate through the higher viscosity oil. The air will form long fingers into
the oil, leaving most of the oil behind. This visually striking process, known
as the Saffman-Taylor instability, has been well documented in macroscopic
systems. It strongly affects oil recovery processes for energy production and
environmental remediation. In a serendipitous discovery, fingers were found in
drying films of nanoparticles and polymer, similar to that found in paints used
on buildings, cars, and many other consumer goods. What is surprising is that
these fingers form at much smaller scales, and they do not follow the rules
determined for the Saffman-Taylor instability. This project will investigate how
the physics surrounding the formation of these microscopic fingers differs from
macroscale phenomena. This fingering instability will be characterized
quantitatively in well-controlled experiments and computational analysis of
images obtained using specialized microscopy. The knowledge gained will be used
to control or suppress the formation of fingers in order to alter the properties
of these films. These fingers may be ubiquitous in drying thin films of
particles in viscous liquids and may have a strong impact of the adhesion of
these films to their substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
investigate a visually striking fluid flow instability in colloid-polymer thin
films during drying that was found using high-speed confocal laser scanning
microscopy. This is the first observation of a fingering instability of polymer
solutions at micron or sub-micron length scales in porous materials such as
colloidal crystals. Fingering instabilities, such as the Saffman-Taylor
instability, have had broad impacts for transport in porous media for secondary
oil recovery and aquifer transport. Most studies of the Saffman-Taylor
instability focus on the displacement of one higher viscosity Newtonian fluid
with an immiscible lower viscosity Newtonian fluid in either a Hele-Shaw cell or
a porous material. Fingers in this study are not visible using regular light
microscopy because they have wavelengths on the micron scale, defying the
typical Saffman-Taylor scaling found in macroscopic systems. This project will
investigate the modes of this instability across various polymer concentrations,
polymer molecular weights, and particle sizes where the polymer radius of
gyration ranges from very small to that which is comparable to the pore scale of
colloidal crystals. The goal is to determine whether this fingering instability
differs from previous studies due to the non-Newtonian behavior or the
interfacial properties of the fluid at the nanoscale. Because the polymer is
left behind, it forms well-defined solid structures at the film-substrate
interface. These structures will be investigated and utilized in the fabrication
of nanoscale or microscale networks of fluid channels for devices. Moreover, the
fingering instability may have a significant effect on film adhesion to the
substrate through reduction of contact area and/or creating microfibrillated
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.