* 1936869
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Neural Engineering Systems with Societal Impact (NESSI)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jack Judy, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Neural Engineering Systems with
Societal Impact (NESSI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chronic and acute pain affect ~100
million people in the US and greatly increase national rates of morbidity,
mortality, and disability. Pain not only negatively impacts individual lives in
significant ways, it also imposes enormous national economic costs (up to $635B
annually). The misuse of and addiction to opioids, such as prescription pain
relievers, heroin, and synthetic opioids is a serious national crisis. Currently
~130 Americans die of opioid overdose every day. Opioid addiction can also be
driven by causes other than pain, such as social, economic, and "diseases of
despair". By tackling this national crisis, the proposed center-planning effort
will align with a major priority of the United States and the states of Florida,
Pennsylvania, and Arizona which in 2017 had the 3rd, 4th, and 22nd most opioid-
overdose deaths in the country respectively. Inspired by the neurotechnological
breakthroughs enabled by the convergence of engineering with the fields of
neuroscience, neurology, and neurosurgery, teams from the Universities of
Florida, Pittsburgh, and Arizona propose to plan the Center for Neural
Engineering Systems with Societal Impact (NESSI) to achieve lasting
transformative impact on the opioid crisis with new neural-engineered systems
that can dramatically reduce pain and others that reduce addiction. In addition
to the positive societal impacts of improved human health and reduced economic
burden, which we expect will be made possible by new neurotechnologies to be
developed by the envisioned center, this ERC planning effort will use its early-
stage emphasis on inclusion to extensively engage underrepresented minorities
and women in all activities and with all stakeholders. Through the proposed
planning process, our diverse team will integrate together strategic plans for
the center research, workforce development, culture of inclusion, and innovation
ecosystem into a single consistent vision for the entire center. NESSI will
develop graduates with skills, training, and experiences that make them well
suited to successfully translate innovative neurotechnologies for pain and
addiction in a globally competitive
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Project Description:
Inspired by the neurotechnological breakthroughs enabled by the convergence of
engineering with the fields of neuroscience, neurology, and neurosurgery, teams
from the Universities of Florida, Pennsylvania, and Arizona propose to plan the
Center for Neural Engineering Systems with Societal Impact (NESSI) to achieve
lasting transformative impact on the opioid crisis with new neural-engineered
systems that can dramatically reduce pain and others that reduce addiction.
Specifically, our strategy is to develop neuroengineered tools, technologies,
and systems that advance fundamental understanding of the complex
neurobiological systems of pain and addiction in ways that can be translated
into novel, comprehensive, and effective solutions. Although neuromodulation
represents a drug-free alternative to opioids for pain management, barriers
exist that prevent it from replacing opioids as the front-line therapy for the
management of severe orofacial, post-surgical, and visceral pain. In addition,
neither existing pharmaceuticals nor conventional bioelectronic neuromodulation
have the spatial, temporal, and circuit-targeting precision needed to treat
severe addiction. To overcome these challenges, NESSI will assemble a broad team
of disciplinary experts to advanced knowledge of the relevant (1) societal
needs, (2) neural circuits, (3) use of modeling and AI to create rationally
designed reliable neural-interface systems capable of selective stimulation, (4)
effective methods to validate chronic neural interface systems in advanced
preclinical models, and (5) means to build partnerships with leading
practitioners and industry to create a roadmap towards future successful
clinical translation and commercialization of advanced neurotechnologies to
treat pain and addiction. Our proposed ERC-planning process will start with
training to ensure it is informed by the best practices of inclusion and
unconscious bias. Next, a sequential set of working-group (WG) meetings will
focus on 5 primary research themes: Target, Model, Implement, Validate, and
Translate. Output from earlier WG meetings, such as reports and SWOT analyses,
will be passed on to later WG meetings to inform their discussion. The outputs
of all WG meetings will be considered at an Integration Meeting focused on
bringing all of the guidance together and developing preliminary vision
documents for the research, workforce-development, inclusion, and innovation-
ecosystem components of the center. Lastly, a center-wide Final Strategic
Meeting will be organized to solidify the center vision for all components. This
planning grant will support the creation of a detailed roadmap for targeted,
effective, and efficient use of neurotechnology for a wider range of pain
conditions and to address severe addiction to opioids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.