* 1936425
* PIXEL2020: The 10th International Workshop on Semiconductor Pixel Detectors for Particles and Imaging
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Sally Seidel, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 02/29/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports the 10th International Workshop on Semiconductor Pixel
Detectors for Particles and Imaging (PIXEL2020), to be held in Santa Fe, New
Mexico on December 14-18, 2020. This workshop will advance technologies that
enable discoveries at the highest energies, of the rarest processes, in
astrophysical and space applications; in nuclear, heavy ion, and cosmology
contexts; in synchrotron light and lepton beams; and in a variety of health,
communications, and defense applications requiring radiation hardened
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will review existing and proposed
pixel detectors for particle physics and for x-ray imaging. Issues to be
discussed include new designs and architectures, radiation effects, simulation,
alignment and calibration, mechanical stability and cooling, electronic readout
and front-end ASICs, and triggering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports
the attendance of up to 25 participating graduate students and junior
investigators. As all sessions will be plenary, this meeting will provide
excellent exposure for these junior scientists. Proceedings will be made
available for the use of the worldwide instrumentation community. This workshop
will bring to the Southwest international experts on instrumentation.
Developments will have potential applications to medicine, astrophysics,
biology, and nuclear and particle physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.