* 1936949
* Planning Grant: NSF Engineering Research Center for Smart Personalized Assistive Devices and Enabling Systems (SPADES)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Maria Yang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assistive devices provide the critical support
required to overcome physical limitations, prevent injury, and improve safety
for healthy workers and people with disabilities. The epidemic of diabetes,
dementia, and obesity, the rise in childhood disability, and the aging
population have increased the use of assistive devices, making them an
instrumental part of the care system in our society. While many users of have an
increased need for assistive devices, they may have a declined willingness to
use them due to self-pride, poor fit, high cost, and changing needs. The
Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Smart Personalized Assistive Devices and
Enabling Systems (SPADES) is proposed to meet this societal need by creating
personalized assistive devices (PADs) and smart care system (SCS). Advancements
in science and engineering have enabled the material, design, manufacturing,
learning, and control of PADs. A distributed manufacturing and service network
for PADs will be established as the foundation for SCS. The ERC for SPADES is
aimed to create an innovation ecosystem and transform PADs and SCS in our future
society with the diversity and culture of inclusion for women, underrepresented
minority (URM), and veterans. This planning grant will establish a convergent
research and education team with partnership among engineering, psychology,
sociology, kinesiology, rehabilitation, and industry (the breadth of knowledge)
and integration of fundamental sciences (the depth of knowledge).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New scientific knowledge in polymeric soft material for
additive manufacturing (AM), contact mechanics, human-centered design, and
machine learning will be explored for PADs and SCS. AM of micro-architectured
and functionally graded materials will be studied to construct conformal shapes
for human contact interface with personalized properties. The dynamic
biomechanical and contact models will be established to design a PAD contact
interface that matches to the optimal personal preference space of a user, which
is identified based on the multidimensional unfolding modeling and inputs from
the user feedback and biometric sensor data measured during evaluation. To
address the evolution of user needs, the real-time control of active PADs and
the big data based learning for improved PAD design and control will be
established. The big data is based on robust extraction, transformation, and
identification capabilities to analyze the evolution of sensor measurements and
model predictions, which are the foundation of learning in SCS. A multi-level
decision making strategy will utilize data derived from sensors and user
feedback, combined with supervised learning and multi-objective optimization, to
drive the decision-making strategy for both passive and active
PADs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.