* 1936159
* Sustainable Nanotechnology in the 2020's
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Paul Westerhoff, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2020
* USD 35,000.00

Nanotechnology is recognized as a transformative approach that will improve
products and processes across numerous sectors of the economy, and holds promise
to improve the sustainability of food, water and energy systems. However, these
benefits have potential risks both actual and perceived - to living organisms
and the environment, in part due to a general lack of public understanding
regarding nanotechnology. This conference entitled Sustainable Nanotechnology in
the 2020's, part of the Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization (SNO) will be
held from November 7-9, 2019 in San Diego, CA. The conference will strive to
achieve equal gender representation, and at least 30% attendees being
underrepresented minorities, and funding will be used in part to support student
involvement and broaden participation. SNO is now a self-sustaining organization
with the following mission: i) Support the development of sustainable
nanotechnology for the improvement of society, the environment and human health;
ii) Promote the advancement and application of scientific research related to
nanotechnology, implementation of sustainable nanotechnology for environment,
health, and safety, and the use of nanotechnology in policy and decision-making;
and iii) Provide a forum where scientists, engineers, and other professionals
exchange information and ideas for the development and use of nanotechnology
leading to overall sustainability. The conference focuses on looking forward,
instead of backward, to understand where nanotechnology is making the most
significant environmental scientific breakthroughs and demonstrate how
applications using nanotechnology can be sustainably developed between 2020 to
2030.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference entitled Sustainable Nanotechnology
in the 2020's, part of the Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization (SNO) will be
held from November 7-9, 2019 in San Diego, CA. Other recent scientific
conferences including American Chemical Society, Gordon Conference, Society of
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, and International Conference on the
Environmental Effects of Nanoparticles and Nanomaterials have identified several
issues concerning the use, safety, biological and environmental transformation
of engineered nanostructured materials. Hence, the motivation for this
conference is to (1) draw attention to the need to proactively manage the
emergence of nanotechnology into society so as to avert such problems that arose
with earlier products such as DDT, leaded gasoline, and PCBs and numerous other
substances, and (2) advance sustainable technologies that utilize nanotechnology
to solve wicked-problems where traditional approaches have significant
drawbacks. Such-problems require a convergence of ideas, skillsets and people
and the 2019 annual SNO conference will bring together these diverse people to
share their vision for the nanotechnology impacts on sustainability in 2020 to
2030. The conference will be co-chaired by Profs. Vicki Grassian and Paul
Westerhoff, both leaders in the field of sustainable nanotechnology. There are
six accepted plenary speakers and a young group of dynamic experts have been
recruited to assist in conference coordination. Anticipated session topics
include: Emerging nanotechnologies for sustainable energy, education, Food and
Agriculture, Water Treatment and Remediation, Fate and Transport, Measuring
Nanomaterial Exposure &amp; Effects in Environmental Health Research, Green
Synthesis or Manufacturing, and Nanomaterials and Indoor Environments. The co-
chairs are empowering the session chairs to progressively recruit abstracts with
mentoring as needed from senior conference organizers. These topics are critical
areas where nanotechnology can achieve major breakthroughs and this conference
provides a forum for approximately 150 attendees to share ideas, develop
collaborations and recognize accomplishments of leaders in the field. The
conference provides awards for groundbreaking research, and is one of the few
formats where such community recognition of environmental nanotechnology is
provided. By focusing on food-water-energy topics, in addition to air, human
health, and manufacturing, this conference supports critical research priorities
and provides an opportunity to create new industries and high-tech
jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.