* 1936040
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Trustworthy System-On-Chip Design using Secure On-Chip Communication Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Prabhat Mishra, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2024
* USD 563,970.00

System-on-Chip (SoC) is the driving force behind computing and communication in
a wide variety of electronic systems, ranging from simple devices in smart homes
to complex systems in satellites. Network-on-Chip (NoC) is a commonly used
solution for on-chip communication between components in complex SoCs. To meet
cost and time-to-market constraints, SoCs are designed using various hardware
components, often gathered from untrusted third-party vendors. Despite
increasing importance of trusted communication in overall system security, NoC
security is relatively under-investigated. This project will develop a secure
NoC architecture to enable trusted communication between components in NoC-based
SoCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two important objectives. The first
objective is to develop automated tools and techniques that work across diverse
communication technologies including electrical, optical and wireless NoCs while
meeting energy and performance requirements as well as real-time constraints.
The second objective is to develop a secure and lightweight on-chip
communication architecture that enables secure data communication, anonymous
routing to maintain communication privacy, finding trusted paths in the presence
of malicious components, real-time detection and localization of denial-of-
service and buffer overflow attacks, and validation and evaluation of NoC
security architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
are three-fold: bridging computation and communication security, integration of
research and education, and involvement of undergraduates and minority students.
Secure NoC architecture will enable trusted SoC design with untrusted components
when combined with existing security solutions. Ongoing collaboration with
different companies will enable the application of the security solutions on
industrial SoCs. This project will integrate research and educational activities
by developing modified courses with an NoC security module, as well as
dissemination of research results through publications, seminars, tutorials and
panels. This project will involve female and under-represented minority
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to produce a wide
variety of data that would be immensely helpful for future research and
education in the engineering community. Knowledge, tools, methodologies and data
generated in this project will be made publicly available through the project
web page (https://www.cise.ufl.edu/research/cad/NoC.html). The web page will
include all the relevant materials related to NoC security architecture as well
as associated tools and techniques to enable incremental encryption and
authentication, trust-aware routing, anonymous routing, and real-time attack
detection and localization, in a wide variety of on-chip communication
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.