* 1936370
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Cybersecurity Big Data Research for Hacker Communities: A Topic and Language Modeling Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 526,624.00

It is estimated that cybercrime costs the global economy around $445 billion
annually, particularly due to intellectual property theft and financial fraud
using stolen consumer data. Incidents of large-scale hacking and data theft
occur regularly, with many cyberattacks resulting in theft of sensitive personal
information or intellectual property. Cybersecurity will remain a critical
problem for the foreseeable future, necessitating more research on a large,
diverse, covert and evolving international hacker community. Computer science
and social science researchers face non-trivial challenges, such as the
technical difficulties in data collection and analytics, the massive volume of
data collection, the heterogeneity and covert nature of data elements, and the
ability to comprehend common hacker terms and concepts across regions. In order
to alleviate these challenges, this project has two research goals: 1) advance
current capabilities for scalable identification, collection, and analysis of
international hacker community contents, and 2) make contributions to the
cybersecurity community by developing new big data techniques that could enable
researchers to conduct analyses on hacker content and other related domains. The
impact of the project is made through the sharing and dissemination of our
comprehensive hacker community data collection, advanced collection strategies,
and innovative analytical approaches within the NSF Secure and Trustworthy
Cyberspace data science and other communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to develop a large, comprehensive and longitudinal testbed of all
significant international online hacker community contents, including: forums,
IRCs, underground economies, and other emerging hacker assets, for the
cybersecurity and big data communities. The analytical approaches mainly aim to
address the large-scale international hacker community content analysis for
proactive cyber threat intelligence (CTI). In order to analyze hacker contents,
the project develops an innovative, holistic, and proactive CTI framework
encompassing Cross-Lingual Knowledge Transfer to alleviate the language barrier,
Nonparametric Supervised Topic Modeling to profile key hacker assets, and
Scalable Dynamic Topic Modeling to inform emerging threat detection. UA's
National Security Agency-designated Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber
Defense, Research, and Operations, NSF Scholarship-for-Service (SFS) Cyber-
Corps, and top-ranked Master's in Cybersecurity programs position the project
for synergy with teaching and research. Techniques developed in this project not
only advance CTI knowledge, but also deep transfer learning, deep generative
modeling, supervised topic modeling, dynamic topic modeling, neural variational
inference, and numerous other important domains. Results from this research will
be disseminated through various academic and cybersecurity industry channels
such as undergraduate and graduate curricula, IEEE Intelligence and Security
Informatics conference, National Cyber-Forensics Training Alliance (NCFTA), The
Society for the Policing of Cyberspace (POLCYB), and NSF CyberCorps
SFS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.