* 1936353
* QII-TAQS: Simulating Entangled Quantum Chemical Abstract Machines
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Amr Sabry, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,994,238.00

The coupled quantum-mechanical behavior of protons and electrons has a central
role in many chemical catalytic reactions that are fundamental to human
existence. A critical portion of this project will involve the mapping of the
quantum mechanical descriptions of complex chemical catalysis problems to a
specialized type of quantum computer, known as an ion-trap quantum simulator.
This map will be used to develop quantum software and domain-specific computing
tools. These tools are inspired by a popular and influential model of
computation, known as the chemical abstract machine. The research project will
design, build, and validate the effectiveness of a general programming model
with a variety of existing quantum algorithms and applying the models to
problems in chemical catalysis. Broader impacts include new quantum science
directed graduate, undergraduate, and postdoctoral training initiatives in
physics, chemistry, and computer science. Furthermore, summer workshops on
quantum science for local middle- and high- school science teachers will also be
initiated. Underrepresented groups, including women, will be recruited into
computational and physical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated quantum
simulation ecosystem that includes a mathematical description, a computational
implementation, and an experimental realization of a challenging quantum problem
in chemical catalysis will be developed. This includes an integrated domain-
specific programming paradigm, a quantum simulator, and associated quantum
algorithms that facilitate the mapping and consequently the study of complex
chemical catalysis problems. Dissipative molecular system-bath Hamiltonians will
be mapped to ion-lattice quantum simulator Hamiltonians. This will be used to
develop chemical abstract machine-based quantum software to program the time
evolution of coupled electron-proton states arising from a set of synthetic
proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) problems on the quantum simulator. The
validation of quantum simulation will be conducted through the experimental
investigations of a modular set of intramolecular PCET platforms and a
combination of quantum dynamics and electronic structure calculations on the
smaller model systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Quantum Leap Big Idea Program and the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.