* 1936046
* Collaborative Research: BBSRC:  RiboViz for reliable, reproducible and rigorous quantification of protein synthesis from ribosome profiling data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Premal Shah, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 266,257.00

All cells make proteins by using molecular machines called ribosomes, which read
a messenger RNA template and "translate" the RNA code into the protein code.
Cells need to make the right proteins, at the right time, in the right
quantities, and so this process is carefully controlled by signals that are also
encoded in the RNA. These signals are complex and only just beginning to be
understood because there are thousands of different RNA sequences in a cell and
each is hundreds to thousands of nucleotides ("letters") long. Recent advances
in DNA &amp; RNA sequencing technology mean that we can now measure all parts of
RNA that are translated into protein and how much by using a technique called
ribosome profiling. Although this technique is amazing, it is not perfect, and
statistical tools are needed to separate the interesting biological signals in
the data from unwanted biases of the experimental measurement. These tools need
to be implemented in usable and reliable software in order for all scientists
studying studying protein synthesis to be able to get the maximum possible
information from ribosome profiling data, which is expensive and time-consuming
to collect. The RiboViz software suite, which is open source and free to use by
anyone in the world, already takes raw data from sequencing machines and puts it
through a series of processing steps. RiboViz estimates how much each part of
RNA is translated, and how the amount of translation is controlled by the code
of that RNA. RiboViz produces tables, figures and graphs that are accessible
online, so is useful for both experts and non-experts. This kind of data sharing
makes science more reproducible and more accessible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will accelerate understanding of the mechanism and regulation of protein
synthesis by extending the RiboViz open-source computational pipeline to extract
biological insight from high-throughput data measuring protein synthesis. The
goal is to further develop the RiboViz open-source software pipeline
(https://github.com/shahpr/RiboViz) for accessible, reliable, reproducible,
rigorous and bias-aware analysis and visualization of ribosome profiling data.
Specific aims are to refactor RiboViz following best practices for scientific
computing, by writing tests akin to experimental controls for each step of the
setup, processing and analysis, and by containerization of the pipeline to
enable running on different computers with full control of software
dependencies; develop likelihood-based statistical methods for quantification of
differential translation of open reading frames and codons while correcting for
sequence-level bias, building on best practices in differential RNA abundance
analysis, and implement these analysis and visualization tools within RiboViz;
and to generate standardized ribosome profiling datasets by re-analyzing
published datasets for all eukaryotes to quantify rigorously how codon usage and
other sequence features predict protein synthesis. The improved RiboViz pipeline
will accelerate studies of translation regulation and produce tested and
rigorous tools that we will be disseminated as an open-source resource to the
entire community studying translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.