* 1936893
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Smart One Water (SOW)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Paolo Gardoni, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,474.00

Adequate quantity and quality of water is necessary for human health, the health
of nature?s ecosystems. It is also important to commercial water-dependent
commercial enterprises. Siloed water systems are no longer adequate to ensure
continued and equitable access. Instead, engineered water systems need to become
smart, connected, sustainable, and resilient to properly manage water services
for communities facing a multitude of new challenges. Current systems are ill-
equipped to deal with increasing extreme events, conflicts between ecosystem and
human society demands, rapid global urbanization, and infrastructure
deterioration. Advances in hydrology, ecology, biogeochemistry, engineering, and
systems analysis enable the redesign of better engineered water systems. The
Smart One Water Cyber-Physical-Social infrastructure ERC (SOW) aims to transform
the way people interact with water services by advancing technologies for better
management of engineered and natural water systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SOW-ERC will foster the development of a new generation of water systems that
will provide timely and accurate information on water challenges through
automation, efficient monitoring, analysis, control, and performance evaluation.
Deploying the SOW paradigm at a national scale requires the development of new
cyberinfrastructure that supports (1) system-of-systems analyses at multiple
spatial and temporal scales, (2) innovative cyber-enabled observation and
stakeholder engagement technologies, and (3) novel smart and connected decision
support. These developments will transform water sector governance, policies,
engineering methods, and social practices. The SOW will advance the water sector
by use of basin-scale real-time information in natural, social, behavioral and
built systems, and machine intelligence for operationalizing sustainability, and
resiliency. This planning grant is aimed at creating collaborative research
ecosystems to facilitate new and to deepen partnerships that are advancing
fundamental knowledge of water systems to improve decision- making, governance,
and policy. Leveraging expertise across multiple disciplines will advance a
vision for novel knowledge and problem-solving frameworks that span the realm of
diverse water systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.