* 1936752
* Collaborative Research: Tracking Carbon, Water, and Energy Balance of the Arctic Landscape at Flagship Observatories in Alaska and Siberia
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Marion Bret-Harte, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 06/30/2025
* USD 2,481,410.00

The Arctic is warming faster than other parts of the world and it has the
potential to amplify global warming. The amplification comes from thawing
permafrost (frozen soils) that release greenhouse gases, especially carbon
dioxide and methane, that lead to additional warming, more thaw, and more
greenhouse gases released. However, how fast the permafrost will thaw, how much
greenhouse gas will be released, and how important gradual thaw is versus abrupt
thaw caused by melting ground ice or floods, is unknown. This Arctic Observing
Network research will document changes in permafrost thaw, greenhouse gas
releases, and energy balance in terrestrial and freshwater systems in the
Alaskan and Russian Arctic. Arctic ecosystems have seen an acceleration of
permafrost thaw and greenhouse gas release to the atmosphere that may not be
easily reversed. Further observations are required to determine the rates of
change and potential impacts on climate to best inform society on what to expect
and how to prepare. In addition to advancing understanding of environmental
change, broader impacts of the research include contributions to teaching,
learning, and outreach by including findings in school classrooms, support of
undergraduate summer research, and outreach to Indigenous communities and K-12
schools in Alaska. Two communities in the Alaskan and Russian Arctic will learn
to map methane bubbling hotspots that create dangerous ice, which will result in
co-production of knowledge and improved safety for winter travelers. Other
benefits to society include improved understanding of how permafrost thaw
threatens roads and buildings, and how a thawing Arctic influences climate
change at lower latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will extend time-
series data on carbon, water, and energy balance in four different tundra
ecosystems in northern Alaska (year-round eddy covariance measured since 2007),
and at two sites in Cherskii, Russia. The records already collected show
evidence of recent change and tipping points, highlighting the value of
supporting long-term measurements. In addition, carbon dioxide and methane
fluxes measured by eddy covariance and ebullition will be monitored in a new
thermokarst lake in Siberia, and ebullition will be measured on existing and new
Alaskan and Siberian lakes mapped using remote sensing. Long-term monitoring of
hydrology and stream chemistry of Imnavait Creek, Alaska, and depth of thaw in
its catchment will be maintained and expanded. To help interpret these core
data, the project will continue camera records of plant phenology and dates of
snowmelt and snow return, harvests to assess plant biomass and net primary
productivity, and analysis of soil properties and stocks of carbon and nitrogen.
Permafrost boreholes will be instrumented near eddy covariance towers at
Imnavait Creek and near the new lake in Cherskii. All data will continue to be
made publicly available and archived with the Arctic Data Center, NSF-LTER Data
Portal, and Ameriflux. Data collected by this project will be used extensively
by other researchers and incorporated into other observing networks such as
Ameriflux, the Phenocam Network, and other efforts including NASA projects and
satellite campaigns. Research will also be disseminated though scientific
publications and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.