* 1936388
* QII-TAQS: Suppressing and Correcting Errors in Hybrid Superconducting Qubit Systems
* MPS,OMA
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Daniel Lidar, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,080,000.00

Quantum information science - the use of quantum mechanics to perform novel
computing, simulation, communication, and sensing - is poised to revolutionize
computing, biochemistry, condensed matter physics, cryptography, and astronomy,
as well as a host of other fields. One of the most promising technology
platforms is based on electrical circuits made of superconducting materials and
operated at cryogenic temperatures. Quantum computers based on these quantum
circuits have already been created and used for simple applications. However,
their performance is limited by errors in the basic operations that make up
quantum algorithms. For quantum processors to realize their full potential,
these errors must be made inconsequential. This project aims to develop new ways
to model, suppress, and correct errors in quantum circuits. The approach uses
both hybrid "hardware" - different types of physical circuit designs - and
hybrid "firmware" - different error correction and suppression protocols - in
combination. By leveraging this hybrid approach, the research aims to create
modular, scalable unit cells that can be used to create large-scale quantum
processors with low error rates. The project will also train graduate students
in the rapidly-expanding field of quantum information technology, growing the
workforce for both academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several types of
superconducting qubit designs exist, each with their own advantages and
drawbacks. To date, no design combines the long-lived coherence and fast
addressability necessary for use in large-scale quantum processors. Similarly,
several methods for error suppression and correction exist, but most are only
partially effective or are far too resource-intensive to be practical. This
project combines different types of qubit hardware and multiple error correction
schemes to realize ultra-low-error logical qubits. The key to the approach is to
use hybrid error suppression protocols carefully designed to harness the
detailed strengths and vulnerabilities of the basic physical qubit elements,
while combining different qubit hardware to best leverage the protocols. The
work includes using transmon qubits as "error detectors" for flux qubits used in
quantum annealing protocols; combining dynamical decoupling with "generalized
Markovian" noise for enhanced error suppression; using full quantum circuit
simulations to correctly model the effects of noise channels; combining transmon
and fluxonium qubits to achieve fast gates with ultra-long-lived coherence; and
developing novel ways of encoding quantum information in decoherence-protected
subspaces, together with other experimental and theoretical work. The eventual
outcome of this project is intended to be the creation of logical qubits that
function as modular, scalable unit cells. These basic modular elements can then
be used in intermediate-scale quantum processors with no further error
correction. Such modular elements that allow for resource-efficient error
correction could be used in the full-scale, error-corrected quantum processors
envisioned in the early days of quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.