* 1936186
* FDSS: University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA) Faculty Recruitment in the Space Sciences
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 11/30/2024
* USD 901,292.00

The goal of this 5-year Faculty Development in the Space Sciences (FDSS) project
is to enable a new faculty hire in the space sciences at the University of
California at Los Angeles (UCLA). The UCLA has a long tradition of teaching and
research excellence in the space sciences, as reflected in the quality of
graduate student applicants, and numerous NSF, NASA and AGU awards/medals.
However, there has been a continued reduction in its space science faculty, and
budgetary issues from the state have prevented adequate renewal to date. A
junior faculty member is urgently needed to maintain and grow the program in
this most vigorous field. The new hire will be strongly encouraged and supported
in integrating into the University program of education, outreach, and research,
and in strengthening partnerships within the university and space science
community commensurate with the new hire's field of specialization. Available
resources include facilities and expertise in spacecraft and instrument
development, computation/modeling, plasma laboratory, as well as established
outreach activities and educational training. As part of this 5-year project,
the new faculty hire will initiate an Inter-Departmental Program (IDP) that will
streamline the Space Science graduate application process, consolidate the
graduate education program, and develop an undergraduate education program that
will be nominally offered as a free-standing minor in the PA department, and
part of the IDP. Particular emphasis will be placed on fostering participation
by women and traditionally underrepresented groups in the recruitment
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential faculty hire at the UCLA will be
expected to advance the state of scientific knowledge through her or his
research activities performed within their research group, and collaboratively
amongst the faculty and researchers at UCLA and more broadly in the space
science community. There are numerous fundamental and applied plasma and physics
problems that can be addressed uniquely using the natural plasma laboratory
which is the Earth's space environment. A new faculty hire will also enhance the
intellectual ecosystem within UCLA, cross-pollinating the educational system for
undergraduates and non-majors, sparking new ideas and advancing knowledge within
its own field and across different fields. The potential faculty hire at the
UCLA will have broader impacts in terms of education, through teaching
undergraduate and graduate classes in space physics, or related subjects at the
UCLA, advancing the state of the art in education through innovative teaching
approaches, and in educating the broader public through outreach events to the
community and local schools. The research and EPO agenda of this 5-year project
supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.