* 1936098
* CAREER: Designing a New Nexus: Examining the Social Construction of Electronics and Computing Toolkits to Broaden Participation and Deepen Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kylie Peppler, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 292,153.00

The persistently lopsided gender makeup of computer and information science
programs in US universities and colleges suggests that the gender gap in
computing education is still obstinately wide. Despite several national
initiatives to diversify participation in STEM fields, the underlying culture of
computing education remains relatively stagnant, with curriculum, tools and
materials that continue to emphasize areas historically aligned more closely
with male interests than women's. This project takes a very different starting
point to understanding the pipeline challenge of women's underrepresentation in
STEM careers through focusing on how young girls learn. Through understanding
the socially situated nature of learning tools and materials, educators and
technologists can design more equitable learning environments for all youth and
extend current learning theory to better understand the role of tools and
artifacts in the learning process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to the
understanding of learning is the relationship between various tools and
technologies and the structuring of disciplinary subject matter. However, very
little empirical research exists to inform contemporary understanding of how
tools and materials shape learning and participation across this emerging
technological landscape. Through a series of systematic and crosscutting
research investigations, this project provides a basis for theorizing how
contemporary electronic tools and materials (e.g., toolkits like paper
computing, squishy circuits, e-textiles) shape learning and participation. Each
investigation occurs in the complexities of real-world settings such as schools
and afterschool clubs; includes the development of new sets of assessments;
illuminates design principles for creating new tools and educational ecosystems
to better support learning and equitable participation; and explores the design
of new toolkits and parts based on these emergent principles. Design-based
research guides the methods of each study, in consultation with practitioners to
help ensure each proposed activity system effectively complements curricular and
practical realities.