* 1936928
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Urban Agricultural Infratructure Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* John Crittenden, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,998.00

In the 21st Century, agriculture, technology, urbanization, population growth,
community culture, and consumer demand will come together to create new pathways
for the large-scale production of nutritional and safe food, generation of jobs,
improvement of human health, management of resources, treatment and production
of water, and efficient use of energy. Newly-structured and improved nutrient,
energy, water, and transportation (NEWT) systems will diversify, decentralize,
localize, and democratize food production, processing, and distribution in urban
areas where most people will live and where NEWT (and labor) resources are
readily available and often wasted. Due to the synergistic benefits from
reducing NEWT inputs for food production, some commercial food can be better
grown locally using high-tech and high land-area productivity Controlled
Environmental Agriculture (CEA) systems compared to the products that they would
displace. For this vision to be realized at commercial scale, however, a host of
challenges must be overcome in the fields of civil and environmental
engineering, CEA, urban planning, food safety, health and nutritional science,
supply chain management, and consumer science. Research at the scale of an
Engineering Research Center is needed to study novel optimized technology-driven
CEA systems that can achieve high areal food productivity to increase the food
and nutritional security in urban areas with low operating cost and reduced
energy and water consumption. This planning grant will enable the building of a
diverse research, education, and innovation team that identifies and develops
leaders that are effective in managing team science efforts and skilled in the
best practices for managing large research centers. This team will develop and
practice effective means for inclusive collaboration and decision-making among
disciplinary, geographically and demographically diverse partners. Additionally,
the planning grant team will jointly develop a 10-year roadmap of research,
education, and innovation that would enable the vision for urban agricultural
infrastructure systems to be realized. To accomplish these goals, the planning
grant team will conduct a series of leader-building activities, diversity and
inclusion training, and science communications exercises. These activities will
help all participants become more effective leaders, better administrators and
stewards of research resources, articulate communicators of complex science and
engineering phenomena, skilled builders of diverse research teams, and
knowledgeable and adaptable practitioners of team science. While investigators
are typically selected for teams based on their research expertise, most have
received no formal training in leadership, team science, diversity and
inclusion, scientific communication, and other underpinning skills. These are
critical skills that large research teams need if they are to succeed. Through a
shared experience, participants also will develop multi-generational and
mentoring relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team, and the diverse partners
it will recruit through this grant, will begin identifying the shared values
upon which future urban agricultural infrastructure systems will be built. This
will require the team to consider multiple objectives and perspectives, and to
develop a roadmap for the next 10 years that will describe the work that needs
to done to 1) uncover the interconnections, interdependencies, and synergies
among urban infrastructure systems and food producing agricultural systems; 2)
work with industry and government to create the technologies, policies,
programs, and markets for urban agriculture to succeed at the commodity scale;
3) develop and test the laws, rules, standards, and best practices for siting,
designing, building, and operating sustainable and resilient urban agricultural
systems; 4) develop the practice of teaching engineered urban agricultural
systems; 5) recruit and train the first generation of engineers, scientists,
designers, managers, and analysts, that are as diverse as the communities in
which they will serve; and 6) foster agricultural technology entrepreneurship
within a start-up ecosystem while training students to pursue intellectual
property development, social entrepreneurship, and sustainable technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.