* 1936930
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Biologically Inspired Realizable Building Energy Eco-Systems (BIRDBEES)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Jeffrey Turner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 02/28/2022
* USD 99,887.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research Center planning grant
will bring together biological and other scientists, engineers and other
stakeholders from industry to develop biologically based approaches to building
energy systems. This project views buildings as living, breathing organisms
(coupled fluid flow, heat and mass transfer, water and moisture transfer,
complex control systems, etc.) to identify biological strategies that can enable
novel mechanisms for enhancing energy and material efficiency of the built
environment, a process referred to as Biologically Inspired Design (BID). For
instance, polar bears and whales adapt extremely well to cold environments using
multifaceted and precisely controlled insulation schemes that can inspire new
designs for adaptable building skins. The ERC planning grant participants will
learn and employ deep BID methods that converge biological sciences with
engineering to provide new approaches for a) fundamental energy systems
technology components such as heat exchangers, pumps, insulation, building
skins, energy storage, b) inspiration for new building technologies that
integrate the various components with biologically inspired control systems, c)
ecosystems of buildings that provide even larger energy reductions through
symbiotic interaction of bio-inspired buildings. A radical shift in building
technologies is critical to achieve the carbon emission reductions required to
avoid the effects of worsening climate. Residential and commercial buildings
account for about 40% of total U.S. energy consumption and carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions and more than 70% of electricity use. This planning grant will
accelerate the use of BID to improve the material and energy use efficiency of
buildings throughout their life from construction to operation to re- or de-
commissioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rationale for using biologically
inspired design (BID) approach for a) building energy components, b) building
design and c) ecosystems of buildings is that at all levels of organization,
biological systems employ different strategies that have evolved under stringent
penalties for material and energy inefficiency. Identifying functions in
biological systems analogous to functions required in buildings, and the
translating those biological mechanisms ("solution principles") to human devices
and processes will yield commensurate benefits at all scales, from internal
processes in individual building energy systems to communities of buildings. To
enable the BID approach, the participants of activities funded by this planning
grant will learn a series of analogical based design techniques (problem
decomposition, functional extraction, assessment of analogical matching etc) and
apply these methods to the problem of building energy management. The goal is to
leverage biological "solution principles" to identify novel and effective ways
of reducing the energy required to construct and operate buildings while
ensuring they are comfortable for their human occupants. Solution principles
from natural systems emphasize material hierarchy, adaptive use of information
and feedback, distributed decision making and other operating methods, all of
which are novel in the context of human solutions and are less intensive in
their use of material and energy. In addition to identifying potential solution
principles, participants will use analogical evaluation techniques to determine
best matches between biological solutions and existing problems, and use
targeted searches of the biological and engineering/science literature to
determine the barriers (both conceptual and technical) that stand in the way of
developing innovative biologically-inspired solutions. These activities will
result in determining the ERC guiding questions, personnel, and approaches
necessary to achieve enabling technologies and will create a community of
biological and other scientists, engineers and end users equipped with the
necessary skills to apply BID to design and retrofits of
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.