* 1936642
* Integrating Observational Constraints and Modeling of Atmospheric Reactive Organic Carbon
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Colette Heald, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 598,754.00

This project is designed to improve the modeling of reactive organic carbon in
the atmosphere. Reactive organic carbon species play a central role in
controlling the overall composition of the troposphere. The oxidation of organic
carbon ultimately leads to the formation of organic aerosol, ozone, and carbon
dioxide, and is therefore of critical importance to understanding the formation
of air pollution and the causes of climate change. This research is designed to
improve the understanding of the role of reactive organic carbon in tropospheric
chemistry, and to provide significant improvements to the GEOS-Chem model,
leading to more accurate information for policy decisions regarding air quality
and climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two overarching goals for this project
are to assess the key contributors to reactive organic carbon (ROC) mass and
reactivity in both observations and models, and to improve model descriptions of
ROC and test these against observations. This project will synthesize past and
on-going field measurements to explore new concepts and as a means of testing
model schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The revised research plan includes the
following tasks: (1) Observationally characterize and contrast the ROC mass
concentrations and OH reactivity observed during two recent field campaigns in
the United States; (2) Improve a global model description of ROC processing,
with a focus on photochemical loss of organic aerosol; (3) Improve a global
model description of ROC chemistry, with a focus on monoterpene oxidation
chemistry; (4) Assess the characteristics of OH and NO3 reactivity as
represented by a global model; and (5) Use Zeppelin measurements to test the
model representation of ROC and OH reactivity over
Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.