* 1936656
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Analytics-Driven Accessible Pathways To Impacts-Validated Education (ADAPTIVE)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Ariel Anbar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 995,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is the
development of powerful, data-driven tools to support the tens of millions of US
workers whose jobs are being transformed by Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
automation. Our nation's economic competitiveness and social fabric depend on
how well we prepare individuals for this transformation via career-relevant
skills development. Yet, with ever-changing job skill requirements and the
proliferation of online training options, lifelong learners are facing a growing
information gap. To address this, in Phase I, we will develop and pilot test
meaningful data visualizations and analytics about the relevance and efficacy of
available learning opportunities and credentials to help learners make informed,
labor market aligned reskilling choices. In Phase II, the project will develop a
career recommender "GPS" platform. Incorporating learning analytics and outcomes
data from thousands of course and credential offerings and real-time labor
market data, the platform will provide equitable access to decision support to
US workers across a lifetime of learning and skill development. The team is
comprised of data and learning scientists, economists, education researchers,
and course designers. Partners include The Boeing Company, Burning Glass
Technologies, and O*Net.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator
Phase I project advances understanding of "learning in the flow of work" and
develops new data-rich tools to help learners and education providers navigate
the rapidly changing labor market. It will demonstrate how labor market and
course syllabi data, learning analytics, and insights on transferability of
learned skills can be combined and visualized in novel ways to support a
learner's decision-making about, sustained engagement in, and application to
their job of professional skills acquired through education and job-related
training. Instructors and course developers can also apply these data-driven
insights to support faster revision cycles and better alignment of courses with
ever-changing labor market skill demands. Three convergent lines of research and
development are proposed: (1) Development of a Design-Based Research paradigm
coupled with innovative Learning Analytics (DBR+LA) to study, evaluate, and
improve courses; (2) Application of DBR+LA to assess the effectiveness and
suggest improvements for courses that teach critical skills. (3) Data mining,
modeling, and visualization of millions of job postings and course syllabi to
identify gaps in current skill supply and demand and early identification of
emerging high demand skills resulting in a "reskilling recommender system" to
guide lifelong learning choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.