* 1936331
* ISN2: Interpretable and Automated Detection of Illicit Online Commercial Enterprises
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Maria Mayorga, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 530,726.00

This award will enhance national security, prosperity and health by studying
ways to automatically identify illicit commercial enterprises that operate
primarily via online advertising. While many legitimate enterprises use online
platforms, such as advertisement services, job recruitment ads, and review
boards, illicit business also make use of these services, and it may be
difficult to distinguish between them. Illicit business using these platforms
are often associated with human trafficking activity. This project develops
methods to analyze large amounts of online data from multiple sources to create
an interpretable risk score that facilitates detection of illicit business. In
partnership with the Global Emancipation Network, a data analytics non-profit
dedicated to countering human trafficking, the project will fuse data from
business-specific operations with data from publicly available licensing
documents and court records to better detect suspicious activity and guide
resource-constrained interdiction efforts. The results will modernize anti-
trafficking efforts to keep pace with the complex strategies used by
traffickers. The award will provide support to educate graduate students to meet
the emerging needs of illicit support network research to inform
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a large existing database of scraped data
from the deep and open web, this research will build risk scores for
automatically detecting illicit businesses. Risk scores are linear
classification models that only require users to add, subtract and multiply a
few small numbers in order to make a prediction, as such, these models are easy
to apply and understand. Information in ads from illicit businesses has
distinguishing features, such as data obfuscation, non-random misspellings, high
occurrences of out-of-vocabulary and unusual words, and frequent use of Unicode
characters, making natural language processing difficult. The risk score
learning problem is formulated as a nonlinear mixed-integer optimization
problem. The analytical framework leverages and extends state-of-the-art
techniques from optimization and statistical learning and will produce a
scalable branch-and-cut procedure to solve the learning problem over large
training sets. It will employ semi-supervised learning methods to use both
labeled and unlabeled data to generate better risk scores. The performance
evaluation of the risk scores will be informed by real data from legitimate and
illicit massage businesses. The research results will be generalizable to
different data platforms, and the methods developed in this work is expected to
be translatable to detection of human trafficking in other
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.