* 1936028
* The Thirteenth (13th) International Meeting on Light and Color in Nature; Bar Harbor, Maine; July 15-19, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Raymond Lee, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides funding for students and early-career researchers to attend
the 13th International Meeting on Light and Color in Nature. This meeting brings
together researchers working in the areas of atmospheric and environmental
optics to share their findings and stimulate new areas of research. Public
engagement will include presentations at a local college and at Acadia National
Park as part of a National Park Service public event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
13th International Meeting on Light and Color in Nature will take place in Bar
Harbor, Maine in July, 2019. Projected attendance for the meeting is 40-50
participants with a full slate of oral presentations on topics such as
visibility, refraction effects, and colors created by absorption and scattering
in water and air. A planned outcome of the meeting is a special issue of the
journal Applied Optics. NSF funding is for airfare and lodging for 10 US
participants, with priority given to students, underrepresented participants,
and early-career scientists. This award is being co-funded by the Division of
Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences and the Division of Electrical, Communications
&amp; Cyber Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.