* 1936276
* QII-TAQS: Quantum Circuits Through Symmetry-Driven Valley Optoelectronics
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Alexey Belyanin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,980,000.00

Quantum information science aims to radically revolutionize technologies in
communication, computing, and sensing. However, to achieve this goal, new
materials and devices that utilize the unique properties of quantum mechanics
need to be explored and seamlessly integrated on a common platform. In this
project, the investigators will exploit the novel properties of extremely thin
quantum materials and use light to create precise quantum states to encode,
transmit, and detect information and to demonstrate proof-of-concept quantum
circuits. The goal is to demonstrate the generation, manipulation, transmission,
and detection of quantum mechanical states of a system via precisely engineered
materials on an integrated platform. If successful, this will enable the next
generation of quantum circuits that may drive quantum computers in the future.
The interdisciplinary nature of the research program will provide an excellent
educational opportunity for training graduate and undergraduate students and
prepare them for a future dominated by quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will exploit the valley
polarization properties of layered 2D quantum materials and their
heterostructures coupled to optical cavities to create precise quantum
superposition states to encode, manipulate, transmit, and detect information in
strongly coupled exciton-polaritons to demonstrate proof-of-concept quantum
circuits. The strongly-coupled valley degree of freedom-based polaritons when
escaping the system will produce photons with polarization reflecting the
internal quantum state of the system, which will then be further manipulated and
routed on-chip to different ports through routers designed via quantum symmetry
paradigms. The team will utilize the properties of quantum materials with
engineered quantum symmetries to assemble photodetectors that are sensitive to
the polarization state of the photons from the coherent valley superposition
states for on-chip detection. The interdisciplinary project will involve the
exploration of emerging quantum and topological materials and their
heterogeneous integration with integrated photonics technology to enable the
next generation of quantum photonic circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.