* 1936019
* ADVANCE Partnership: Values-based Academic Leadership Trajectories for faculty in STEM (VAuLTS)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Laura Lavine, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,218,058.00

Washington State University (WSU) ADVANCE Partnership project called "Values-
based Academic Leadership Trajectories for gender Equity in STEM" (VAuLTS) aims
to reduce the systemic barriers to achieving gender equity in STEM across
various types of higher education institutions by empowering a cadre of change
agents to implement strategies aimed at eliminating systemic barriers to gender
equity. Expected broader impacts of this project include an increase in gender
equity at the highest professoriate ranks and at the senior/executive leadership
levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several innovative strategies will be implemented
to achieve the project's goals. First, Network Improvement Communities will be
created including all interested faculty from ADVANCE grant-recipient
universities, and partners from regional 2-year institutions and predominantly
undergraduate institutions (PUIs), to address program implementation and policy
issues related to gender equity in STEM. Second, a dual leadership and mentoring
program will be created at the ADVANCE grant-recipient partner institutions
(Montana State University, University of Montana, Oregon State University, and
Western Washington University) to build leadership capacity for initiating local
policy changes and to prepare for expanding VAuLTS to include community college
and PUI partners. Third, the program will be extended to support policy change
initiatives at community college and PUI partners: Wenatchee Valley College,
Whatcom Community College, Missoula College, Columbia Basin College, Bellevue
College, Heritage University, Everett Community College and Yakima Valley
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support to
collaborations among STEM professional societies and academic and non-academic
non-profit organizations designed to broaden the implementation of evidence-
based equity strategies and have a national or regional
reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.