* 1936195
* SG: Impacts of Long-Term Warming on Plant and Microbial Control of Soil Carbon Cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Lara Souza, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 213,443.00

Soils contain twice as much carbon (C) as other terrestrial sources. This
subterranean C is mostly generated by plants and degraded by soil-dwelling
microorganisms. The balance of plant input and microbial degradation determines
how much C is stored below-ground versus released to the atmosphere. Plant-
microbe interactions may therefore hold the key to mitigating C release into the
atmosphere in a changing world. The environmental controls over how much C is
stored in soil versus released to the atmosphere are unknown. This research
leverages NSF-funded infrastructure that induced 30 years of continuous warming
to understand how temperature affects plants and microorganisms, and the long-
term soil C turnover that they mediate. The project will provide training
opportunities for a laboratory technician as well as an early-career assistant
professor, both female. In addition, the research will be integrated into the
K-12 "Biology in a Box" program to create a module on below-ground plant-microbe
interactions. The project has global importance as rising temperatures occur in
ecosystems on earth. This research will enhance ecological forecasts and
predictive models of ecosystem response at the global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial and ecosystem ecologists aim to connect
shifts in plant and microbial community composition and physiology to subsequent
changes in ecosystem functions such as C and nutrient cycling. Understanding
long-term imprints of plant and microbial communities and associated soil C
cycling under global change is paramount for predicting future global soil C
stocks. By combining ecosystem-level measurements of soil C pools and fluxes
with simultaneous measurements of plant physiology, abundance, and traits as
well as microbial abundance, composition, and function in the longest
continuously running soil warming experiment, this project will collect one of
the most comprehensive data sets linking plant and microbial influence on soil C
storage under global change. In addition, this research will use estimates of
plant and microbial chemical fingerprints to detect their impacts on soil C
pools and longevity in response to warming across soil depths. These data are
necessary to project future soil C storage in a warmer climate. If microbial
communities acclimate or adapt their genetic repertoire or functional gene
expression rates under long-term warming, then short-term observations of
microbial C cycling in response to warming are inadequate for forward
projections of soil C stocks. Therefore, model projections of future soil C
stocks that are predicated on short-term (5-10 year) microbial responses to
warming likely predict larger C losses than may actually occur. Only by
understanding the mechanisms controlling soil C cycling can we make accurate
process-based ecosystem models of terrestrial C fluxes in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.