* 1936183
* EAGER: A Molecular Tool to Measure Mold Exposure and Remediation Effectiveness in Water-damaged Buildings
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jordan Peccia, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 171,089.00

In 2017, damage and flooding from Hurricanes Harvey, Maria, and Irma cost $265
billion. More broadly, almost one half of U.S. homes will incur water damage
from floods, humidity, and leaky plumbing. Wet sheetrock, wood, and concrete
promote the growth of mold in homes, which causes asthma, allergies, and other
respiratory disease in infants, children, and adults. Even when flooded homes
are dried and cleaned, hidden spaces in walls, baseboards, and floors often
retain water and mold. Due to uncertainties in cleaning effectiveness, the
property value of a flooded home decreases by more than 50% in the year after a
flood. The purpose of this research is to build a practical and affordable tool
to measure if building remediation has removed mold that grew due to a flooding
event. The tool uses comparative DNA sequence analyses of house dust to classify
a home as dry or moldy. This project will produce a tool or test kit that
homeowners, industry, and government relief agencies could use to determine
whether a home needs remediation, or if a flooded home has been restored to a
healthy state. Use of the tool resulting from this project by private
remediation companies and public disaster and relief agencies has great
potential to protect human health, maintain property values after floods, and
improve our Nation's response to flooding events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
water penetrates into homes during flooding or outdoor precipitation events, the
increase in building material water activity enables the growth of fungi on
indoor surfaces. Visible fungal growth and moisture inside buildings is
consistently associated with respiratory and allergic health effects in infants,
children, and adults. Even when remediated, hidden spaces in homes often retain
moisture and fungal growth, producing chronic health risks among residents and
loss in property values. These impacts are most severe for the economically
vulnerable fraction of our population. Currently there is no available, accurate
approach or test to determine if home exposure to fungi from water damaged
material occurs, or if a water damaged home can be considered mold-free after
remediation. Uncertainty caused by the lack of uniform metrics leaves home
owners and relief agencies reliant upon subjective and possibly unneeded
recommendations for cleaning, restoration, and remediation; and potential
property devaluations and loss of personal wealth. The goal of this proposed
research is to build a practical, affordable, and quantitative tool for two
purposes. First to assess whether exposure to fungi from water damage has
occurred in a home. Second, to determine if building remediation has removed
exposure to fungi that originated during a water intrusion event. The tool is
based on comparative DNA sequence analysis to identify changes in home fungal
communities due to building dampness. To create this potentially transformative
tool, the research project will focus on developing the science of home sampling
using computational biology approaches that can identify subtle differences in
fungal ecology. Successful completion of this research can transform our
Nation's response and financial exposure to flooding. In 2017, structural damage
and flooding from Hurricanes Harvey, Maria, and Irma cost $265 billion. By
providing quantitative measures from which to assess both the need for
remediation and its success, this research can protect human health, maintain
property values after floods, and improve our Nation's response to flooding
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.