* 1936667
* Travel Awards for Students from Underrepresented Groups for the 2019 Cognitive Development Society (CDS) Meeting; Louisville, KY - October 2019
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Tamar Kushnir, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 20,623.00

The Cognitive Development Society (CDS) was founded in 1999 with the goal of
providing an intellectual gathering point for researchers who focus on the
development of cognitive abilities. CDS members are united by a common focus on
the developmental origins of perceiving, thinking and learning, and they are
also united in the enterprise of bringing varied perspectives and approaches to
bear on understanding these processes. Their research addresses developmental
time points across the lifespan, and focuses on multi-level biological,
behavioral, social and cultural processes shaping the development of cognitive
abilities. Because bringing together diverse perspectives and approaches is
fundamental to making progress in scientific understanding, CDS has sought to
increase diversity in its membership. The CDS seeks to promote the attendance,
at its 2019 meeting, of junior scholars (e.g., graduate students, post-docs)
from groups traditionally underrepresented in the developmental sciences. At the
conference, these scholars will present their research and participate in a
mentoring program which involves pairing them with senior researchers in the
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present award will increase the diversity of
the CDS membership through several mechanisms. The first of these involves
providing travel awards for junior scholars from underrepresented groups. The
second involves continuing the society's mentoring program in which young
scholars are paired with an established researcher. Through an organized meeting
at the start of the conference with their mentors, mentees will have the
opportunity to begin forging new professional relationships, thereby broadening
their academic networks. Mentors will support their mentees by attending the
junior scholars' presentations in order to provide support and feedback. The
third involves facilitating networking events for junior scholars from this
year's (2019) cohort and former recipients of the CDS Diversity Travel Awards
from the 2015 and 2017 meetings. Together, these experiences are designed to
promote the success of junior scholars from diverse backgrounds as both
conference participants and as future independent investigators. Anonymous
feedback from the junior scholars and their mentors following the 2019 meeting
will help ensure that CDS can improve upon the effectiveness of its travel
awards in achieving its goal of increasing the involvement of scholars
traditionally underrepresented in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.