* 1936251
* FDSS: Faculty Development in a Multifaceted Geospace Program at West Virginia University
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Earl Scime, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,115,916.00

The goal of this 5-year Faculty Development in the Space Sciences (FDSS) project
is to enable a new faculty hire in the geospace sciences at the Department of
Physics and Astronomy at the West Virginia University (WVU). The current
geospace plasma science group at the WVU is multifaceted, with five
tenured/tenure-track faculty, a research professor, and a teaching professor who
also is active in geospace research. The group's expertise spans the gamut of
approaches to geospace plasma science research, including laboratory experiment,
theory, high-performance computing, machine learning, solar observations,
magnetospheric observations, and CubeSat development. The group has a long
history of success in the geospace sciences, including research, training and
placement of undergraduate and graduate students, and cross-disciplinary
activities. The current geospace plasma science group is large enough to have
the infrastructure to support an expanding group, including laboratory space, a
diverse set of colleagues --- by research area, career stage, and gender --- and
a suite of existing classes in fundamental plasma physics. However, the group is
also small enough where a new hire would have a significant impact, such as
bridging links between existing faculty, bringing new capabilities, and
transitioning a new graduate geospace physics special-topics course into a
permanent course on a two-year cadence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new faculty
hire at the WVU would represent genuine growth to the geospace sciences
community. The WVU Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering recently
expanded into geospace science research, providing opportunities for
partnerships within the university community. The strategic need of the geospace
plasma science group at the WVU is for an experimental position, defined broadly
to include laboratory investigations of geospace-relevant physics and/or
development of instrumentation for observational platforms. The department has
the infrastructure to allow such a new hire to thrive, and it would present
significant opportunities for student involvement in research and training to be
future leaders in the field as is the intention of the FDSS program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new faculty hire to the WVU geospace plasma science
group supports the strategic hiring plan of the Department of Physics and
Astronomy to continue the active pipeline of student training in the field and
the development of the workforce in the geospace sciences. Laboratory
experiments, especially current and past ones at WVU, have been immensely
successful in the training of undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. The course creation enhances the infrastructure for
education in geospace sciences. The WVU geospace plasma science group has a long
history of high activity in public outreach, so any new hire would have many
opportunities to become involved. This 5-year FDSS project supports the training
of a graduate student and postdoctoral researcher, which is a key aspect of the
FDSS program. The WVU geospace plasma science group in particular, and the
Department of Physics and Astronomy in general, has a demonstrated track-record
of high regard for the principles of diversity, equity, and inclusivity in
department life and demonstrated success in diverse hiring in the geospace
sciences. The WVU has infrastructure to support new hires, including an ADVANCE
office for diverse hires resulting from a previous NSF ADVANCE IT grant. The
research and EPO agenda of this 5-year FDSS project supports the Strategic Goals
of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.