* 1936314
* QII-TAQS: Quantum Machine Learning with Photonics
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Seth Lloyd, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

Deep learning is revolutionizing computing for an ever-increasing range of
applications, from natural language processing to particle physics to cancer
diagnosis. These advances have been made possible by a combination of
algorithmic design and dedicated hardware development. Quantum computing, while
more nascent, is experiencing a similar trajectory, with a rapidly closing gap
between current hardware and the scale required for practical implementation of
quantum algorithms. But we are still extremely far away from a full-scale
quantum computer that can implement gate-based computer architectures. Such
architectures require quantum error correction to make the system robust against
noise, which remains outside the reach of existing quantum technology. This
project aims to develop a new approach to quantum computation by adopting
concepts from the field of machine learning. In contrast to conventional
approaches where computation is decomposed into logical gates, the investigators
will focus on quantum computing architectures inspired by machine learning and
deep learning to implement quantum protocols that are naturally efficient and
robust to noise. These architectures are ideally suited to maximize the
computational capabilities of currently available noisy quantum processors
because machine learning algorithms can be trained using efficient methods such
as back-propagation. The project represents a highly multi-disciplinary effort
that combines quantum hardware development with algorithms and computer
architecture design to create quantum protocols and devices that can be
leveraged for near-term application in quantum simulation, machine learning,
optimization, and quantum communication. Success of the project could open a
completely new approach to quantum computing that enables currently available
quantum hardware to efficiently solve problems in a broad range of fields such
as medicine, biology, nuclear physics, and fundamental quantum science. The
program also entails a strong outreach effort that integrates education at the
high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels with public education through a
series of YouTube educational modules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated quantum
photonics enables dynamic, high-fidelity generation and manipulation of quantum
states of light, and is therefore a natural platform with which to develop chip-
based quantum machine learning architectures. Leveraging both the versatility of
neural networks and the computational complexity of quantum optics, the program
develops chip-based deep quantum optical neural networks for applications in
quantum computation, simulation, communication, machine learning, and beyond.
Taking inspiration from the burgeoning field of neural networks, this hardware
platform combines semiconductor quantum light sources (input encoding) with
dynamically reconfigurable linear optical circuitry (matrix multiplication) and
strong single photon nonlinearities (the quantum neuron), to develop a new
paradigm for next generation quantum processors. In parallel, the theory effort
will develop a robust numerical platform to simulate quantum machine learning
protocols based on the hardware platform and design new protocols for multiple
applications including image and pattern recognition, optimization, and quantum
communication. The strong collaborative interactions between hardware and theory
will thus be leveraged to develop an entirely new arsenal of protocols that
exploit the unique physical properties of photons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by Quantum Leap Big Idea Program and the Division of
Electrical, Communications, and Cyber Systems in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.