* 1936077
* 2019 AHMB MINDS Conference Grant
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

The 2019 MINDS (Mentoring for Innovative Design Solutions) Workshop organized by
Alpha Eta Mu Beta, the National Biomedical Engineering Honors Society, will be
held in parallel with the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) Annual Meeting
on October 17-20, 2019 in Philadelphia, PA. This award will support student
travel to the MINDS Workshop and BMES Annual Meeting. The MINDS Scholar Program
provides students with the opportunity to collaborate and network with peers and
mentors from across the country for a 5-month period, while building necessary
engineering design skills. The students would also learn about design
considerations that are not usually stressed in coursework projects: (1) market
considerations for commercialization, (2) regulatory strategy, and (3)
evaluating prospects for intellectual property protection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be selected through a competitive process,
with junior undergraduates preferred. Students will then work with their teams
and mentors to develop a design solution, and subject matter experts will
provide support to the teams during this five-month design period. Teams will be
encouraged to submit their designs to various design contests, investment
opportunities, and grant programs. This program will develop a core group of
engineers who will better understand the importance of considering human needs
before attempting to design devices. Additionally, the collaborative and long-
distance communication skills that students will develop in this project will
better equip them to work in an environment that is increasingly dependent on
communication between distant facilities and
customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.