* 1936005
* EAGER: Non-invasive monitoring of arterial parameters via model-based analysis of arterial pulse signals measured by a microfluidic-based tactile sensor
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Julie Zhili Hao, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,935.00

With cardiovascular diseases being the leading cause of death worldwide, there
is an ever-increasing need for non-invasive monitoring of cardiovascular health
and physiology. To be effective and widely used, monitoring methods must be
relatively simple, affordable, and accurate. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project seeks to develop a novel method for non-
invasive monitoring of the cardiovascular system using a microfluidic-based
tactile sensor and associated model-based analysis. This project will also
reveal sensor-artery interaction physics that is critical for achieving accurate
and repeatable measurements. If successful, this method will revolutionize
cardiovascular health assessment and tracking by 1) allowing early detection and
timely intervention and treatment assessment of cardiovascular diseases, thus
reducing morbidity/mortality rates and lowering healthcare costs; and 2)
offering a reliable, affordable, and convenient tool to the medical field to
conduct extensive clinical studies and large epidemiological surveys to
understand cardiovascular physiology and pathology. This project will also train
students with fundamental scientific knowledge and experimental skills, and
implement several outreach activities, including research open houses and
summer-camps for local high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, a microfluidic-based tactile sensor with location-insensitive
configuration is used to measure the pulse signal in an artery at the skin
surface. By treating the measured pulse signal as a vibration signal, the
arterial wall is modeled as a second-order dynamic system. Consequently, the
associated model-based analysis allows estimation of three arterial parameters
(elasticity, viscosity and radius of the arterial wall) from only one measured
pulse signal. The overall goal of this project is to gain fundamental
understanding on how estimated arterial parameters and their concomitant changes
depend on the sensor design under different subject-specificity (Body Mass Index
and age) and to establish correlations of the estimated values with other CV
system parameters. The technical objectives of the project are to: 1)
experimentally investigate the dependence of estimated arterial parameters and
their changes on the sensor design under different subject-specificity; 2)
assess the measurement accuracy and repeatability by relevant medical readings;
3) based on the experimental results and relevant engineering principles,
establish a theoretical framework on quantitative relations of the estimated
values of arterial parameters to the sensor design under different subject-
specificity; and 4) examine correlations of estimated arterial parameters and
their changes with other CV parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.