* 1936833
* MODULUS: Data-Driven Mechanistic Modeling of Hierarchical Tissues
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Angela Fleischman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 09/30/2022
* USD 799,996.00

This project will develop new statistical and mathematical models that describe
how cells and molecules within cells self organize to perform biological
functions within an organism. While it is increasingly feasible to study
biological systems as a whole by collecting information across many scales
(e.g., cellular and molecular levels), a major challenge in such studies is to
properly integrate information from individual components in order to obtain a
complete picture of the system. What makes this task even more daunting is the
fact that biological systems are typically heterogeneous and dynamic, meaning
that the system properties tend to change across individuals, time, and space.
For investigating such complex biological systems, this project brings together
an interdisciplinary team of data and biological scientists in order to develop
and validate a new mathematical framework that combines statistical and
mechanistic models together to enable scientists to discover emergent biological
phenomena and to understand the rules that govern them. This framework will then
specifically be used to investigate hematopoiesis, which is a remarkable
biological process responsible for creation and maintenance of blood cells, and
involves complex interactions among biochemical and physical events across
temporal and spatial scales that are still not well-understood. Additionally,
this project will provide undergraduate and graduate students with a true
interdisciplinary experience with equal mentorship from data and biological
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this project is
to develop a new data-driven framework for investigating complex biological
systems that are characterized by heterogeneity, dynamics, and interactions
across multiple time and space scales. The investigators will achieve this goal
by embedding mechanistic models in a hierarchical Bayesian framework.
Hierarchical Bayesian models provide a natural framework for integrating
information (as well as prior knowledge) available at different scales.
Mechanistic models, on the other hand, provide a flexible framework for modeling
heterogeneous and dynamic systems in ways that enable prediction and control.
This mathematical framework will be used to develop optimal experimental design
strategies in order to elucidate hematopoiesis dynamics, perform new in vivo
experiments to produce serially sampled barcoded single-cell gene expression
profiles, and analyze the resulting data. Hematopoiesis is an ideal biological
process for this modeling framework because 1) cell populations (stem,
progenitor, and mature cells) are well-defined, 2) experimental model systems
allow for easy manipulation, and 3) it is possible to apply stressors to
minimally perturb the system and observe the process of returning to
homeostasis/equilibrium. Successful implementation of this project will allow
scientists to gain insights into physiologic hematopoiesis. The methodology
developed in this project will be transferable to other heterogeneous and
dynamic biological systems in developmental biology, ecology, and epidemiology.
This award was co-funded by Systems and Synthetic Biology in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Mathematical Biology Program of the
Division of Mathematical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.