* 1936981
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Technologies and Design for Sustainable Offshore Aquaculture (SOA)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Michael Triantafyllou, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 02/28/2022
* USD 98,825.00

This ERC planning grant will bring together scientists and engineers from
universities, Sea Grant programs, aquaculture innovation centers, associations,
and industry in a series of in-person and online planning meetings where they
will establish trust, working relationships, and common frameworks and language
to develop a full ERC proposal focused on developing Sustainable Offshore
Integrated Multi-Trophic Aquaculture (O-IMTA) in the US. Seafood is a crucial
source of protein and key to ending hunger and fostering a healthy public, both
in the US and across the globe. The US imports over 90% of seafood consumed
domestically, and wild capture fisheries production has plateaued since the
mid-1990s. Key technical advances and collaborative approaches to innovative
offshore fish farming strategies are necessary to satisfy the U.S. demand for
seafood, in a sustainable and economically viable manner, and to make the U.S.
seafood industry more independent and secure. Moving aquaculture offshore into
deeper waters presents the opportunity to access less crowded, cleaner, and more
nutrient-rich environments; however, locating in deeper waters can increase
operational costs and technical challenges. Our team will strive to develop a
roadmap for a cohesive ERC focused on addressing key technical challenges for
O-IMTA: including the development of novel technologies, materials, and sensors
to ensure aquaculture farms withstand environmental forces (e.g., waves) and
conditions (e.g., temperature and changing water quality), reducing
environmental impact of offshore systems, and increasing system autonomy to
require minimal human interaction, all while maintaining economically viable and
healthy production output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Fulfilling the
promise of O-IMTA poses multiple scientific and technological challenges -
socio-technical, infrastructure systems, and enabling technologies - and
requires the convergence of biophysical, social, and engineering sciences within
a transdisciplinary framework. We will focus on three preliminary research
thrusts: (1) circularity, sustainability, and system analysis and design; (2)
structures and equipment for installation and operation of aquaculture,
including automation, energy, and communications; and (3) sensing, monitoring,
and data analysis, including IoT (Internet of Things), Big Data and AI
(Artificial Intelligence) for site selection and operations. The planning grant
will facilitate a series of in-person and online planning meetings, and site
visits to regional aquaculture centers, where participants from universities,
Sea Grant programs, aquaculture innovation centers, associations, and industry
can establish trust, working relationships, collaborations, and common
frameworks and language. The outcomes of the meetings will include a shared
vision for O-IMTA, identification of the key challenges for making O-IMTA
sustainable and economically viable and the crystallizing research thrusts
needed to overcome these challenges. Additional outcomes will include developing
programs and road maps for education, workforce development, inclusion and
diversity, and an innovation ecosystem that considers the needs and constraints
of industry and society; recruiting additional investigators and practitioner
collaborators; and designing an organizational structure for an ERC focused on
O-IMTA innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.