* 1936031
* I-Corps: Low-energy High-speed Optical Interconnects for Quantum Computers
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2021
* German Kolmakov, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
interconnects between low-temperature quantum computing systems and the end
users by using optical signal transmission. This method provides an alternative
to the current electric signal transmission lines, which are easily disturbed by
thermal noise. The project will address the current technological challenge of
combining, as a single information circuit, the quantum computing systems and
high-speed optical information distribution networks. Specifically, the project
will (i) enable significant increases to the data processing and transfer rates
for the end user and (ii) reduce the overall power consumption of the system.
The proposed innovation will potentially enable to shift the quantum computing
paradigm from the current experimental stage to large-scale applications in
industry including big data science, artificial intelligence, biotechnology and
drag discovery, and financial forecasting, as well as national security by
including robust quantum-encrypted communication and quantum
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will further develop optical
interconnects for quantum computing. The proposed technology utilizes cavity
polaritons, which are photons dressed with charges in a semiconductor optical
microcavity and, unlike photons in vacuum or dielectrics, are extremely
sensitive to electric fields. This enables re-routing, switching on and off the
light by means of the electric pulses from the qubit readout system. The use of
emergent two-dimensional excitonic materials such as transition metal
chalcogenides helps to significantly increase the light-matter interactions and
thereby to improve the stability of the data transfer protocol by increasing the
working speed, lowering latency and reducing the power consumption in the
system. The latter will allow mitigation of the cooling power constraints for
maintaining the cryogenic quantum computing data-transfer
module.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.