* 1936321
* QII-TAQS: Quantum-Enhanced Telescopy
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michael Raymer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,999,728.00

The angular resolution of a telescope is determined by the wavelength of the
detected light divided by the aperture size. One can increase the effective
aperture size by using multiple separated telescopes, assuming one can bring the
signals together coherently and interfere them; this is the principal upon which
large radio telescope arrays operate, and what enabled the Event Horizon
Telescope to recently capture the first-ever image of a black hole.
Unfortunately, it is much more difficult to do this for visible wavelengths.
Several years ago, a modified form of quantum teleportation was proposed to
effectively bring the signals from multiple telescopes together; implemented
correctly, quantum teleportation realizes an effectively lossless channel.
Through this project a multidisciplinary team of researchers in astronomy,
electrical engineering, physics, and quantum information theory aims to perform
the first proof-of-principle table-top demonstrations showing the advantage of
such quantum-enhanced telescopy. This work develops a deeper understanding of
the fundamental science of the role and potential of quantum mechanics in multi-
telescope interferometric imaging, creates a distributed quantum sensor relevant
to the broader field of quantum communication, and engineers new technologies
for producing quantum light and detecting it at high rates, making the research
of value for multiple applications. This project supports the training of
students in multidisciplinary collaboration, the expansion and development of
courses in quantum information science, and public outreach activities to
encourage young people and minorities to explore science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a table-top testbed optical
setup with simulated stellar sources in the form of single-photon sources and
highly attenuated thermal sources, and a simulated telescope network that uses
coincidence detection between telescopes to determine the spatial coherence of
the modes from the source. The investigators aim to 1) demonstrate for the first
time quantum-enhanced telescopy with a simulated source using one single photon
per collected mode, 2) extend the demonstration by implementing a faster
multimode parallel-processing version of the protocol, and 3) explore going
beyond this initial approach and implement more efficient multimode operations
with all-optical methods and using quantum error correction techniques. The
largest long-term scientific payoff of this research would be the development of
practical astronomical interferometers with quantum-enhanced performance.
Shorter-term outcomes include a deeper understanding of distributed quantum
sensing and the development of new techniques that use quantum light, both of
which have broad applicability beyond astronomical
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.