* 1936636
* Pyroelectrochemical Cell: Enabling Intelligent Self-Powered Systems via Direct Conversion of Thermal Energy to Stored Electrochemical Energy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Shad Roundy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 374,000.00

Power availability remains one of the central limiting factors for the
implementation of wireless sensors in many applications. For example, smart
precision agriculture could increase crop yields while simultaneously reducing
fresh water resources and maintaining soil health through the use of self-
powered, wireless soil and moisture sensors. Wearable health sensors that are
thin, flexible, and have 24/7 operation capability can provide early warnings
for a wide variety of conditions such as cardiac arrhythmia and can provide
real-time information for conditions such as asthma. However, such applications
are often limited by the need to regularly re-charge or replace batteries. Thus,
the ability to harvest enough energy directly from the environment to power such
sensor systems, making them completely energy independent, could enable many
applications with wide ranging societal benefits. This project will develop new
technologies that can harvest power from ambient thermal energy, specifically
small changes in temperature that occur daily all around us, and directly store
that energy in a battery-like structure on the wireless sensor for later use.
This technology could have wide-ranging applications enabling many smart
environments with direct benefit to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to explore a new approach for the direct conversion of
thermal energy to stored electrochemical energy using a novel device called a
"pyroelectrochemical cell" (PEC). The PEC uses a pyroelectric material (porous
polyvinylidene fluoride, PVDF) as the separator of an electrochemical cell. When
the PEC is heated (or cooled), the polarization of the pyroelectric separator
decreases (or increases), producing a potential gradient that induces ion
migration to charge the cell. The inclusion of shape memory alloy (SMA) onto the
surface of the pyroelectric separator further enhances PEC charging by
integrating a stress-mediated ion migration that complements the pyroelectric
ion migration. To improve the energy independence of electronic devices, there
is great interest in powering devices from wasted environmental energy using
energy harvesting technologies, however many self-powered devices that utilize
energy harvesting still require an energy storage mechanism due to intermittent
energy availability. The PEC addresses this challenge by integrating thermal
energy harvesting and electrochemical energy storage in a single device,
eliminating the need for auxiliary device components. The goal of this work is
to fully explore and mathematically model this new technology such that it can
be used to support self-powered sensing operation while minimizing device size,
weight, and number of components. This goal will be achieved through a
combination of experimental and simulation-based tasks that seek to understand
the fundamental mechanisms of ion and electron transport within the cell,
explore the efficiency limit of the thermal-to-electrochemical energy conversion
(both with and without inclusion of SMA), and establish design principles for
integrating PEC devices in self-powered systems. The new technology and design
principles will be demonstrated through the application of an optimally designed
PEC to self-powered soil moisture sensors and tire pressure monitoring sensors.
The proposed research will be the first exploration of integrated pyroelectric
energy harvesting and electrochemical energy storage within a single device. The
research will address fundamental questions related to ion and electron
transport within the PEC (questions that remain unexplored in previous studies
of integrated piezoelectric energy harvesting and electrochemical energy
storage) and lead to new understanding of the coupled thermo-mechanical-
electrochemical interactions that occur to make the PEC
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.