* 1936620
* SciSIP Grantee Conference 2019
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Julia Melkers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 60,422.00

The Program on Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP) has been
enhancing the knowledge base for U.S. research policy since 2007 by supporting
research projects in many disciplines. The 2019 SciSIP Grantee Conference will
help to build this research area by featuring the work of early career scholars
and showing the range of research topics and useful results the field has
produced. New thinking often comes when researchers approach a problem from
different angles and put their insights together. The conference will highlight
places where this happens in the science of science and innovation policy and
point to the ways research results in this field contribute to effective U.S.
policies that encourage new support for the advancement of knowledge, well-
trained scientists and engineers, and new products and processes that strengthen
business and employment in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Conference includes five sessions that are part of the broader Atlanta
Conference on Science and Innovation Policy, which provides an international
audience for SciSIP results. One plenary session will focus specifically on the
uses of results in this field for policy, in international comparative
perspective. Another plenary, featuring two SciSIP grantees, explores new
manufacturing approaches, both within the United States and globally.
Rapporteurs will summarize SciSIP research related to the Atlanta Conference
presentations. A special half-day workshop only for SciSIP grantees held
immediately following the Atlanta Conference, including summaries from the
discussant/rapporteurs. The focus of this workshop will be on exchanging
methodological perspectives and research results, in order to create bridges
among the highly interdisciplinary SciSIP portfolio. The workshop will close
with a session featuring early career researchers, in which they will present
fruitful future directions for the field. A written summary, including the
reports from the rapporteurs, will follow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.