* 1936100
* QII-TAQS: Strongly Interacting Photons in Coupled Cavity Arrays: A Platform for Quantum Many-Body Simulation
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Norman Yao, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

Quantum technologies can revolutionize modern society, from enabling extremely
fast computation and ultra-secure communication to unlocking new materials, such
as high-temperature superconductors, that can transform day-to-day
transportation, medical imaging, and electrical power delivery. Among many
physical systems that strive to implement these technologies, light provides a
significant advantage. It is easy to control and detect the single quanta of
light called photons. Unfortunately, photons do not readily interact with each
other, which poses a serious bottleneck for developing quantum photonic
technologies. Moreover, unlike electronics, optical systems tend to be bulkier,
and thus present significant limitations on scalability. This project aims to
design quantum photonic integrated circuits that address these challenges.
Carefully-engineered integrated photonic structures, also known as resonators,
can store light in a microscopic volume for a long time. Integrating
nanoparticles with these resonators can lead to a strong interaction between the
light and nanoparticles, which subsequently mediates interaction between
photons. Moreover, such integration allows a large size reduction, enabling
hundreds of resonators to be made on a single square-millimeter chip. By coaxing
individual photons to interact with one other within an array of resonators, a
quantum network can be realized that can process quantum information. This
project aims to develop a one-of-a-kind platform for quantum technologies that
can potentially help scientists better understand effects like high-temperature
superconductivity. Furthermore, the project aims to improve the training and
education of undergraduate and high school students, with a strong emphasis on
including women and minority communities, in scientific research in quantum
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scalability remains a daunting problem for
many quantum technologies. Unfortunately, it is virtually impossible to assemble
node arrays with single atoms and solid-state defects, which, despite their
significant contributions to fundamental quantum science, are not scalable. The
field of quantum simulations thus stands to benefit enormously from a new,
disruptive experimental platform. To that end, this project aims to marry two
emerging fields, namely, solution-processed quantum dots and nanophotonic
resonator arrays, to produce a scalable, multi-node quantum system. Nanophotonic
resonators can enhance light-matter interaction via the spatial and temporal
confinement of light. By deterministically integrating a single solution-
processed quantum dot with such a resonator, strong repulsive interactions
between photons can be realized. This interaction is necessary for simulating
the complicated behavior of electrons in real materials and other strongly
correlated quantum many-body systems. Coupling several of such quantum nonlinear
resonators is key to engineering all-optical analogs of Hamiltonians of
different quantum systems, which are intractable with any classical computer
today. Combining modeling and simulation, new synthetic chemistry, and optical
characterization, three research thrusts will be pursued under this project: (i)
Simulate quantum Hamiltonians using a linear resonator array; (ii) Demonstrate
single photon nonlinearity in each resonator; (iii) Perform non-equilibrium
quantum simulations with interacting photons. The research builds upon the three
investigators' prior work on solution processed quantum materials, design and
fabrication of nanophotonic resonators, cavity quantum electrodynamics, and
quantum simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Quantum Leap Big Idea Program, the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate, and the Division of Electrical, Communications,
and Cyber Systems in the Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.