* 1936118
* QII-TAQS: Quantum Metrological Platform for Single-Molecule Bio-Sensing
* MPS,OMA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Liang Jiang, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 11/30/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

Quantum systems enable some of the most accurate measurements known to man. For
example, modern atomic clocks measure time with an accuracy exceeding one second
over the age of the universe. Recently, a new class of room temperature, solid
state, quantum systems emerged that utilize similar quantum measurement
concepts, but measure magnetic fields rather than time. In principle, these
quantum sensors based on crystallographic defects in diamond could enable the
detection of tiny magnetic fields created by nuclear spins in an individual
molecule. Such a measurement could provide important insights into complex
molecular biological processes at the level of individual molecules with atomic
resolution. Although powerful, current quantum technologies lack the sensitivity
and biophysical tools to probe biological systems in a single-molecule regime.
To overcome these limitations, this project relies on a novel, interdisciplinary
approach that combines research in physics, computer science, materials science,
and biophysics. The ability to probe biological systems in such a new regime
would be of far reaching consequences to fundamental biological research. At the
same time the concepts developed in this project will pave the way to a new
generation of biomedical devices based on quantum sensing that could
significantly simplify sample preparation and enable high throughput screening
at a fraction of today's cost. In parallel, this research project will also
contribute to training a new workforce in quantum engineering through the
development of new course materials, the establishment of conferences that
access the interdisciplinary aspects of quantum sensing, and the creation of
workshops that enable scientists from all over the world to get hands-on
training in the quantum technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative,
interdisciplinary effort develops quantum sensing capabilities for nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy of small ensembles and individual
biomolecules. Sensing based on nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond enabled
the detection of nuclear spins in single proteins and basic NMR spectra.
However, these experiments are unable to provide biological information, require
days of data acquisition, and are limited to denatured proteins. Applications to
intact proteins remain an open challenge due to limitations in quantum sensing
methodology, a lack of single-molecule techniques, and imperfections in diamond
material engineering. This project investigates fundamental mechanisms and the
engineering of systems that overcome these limitations. Specific objectives
include: (1) Theoretical exploration of the fundamental limits in single-
molecule NMR, (2) Investigation of quantum metrological protocols for single-
molecule NMR, (3) Spectroscopic study of diamond surfaces and their
functionalization, and (4) Engineering of a single-molecule platform for quantum
sensing devices. Goal 1 employs theoretical methods to investigate the limits of
single-molecule NMR in the context of multi-parameter sensing under decoherence.
Goal 2 develops and benchmarks single-molecule NMR protocols by combining
classical signal processing and experimental quantum control. Goal 3 relies on
materials science techniques and quantum sensing to understand the origin of
decoherence in shallow NV centers. Goal 4 combines methods from single-molecule
biophysics and diamond-based NMR spectroscopy for the development of a bio
quantum sensor interface. The project will advance understanding of quantum
sensing at the intersection of quantum information, engineering, and biology.
This will lead to the development and characterization of new computational
protocols and devices for single-molecule NMR sensing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Quantum Leap Big Idea
Program, the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.