* 1936965
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for AI in Construction (AI-Con)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Amir Behzadan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,999.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Planning Grant award supports the
development of a research roadmap for implementing artificial intelligence (AI)
in the construction industry and the formation of a multi-institutional team
working toward an NSF Engineering Research Center (ERC). Construction is one of
the largest global industries, employing 7% of the world's workforce and
contributing more than $10T annually to the world economy. However, it has the
lowest productivity of any manufacturing industry, labor-intensive jobs with
significant safety risks, and ballooning costs. New AI technologies have the
potential to address all these challenges, leading to massive, positive economic
and social impact. AI is poised to revolutionize the construction industry
similarly to how the assembly line revolutionized the automobile industry,
leading to significant cost reductions, higher productivity, and safer, better
paying jobs for the United States of America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
three primary activities. The first is an advisory board meeting. The 10-member
advisory board will consist of leaders in AI, construction industry leaders, and
government representatives connected with the construction industry. Its
objectives are to (1) formally define the ERC planning grant advisory board, (2)
refine and resolve the primary research themes of the ERC, and (3) identify a
group of 15 individuals from US academic institutions to invite to the second
activity. The second activity is a symposium on the topic of AI in Construction.
Its objectives are to (1) develop a research roadmap to achieve the ERC vision,
and (2) identify the academic partners for the ERC proposal. The third activity
is the ERC preproposal writing workshop. Its objectives are to (1) produce an
outline of a competitive ERC preproposal, (2) identify potential industry
shareholders for the ERC, and (3) identify a diverse ERC leadership team that
will include representatives from each partnering institution to carry out all
four foundational components of an ERC: research, engineering workforce
development, innovation ecosystem, and a culture of inclusion. Impacts of the
ERC will include significant advancements in AI algorithms, human-machine
interfacing, machine learning for generative design, and deep learning that will
transform how construction projects operate in all aspects from conception to
design to completion. Research on AI for construction will help usher in the
'third wave" of AI, which will signal an ascent toward human-level learning,
thinking, inferencing, and problem solving. The new AI technologies - and
advancements toward the third wave of AI - will largely be adaptable outside the
construction industry to impact many other disciplines and various aspects of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.