* 1936070
* ASCEND: Advancing STEM Careers by Empowering Network Development
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Elizabeth Roberts-Kirchhoff, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 999,899.00

Willamette University ADVANCE Partnership project called ASCEND: Advancing STEM
Careers by Empowering Network Development aims to drive institutional
transformation to create environments where diversity is encouraged and
supported. Three regional inter-institutional peer mentoring networks for
university administrators and mid-career STEM faculty will be formed among a
diverse set of primarily undergraduate institutions (public, private, rural,
urban, HBCU and military institutions) in the midwestern, southeastern, and
western United States. Each Regional Network will be composed of an
Administrator Alliance and five discipline-specific Faculty Alliances (four to
five participants per Alliance). Faculty participants will identify barriers
specific to their professional advancement and will develop and pursue a
strategic plan to address these obstacles and advance their careers. University
administrators will evaluate existing policies and practices at their collective
institutions, taking into consideration intersectional impact factors. In
collaboration with faculty, administrators will strategically design and
implement comprehensive campus-specific change plans that reduce barriers to
equity among faculty in STEM fields, create more equitable communities, and
foster the retention and advancement of a diverse STEM faculty
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs inter-institutional
mentoring as a means of effecting systemic change through regional Alliances of
diverse faculty and administrators. The project will determine the effectiveness
of this regional peer mentoring model in achieving equity in STEM faculty at
primarily undergraduate institutions, and will assess its impact on their
professional development, productivity, job satisfaction, personal agency,
collaborative activities, overall well-being, and career advancement.
Furthermore, it will ascertain if Administrator Alliances, working in close
association with Faculty Alliances, are an effective strategy for creating
institutional policies and infrastructure that promote gender equity. In
collaboration with an external evaluation team, outcomes will be assessed using
participant surveys, interviews, and focus groups. Additionally, online and
regional meeting observations will be conducted as well as analysis of
individual and institutional metrics. Issues of intersectionality will be
considered in data collection, analysis, and reporting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership"
awards provide support to collaborations among STEM professional societies and
academic and non-academic non-profit organizations designed to broaden the
implementation of evidence-based equity strategies and have a national or
regional reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.