* 1936921
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Gender and Racial Equity in the STEM Faculty at UMass Boston
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Adan Colon-Carmona, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

University of Massachusetts, Boston (UMB) will implement an ADVANCE Catalyst
project to conduct an institutional self-assessment to understand the status of
women faculty in STEM disciplines on the main campus. The three goals for the
project are: 1) examining the systemic barriers and facilitators of gender and
racial equity among STEM faculty through an intersectional lens in the realms of
hiring, tenure, promotion, differential service burdens, and faculty sense of
belonging, 2) piloting a strategy to address the systemic causes of gender and
racial inequities for faculty, and 3) empowering faculty and administrators to
promote gender and racial equity. The project will focus on the intersections of
faculty gender, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, different abilities, family
status, and faculty appointment type and rank.&lt;br/&gt;This two-year project
will prepare the university for future data collection and data analyses of
faculty equity which can be used by institutional leadership to inform decision-
making. The Catalyst work will also prepare the institution to implement
evidence-based strategies to enhance the university climate for all faculty
which will be outlined in a five-year faculty equity strategic plan that will be
produced as part of this project. &lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed
to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at an academic, non-profit institution of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.