* 1936910
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Ubiquitous Wireless Power for a Healthy World (POWERHEALTH)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Zoya Popovic, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This award supports a planning grant for an Engineering Research Center (ERC) to
create a "Healthy World" by providing ubiquitous wireless power technologies for
a wide range of applications that involve monitoring and improving health from
humans to animals, plants and infrastructure. This potential ERC would provide
foundational technologies required for wireless power transfer to
implantable/wearable medical devices and other internet-connected devices.
Although electronic design and manufacturing have enabled incredible advances
across these fields, the methods for powering such devices have not seen similar
progress. The center would create the environment for developing these
technologies by providing transformative technical advancements. The planning
team consists of faculty with the necessary expertise in materials, health, and
engineering across five institutions-Penn State, University of Michigan,
University of Florida, University of Colorado Boulder, and University of Puerto
Rico Mayaguez. Penn State will lead the planning team providing leadership in
developing the technology roadmap and testbeds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
planning grant for the proposed Engineering Research Center will support the
research and education team building necessary to address challenges and
identify opportunities. The ultimate goal of the planning activities will be to
identify the industrial base, technology roadmap, technology barriers,
regulations and standards, commercialization partners, and intellectual property
for the targeted health-relevant wireless power transfer space. A
multidisciplinary engineering team will be formed to address known technology
barriers, such as tunable components (inductors, capacitors) and circuits that
address variability, beam focusing, understanding of human-in-the-loop wireless
power transfer, health safety, and human-behavior affecting technology adoption,
as well as others identified during the planning workshop and industrial visits.
The team will implement a 3-tier approach to meet the necessary translational
requirements for widespread wireless power transfer implementation, including
efficiency, power density, safety, function and distance. Throughout the
program, emphasis will be on understanding the current barriers to develop
fundamental solutions that provide transformative
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.