* 1936020
* International Summer School on Bio-X: Biocomplexity, Biodesign, Bioinnovation, Biomanufacturing, Biodatascience
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,10/31/2022
* Metin Akay, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 10/31/2022
* USD 15,000.00

Innovations in engineering and technology have significantly promoted and
advanced scientific discoveries over the last few decades. These innovations
have not only been rapid, but have also increased the quality and reduced the
cost of healthcare and inspired new research areas, such as precision medicine.
Additionally, these scientific discoveries reveal the importance of increased
collaboration between researchers in medicine and engineering to address the
problems and obstacles that arise in health care, and, most notably, for the
development of new education directions to translate medical science and
engineering concepts into curriculums and clinical research for the preparation
of the next generation global healthcare workforce. To accentuate these critical
and emerging developments, the summer school 2019 will be held at the Orthodox
Academy of Crete (OAC), Kolympari, Chania, Crete, Greece, June 9-15, 2019 with
the participation of 30 undergraduate and graduate students and 8 faculty. The
main objective of this proposed education program is to expose undergraduate and
graduate biological science and bioengineering students to new approaches and
advancements in the brain and life sciences, data science and artificial
intelligence for biomedicine, healthcare entrepreneurship and
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging computational tools facilitate the
collection and analysis of vast amounts of biomedical data collected at multiple
temporal and spatial scales using smart sensors. The investigation of complex
biomedical systems requires the integration of smart sensors and analytics and
an extensive collaboration between biologists, mathematicians, computer
scientists and engineers to improve our understanding of processes from genes to
systems to behavior. Such collaboration also allows for the development of
better diagnostics and treatments for diseases, the identification of new
research directions and the preparation of the next generation global healthcare
workforce. The summer school will focus on new approaches and advancements in
the brain and life sciences, data science and artificial intelligence for
biomedicine, healthcare entrepreneurship and innovation and the need for a
paradigm shift in biomedical engineering and science education. Also discussed
will be the need for research that places an emphasis on the opportunities
presented by combining translational research with the fields of data science,
engineering innovation and entrepreneurship, and the potential impact on
economic growth. The summer school provides an excellent learning, teaching and
brain storming opportunity for students and young researchers as well as the
summer school faculty. It is an opportunity for students to personally meet with
leaders in the field, while enjoying a pleasant location. This summer school
will further stimulate interdisciplinary research and collaborations among
engineers, mathematicians, computer scientists, and medical researchers while
identifying new research directions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.