* 1936351
* QII-TAQS: Chip-Scale Quantum Emulators Based on Polaritonic Lattices
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Vinod Menon, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,978,219.00

Quantum simulators (emulators) are used to simulate computationally complex and
experimentally inaccessible problems using a controllable quantum system. Such a
simulator is a task-specific device that mimics the physical behavior of a
system of interest that is computationally hard to model or experimentally
difficult to realize. Different platforms for simulators, such as cold atoms in
an optical lattice, quantum nanostructures, superconducting circuits, and
defects in diamond, have been proposed and some partially realized. Under this
research program the team will take a distinct approach based on half-light
half-matter quasiparticles (a.k.a. exciton-polaritons) as a "programmable
quantum matter" platform to realize chip-scale quantum emulators. Specifically,
the researchers will use organic molecular systems combined with light-trapping
structures to simulate systems ranging from magnetism to electron transport in
quasicrystals. This architecture, which relies on the latest advances in
photonics and solid-states physics, can also be leveraged to solve diverse
computationally intractable problems from protein folding and neural networks to
the dynamics of financial markets. The program will help train a cadre of
graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral associates in the broad
area of quantum technologies. The program will also benefit from strong
international partnerships. Outreach efforts will focus on developing a high
school curriculum to introduce concepts of quantum technologies and public
events targeted at making the public aware of quantum technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum emulators leverage the control of interacting
degrees of freedom to simulate complex quantum phases of matter arising in many-
body systems that are outside the reach of classical computers. Through this
research program the team aims to develop a chip-scale quantum emulator platform
based on lattices of exciton-polaritons (strongly coupled half-light half-matter
quasiparticles). This platform for analog quantum emulation will exploit
exciton-polariton condensates in lattices, an alternative to more widespread
atom-lattice approaches. Owing to their hybrid character, the photon component
lends the system small mass, coherence, and ability to engineer the potential
energy landscape, while the matter component provides the necessary nonlinearity
and interactions that can be controlled on demand. The research program will use
excitons in organic molecular systems as the material component, which presents
unique advantages such as elevated operational temperature, tunability, and the
possibility to engineer the optical properties through molecular design. Through
careful engineering of the photonic band structure, polariton lattices with
complex band-structures will be realized. Additionally, exciton polariton
condensates, being intrinsically a driven dissipative system, present an ideal
platform to emulate and uncover out-of-equilibrium quantum orders. Specific
program goals include the demonstration of exciton polariton condensate lattices
with controlled interactions to simulate: (i) ferromagnetism and anti-
ferromagnetism in a one-dimensional polariton lattice, (ii) disorder protected
non-equilibrium quantum orders in quasiperiodic lattices, and (iii)
topologically protected states in two-dimensional lattices with engineered
chiral symmetries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Quantum Leap Big Idea Program and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.