* 1936146
* Cooperative Transport in Ion-Conducting Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Bryan Beckingham, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2024
* USD 308,440.00

Ion-containing polymer membranes are critical components in many technologies
including chemical separations, water purification, fuel cells, and other energy
generation and storage devices. In solar-fuel devices, ion-containing polymer
membranes are responsible for permitting the selective transport of ions between
electrodes to maintain overall charge neutrality yet limit the transport of
oxidation and reduction products produced at the electrodes. Improvements in
membrane technology for these applications requires new material development
that will rely on fundamental understanding of the relationships between polymer
membrane structure and the transport of ions, molecules and complex mixtures.
This project leverages a tunable membrane design strategy to investigate
fundamental relationships between membrane structure, membrane physicochemical
properties, and membrane-transport behavior of ion-containing polymer membranes.
Results from this study will provide fundamental structure-property relations
which will guide the future design of ion-containing polymer membranes. The
research will train undergraduate and graduate students in cutting edge research
in membrane science and engage students from underrepresented groups in STEM
fields. The investigators will also develop and disseminate hands-on educational
and outreach activities, including undergraduate independent study experiences
and exploratory modules related to STEM and membrane science through summer
research experiences and primary education outreach including summer engineering
camps for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to elucidate how co-transporting neutral species impact the transport of
charged species in ion containing polymer membranes with membrane-bound anions
(cation exchange membranes). The research hypothesis is that the presence of
neutral species reduces electrostatic interactions (i.e. Donnan exclusion) that
occur between membrane-bound sulfonate anions and permeating anions, leading to
increased permeability of the charged solute. PEGDA-based membranes with
systematically varied membrane structure, fractional free volume, and ion
content will be synthesized and the impact of membrane chemistry on
physiochemical properties will be characterized. Fundamental solute-solute and
solute-membrane interactions will be systematically elucidated using a tunable
synthetic design strategy based on photopolymerization of acrylates and
diacrylates to control polymer membrane structure, bound ion content, and water
uptake. Transport properties (i.e. permeability, solubility, and diffusivity)
will be investigated experimentally for a neutral solute (methanol), an ionic
solute (acetate), and their complex mixture. Permeation experiments will be
conducted using custom-built diffusion cells outfitted to monitor receiver cell
solute concentrations using ATR FTIR spectroscopy enabling simultaneous
characterization of multiple simultaneous solute concentrations. This research
will have the potential to impact the design of new membrane materials for a
variety of applications, such as materials for water purification, and energy
devices such as solar fuels devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.