* 1936255
* EAGER: Flexible wireless joint sensing system for knee arthroplasty
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Donghui Zhu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2022
* USD 160,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a low power flexible wireless joint
sensor system using novel two dimensional (2D) nanomaterials. The sensor can be
used for total knee arthroplasty which is a surgical procedure to replace the
weight-bearing surfaces of the knee joint to relieve pain and disability.
Approximately 20% of total knee arthroplasty may have soft tissue imbalance or
mal-tracking components resulting in stiffness or subtle instability. Currently,
surgeons generally relied solely on their best judgment in determining what felt
like a balanced and stable knee. Therefore, ligament balancing during knee
arthroplasty is a critical procedure necessary for the longevity of the
prosthesis. The smart sensor system developed in this research can help
orthopedic surgeons by providing real-time information about soft tissue
adjustments and implant position during the surgical procedure. Since it is not
a disposable sensor, it continues to provide real-time data to monitor the
performance of the artificial knee even after the surgery. This enables surgeons
to diagnose potential malfunction and adjust the alignment of the artificial
knee during follow-up visits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flexible wireless joint
sensor system will be developed using smart materials such as graphene and MoS2,
and power-efficient wireless sensing techniques. A new design of active sensor
based on 2D materials will be fabricated and characterized. The flexible 2D
sensor array will be connected to the programmable power unit for sweeping
electric signal to measure the difference of conductivity of each unit with
pressure change. It will detect joint pressure distribution signals with high
sensitivity and rapid response with low power consumption. The measured pressure
distribution signal will be transmitted to the control system wirelessly, and
the results will be presented on a map at real-time. The circuitry for wireless
sensor system will be optimized for low power, area consumption, and accuracy.
The assembled sensor unit will be tested in situ by applying it in an artificial
knee model. Biocompatibility of implants will also be evaluated systematically
so that the materials meet the minimal biosafety criteria as bone implants. This
research project will significantly enhance undergraduate and graduate education
and research training in an integrative and interdisciplinary manner in the
broader areas of materials, mechanical, biomedical, and electrical engineering.
This interdisciplinary project will provide great educational and research
opportunities to female students and students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.