* 1936246
* QII-TAQS: Majorana Nanomanipulation for Topological Quantum Computing
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Gerhard Klimeck, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,029,905.00

The team of researchers at the University of Maryland, Harvard University, and
Purdue University aims to develop flexible methods to store and manipulate
information in quantum bits (qubits), to achieve a more robust and efficient
quantum computer. The researchers will apply a magnetic field to a "topological
superconductor" - a material in which electrons can form unusual pairs at low
temperature. The researchers will use fine control of the magnetic field to
create and exchange quantum whirls of electrical current, called vortices, whose
distinct patterns and trajectories encode quantum information. An important
component of this program will be the development of large-scale classical
computing tools to predict the motion of individual electrons and vortices, to
streamline the efficiency of more costly experimental operations. The software
tools will be publicly available at nanoHUB.org, an open-access website that
reaches over 1.4 million visitors annually. Collectively, the team of four
senior researchers will advise and educate four graduate students and eight
undergraduates, with a strong focus on recruiting new students to physics
through well-mentored summer research programs, and on providing opportunities
for collaborative student exchanges between the three
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological quantum computing has been
aggressively pursued by industries, national laboratories, and universities
worldwide in the last decade. The active strategy universally relies on the
realization and transport of Majorana fermions along 1D nanowires - with
demanding requirements for atomically-precise interfaces, ultra-low temperature,
and carefully-tuned magnetic field. The team of researchers will pursue a
disruptive new approach using a magnetic force microscope tip to manipulate
Majorana fermions in the vortex cores of bulk topological superconductors and
Josephson junctions, and to read out their quantum state. Potential advantages
include larger B-field and temperature range, robustness to disorder, and a
continuous two-dimensional space in which to explore and control Majorana
interactions, orthogonal to predefined wires. The team will (a) propose devices
and readout mechanisms for braiding Majorana bound states superconducting vortex
cores; (b) conduct atomic scale simulations of quantum transport in these
systems; (c) synthesize the topological superconductor Fe(Se,Te) using molecular
beam epitaxy; (d) use scanning tunneling microscopy to identify Majorana zero
modes; (e) use magnetic force microscopy to manipulate vortices and braid their
Majorana bound states; and (f) fabricate and read transport-based devices to
realize prototype topological qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.