* 1936578
* Collaborative Research: Spatiotemporal Fractional Modeling of Blood-Oxygen-Level Dependent Signals
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Anak Agung Julius, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 240,106.00

Understanding the brain in the context of its interactions with the world is key
to assessing its dynamics in health and disease states. Functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) technology is able to track blood-oxygen-level
dependent signals over time and serve as a proxy to neural activity. Current
approaches have limitations, as they assume that the interdependence between
distinct brain regions is constant throughout recording periods. These
approaches also assume that the brain is an isolated system that does not
consider outside stimulus. To capture the highly complex dynamics and to enable
the understanding of the neural basis of human cognition this research project
will develop new data analysis methods for processing brain activity to explain
the relationships involved in attention, learning, memory, decision-making, and
language. This multidisciplinary effort will also enable the training of a new
generation of engineers and clinicians, with particular emphasis on
underrepresented groups, who can use the new data analytics to aid them during
decision-making to assess the brainâ€™s health enabling earlier diagnostics. The
results of this research will have a great impact on healthcare and benefit the
U.S. economy and society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To capture the highly complex
spatiotemporal brain activity, this grant supports development of a model-based
approach that captures the non-stationarity and fractal behavior of the brain
dynamics. As a consequence, it will unveil dynamical characteristics that can be
used to quantitatively and qualitatively measure how well an individual is doing
in a particular task (e.g., attention/memory). Furthermore, the model-based
approach in this project lays down the framework to perform control where
quantitative measures can be used to establish control objectives regarding
success in performing a given task. Unlike currently employed short-range memory
models, this project focuses on a generalized mathematical framework that
captures the degree of a memory of brain activity. Thus, the research will
provide new insights and information about the brain organization and cognition
that may fundamentally change the way one examines neuro-related
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.