* 1936219
* QII-TAQS: Solid State Integration of Molecular Qubits
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michael Flatte, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,028,976.00

Quantum information science has the potential to revolutionize entire sectors of
our economy, from computation, to sensing, to communications. Exciting early
steps along this path include: i) the demonstration of arrays of quantum bits,
"qubits", that can perform computational tasks and are on the verge of
demonstrating the ability to outperform classical computers, ii) the development
of nanoscale quantum sensors that allow for measurement of everything ranging
from electric and magnetic fields to single photons, and iii) the development of
"flying qubits" (tiny packets of light that travel through fiber optic cables)
that are already enabling the implementation of quantum encryption that is un-
hackable using current technology. The promise, however, rests on the
development of systems that exhibit the exact quantum properties necessary to
make a good computer, sensor, etc. Chemists have been manipulating atomic states
for centuries in the design and synthesis of new molecules - making molecules
prime candidates for the design of customized qubits and quantum systems. Early
experiments have shown that this approach has promise, but the challenge is to
get these molecules out of the beaker (so to speak) and onto a chip so that they
can be connected to other supporting technologies. This project focuses on
studying candidate molecules in these device-like environments, with the goal of
learning the "design rules" for molecular quantum systems and designing new
approaches to initialize and measure (write and read) quantum information. This
work will take place in a collaborative network involving university scientists
in the US and abroad as well as close contact with industrial partners
interested in building the "quantum infrastructure" that will be necessary to
support the emergence of quantum information sciences. This interdisciplinary
environment will provide unique training opportunities for undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers in the development of a quantum
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a general framework
for the integration of molecular spin-based qubits into solid state
architectures, harnessing the ability to tune quantum states in molecular
systems via synthetic control of ligand fields and electron-nuclear spin
coupling to demonstrate a unique approach to generating qubits-by-design. Both
electron and nuclear spin qubits have been demonstrated in molecular systems
with appropriately engineered ligands. This performance is comparable to other
leading qubit systems based on diamond NV centers, silicon donors, and Josephson
junctions, and enables chemical tuning to tailor the coherence properties for
particular applications. However, the field has thus far relied on measurements
of large ensembles in solution, precluding the study of single-qubit properties
and impeding scaling and integration with existing and emerging quantum
technologies. Addressing this challenge requires an interdisciplinary program
that exploits a framework of spin-dynamical theory and modeling to bridge from
the synthesis of chemical qubits, to the validation of their quantum coherent
properties, to the ultimate goal of quantum coherent device engineering. This
project will explore how the requirements of quantum functionality intersect
with the phase spaces accessible to molecular design and synthesis at one
extreme and device design and fabrication at the other. As it matures, this
framework will develop into a roadmap for the design of molecule-based quantum-
functional devices that will be of broad relevance to the quantum information
community and provide guidance as to how molecule-based quantum devices might be
most effectively integrated into larger quantum-functional architectures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Quantum Leap Big Idea
Program, the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.