* 1936174
* RAPID: Evaluating the Role of Pollution Monitoring on Improving Coastal Community Social Well-Being Following a Petrochemical Fire and Spills into Galveston Bay
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Antonietta Quigg, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project examines the role of pollution
monitoring in water and seafood on public perceptions of information and risk
following petrochemical spills. This project provide new insights into coastal
community risk perceptions following the recent petrochemical spills from the
Deer Park fire (Houston, Texas) and barge collision in Galveston Bay, Texas. At
present, the ecological and societal impacts of both disturbances are not fully
known. However, concern remains for the exposure of aquatic biota to oil-derived
hydrocarbons and flame retardant chemicals, and likely human health effects upon
their consumption. This project addresses these concerns in the following ways:
First, the levels of pollutants are monitored in water, shellfish and fish from
Galveston Bay. Pollutant levels are measured once per month, over a 1 year
duration. Second, coastal community risk perceptions or concerns for adverse
health effects are assessed using health questionnaires. Third, information on
pollutant levels in water and biota are compared to acceptable regulatory
limits, and used to inform local community leaders of sea food consumption and
recreational threats. Ultimately, the findings of this research will provide
insights into coastal community risk perceptions immediately following man-made
disturbances, and help to develop a risk communication framework that provides
both immediate and follow-up analysis of environmental quality. This grant
supports the NSF HDBE program's mission to understand human-environment
interactions and their responses to man-made disasters.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project uses mass spectrometry to measure the levels of oil-
derived hydrocarbons and flame retardants in the waters and biota of Galveston
Bay, Texas. Water samples will be taken monthly along a transect of Galveston
Bay, and biota samples will be obtained from Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
as part of their monthly surveys of Galveston Bay. The biota samples collected
will include oysters and fish commonly consumed as seafood by coastal
communities. Social well-being will be assessed using an online survey
disseminated to residents of communities in the Galveston Bay area, including
those affected by the Deer Park fire and barge oil spill. Survey responses will
measure social well-being as individual physical and mental health, risk
perceptions, and protective action. The results of research will be communicated
to coastal community stakeholders by partnering with the Galveston Bay
Foundation. Results will comprise temporal trends of pollutant levels measured
in water, shellfish and fish from Galveston Bay, and a risk assessment of
whether pollutant levels are above or below established regulatory
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.