* 1936992
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): AI-Enabled Personalized Training for Displaced Workers in Materials Supply Chain
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Sridhar Seetharaman, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 905,904.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to create artificial
intelligence (AI) -enabled tools aimed at curbing the looming workforce
displacement crisis due to the 4th industrial revolution. The developed AI
technology will allow personalized training techniques to be ported to the
emerging jobs. Specifically, the personalized training and assessment generation
can be used across workers with various backgrounds and areas, focusing only on
what workers need to learn, skipping what they have already mastered, which can
cut training time dramatically while boosting knowledge and skill acquisition,
build workers self-awareness and self-confidence, and ensure the fair treatment
of workers. Whilst the immediate test beds are in mining, metal processing and
manufacturing, which take advantage of existing core education and research
strengths and our industrial consortia and stakeholder industries, the impact of
the tools can be tailored for other fields in engineering. Through the
multidisciplinary cooperation across academia, industry, and education fields,
this project will enhance the scientific understanding of future worker training
and forms a pedagogical convergence of AI techniques, educational sciences, and
traditional engineering &amp; sciences, which meet the future interdisciplinary
job requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I
project will replicate personalized tutoring methods with an AI-enabled approach
that will allow for automatic assessment of the skills and gaps for displaced
workers and for fast, fair, and cost-effective training at scale to place them
in new jobs. We will focus on three research objectives that are mutually
dependent for achieving our research goal. First, the multidisciplinary
cooperation across academia, industry, and education fields will enhance our
scientific understanding of future worker training and will define meaningful
model structure, featurized inputs, and assessment metrics for the AI tool.
Second, a new learning approach will modularly learn and transfer knowledge from
available worker-job combinations to generate the customized training program
for a given new worker-job combination that was not seen during training.
Lastly, the team will develop a solid plan which will integrate the AI-enabled
tool with the existing university and industrial training programs and pave the
way for practical deployment of the AI tool in industry. The deliverables of
this project will serve the US needs across the entire materials supply chain
sector and develop a diverse, globally competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.