* 1936458
* Collaborative Proposal:  Bimetallic Oxyhydroxide Surfaces for Highly Active and Stable Acidic Oxygen Evolution Electrocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Christopher Rhodes, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2024
* USD 347,504.00

Sustainable and renewable energy and fuels will be required to meet future U.S.
energy demands while minimizing carbon emissions. Electrochemical technology –
aided by catalysis – offers a carbon-free route to generating hydrogen from
water and electricity using clean, renewable energy sources such as wind and
solar energy. The hydrogen can be used either directly for power generation (for
example via energy-efficient fuel cell technology) or as a feedstock for
chemicals or synthetic (i.e. non-fossil) fuels. Realizing the goal of a
hydrogen-based fuel/chemical economy, however, will require more efficient, more
stable, and lower-cost electrocatalysts than currently available. To that end,
the project will investigate novel electrocatalyst materials and structures
using experimental/theoretical synthesis, design, and characterization methods
to facilitate development of highly active and stable nanostructured
electrocatalysts with low precious metal content. The project will integrate the
research with educational and outreach activities to increase student awareness
of our Nation’s needs for scientists and engineers to address energy and
environmental challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore
bimetallic oxyhydroxide surface compositions and structures that are active and
stable for the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) by combining a
metal that is highly stable in acid under oxidative potentials and a metal that
is catalytically active for oxygen evolution but unstable. The project
objectives are to (i) investigate the effects of surface structure and
composition on the OER reaction mechanism and activity, and on the dissolution
reaction; (ii) determine the effects of applied potential and aqueous acid
environment on the active site for OER and the dissolution process; and (iii)
investigate alternative active transition metal/supporting metal pairs for
enhanced electrocatalyst OER activity and stability. The collaborative project
will investigate structure-activity-stability relationships of bimetallic
oxyhydroxide surfaces using an integrated experimental and theoretical approach
to determine how an evolving surface structure affects activity and stability.
The integrated computational-experimental effort will provide additional insight
regarding the nature of the active site for both the OER and dissolution
reactions. In addition, effects of the electrolyte on the coupled electron-
proton transfer steps of the reaction will be investigated. The effort will
develop synthesis-structure-activity-stability correlations that can lead to
improved OER electrocatalysts as well as catalysts for other electrocatalytic
and catalytic reactions. The project involves an integrated educational activity
to develop video-based modules for secondary school students to increase
students’ interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics and aims
to broaden participation of underrepresented groups by recruiting from the
diverse talent pool of students from Texas State University, classified as a
Hispanic-Serving Institution, and Texas A&amp;M
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.