* 1936672
* Collaborative Research: Front Range Number Theory Day
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Katherine Stange, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 10/31/2023
* USD 12,735.00

The Front Range Number Theory Day (FRNTD) is a new, one-day, biannual
miniconference whose location alternates between the University of Colorado in
the spring and Colorado State University in the fall. In particular, FRNTD will
be held in Fort Collins, CO, on November 16, 2019, September 26, 2020 and
September 25, 2021; and in Boulder, CO, on April 25, 2020, April 24, 2021, and
April 23, 2022. More detailed information, including past schedules and future
plans, is available at https://sites.google.com/colorado.edu/front-range-number-
theory-day. The Front Range of Colorado is mathematically rich, but
geographically isolated. This conference serves the students and faculty of this
community by providing an easy-to-attend local conference with speakers and
participants from across the Front Range and the USA. It offers local graduate
and undergraduate students a financially supported opportunity to present their
findings to, and engage with, a wider audience, without requiring lengthy
travel. Moreover, it provides a venue for junior researchers from around the
country and a conference opportunity for students and faculty from local
undergraduate-serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each FRNTD
features three keynote talks, with at least one accessible to undergraduates,
and an additional scientific event, such as a poster session or a round of
lightning talks. By choosing one local keynote speaker, as well as giving a
platform for local rising number theorists, we support FRNTD's goal of
strengthening the local community in number theory. In choosing individuals to
invite, one of our goals is the promotion of mathematicians from historically
underrepresented groups and backgrounds. Due to the interests of many of the
participants, the areas of algebraic number theory and arithmetic geometry have
been well represented at past FRNTDs; however, we will continue to invite
participants with expertise in any area of number theory whose research
interests facilitate collaboration and community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.