* 1936709
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for the Electrification of the Chemical Industry (CECI)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Sanat Kumar, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2021
* USD 90,457.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
chemical industry is one of the largest consumers of energy and changing its
energy source from coal and natural gas to renewable electricity would have
significant impact on reducing carbon dioxide emissions and on reversing climate
change. In traditional chemical plants energy needed but not produced in the
plant is supplied by burning fossil fuels and transported around the plant as
high pressure and temperature steam. The global chemical manufacturing
infrastructure has been based on this model since the beginning of the
industrial revolution. In contrast, the future electrified chemical plant will
rely on fundamentally different unit operations powered by electrochemistry.
This project envisions for transforming the present-day chemical industry from
an enterprise that relies on fossil-fuel-derived heat as power source to one
that is based on renewable electricity. Towards this end, plans for initiating
the formation of an Engineering Research Center for Electrification of the
Chemical Industry (CECI) are proposed. This team proposes to engage a broad and
diverse group of experts and stakeholders through a call for solutions to CECI's
target technology needs and a workshop to generate actionable ideas and
interdependent research tasks. The goals are (1) to facilitate the formation of
a community vested in CECI's vision, (2) to identify and bring together the
necessary skills and capabilities to surpass the existing barriers for the
electrification of the chemical industry, (3) to plant the seeds for the
formation of a community and the accompanying.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CECI will
concentrate on three key bottlenecks for the deployment of electrochemical
manufacturing on large scale: electrochemical reactors, electrochemical
separation units, and electrochemical energy recycling. The technological
development in these three technology areas will be supported by exploration on
four research platforms: components, unit operations, systems integration, and
societal impact. The component research platform will comprise a team of
chemists, material scientists and chemical engineers who will develop membranes,
electrocatalysts, and molecular redox energy carriers that satisfy the needs of
the unit operations. The unit operations platform will comprise chemical,
electrical, and mechanical engineers who will develop electrochemical cells that
incorporate the components developed in CECI to impact each of the three
technology areas. The systems integration platform will comprise power and
systems engineers who will develop protocols to integrate unit operations with
each other, renewable energy generators, and/or the electric grid. The impact
research platform will comprise, energy economists and sustainability experts
who will develop and employ techno-economical and life-cycle assessment tools to
provide CECI with societal, economic, and environmental welfare targets. This
multi-level interdisciplinary and ambitious effort would only be possible
through large convergent research approaches enabled by an NSF ERC. CECI will
aim to reduce the overall energy consumption and cost, making its impact on the
society both environmental and economical. Importantly, CECI will educate the
next generation of scientists and engineers with technical, entrepreneurial, and
communication skills necessary for realizing CECI's vision. The diverse CECI
team will also endow these students with policy knowledge and awareness
necessary for successful implementation of technological advances achieved by
CECI. The New York Metropolitan area and surrounding states (e.g., New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Connecticut), is well-suited for nucleating and assembling the
CECI team because it provides access to a diverse population of students, an
abundance of higher education institutions, including some designated as
minority-serving, proximity to chemical companies and capital, and a well-
established culture of innovation and
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.