* 1936908
* EAGER - Exploration of Brain Computer Interface for Individuals with Cerebral Palsy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Anca Ralescu, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2024
* USD 242,330.00

Cerebral Palsy (CP), which occurs in about 2 out of 1000 births, is a group of
disorders that affect movement and posture. CP is the result of a lesion/injury
in the developing brain, usually before or during birth. CP manifests itself
early in life, during infancy or preschool years, with delayed or abnormal motor
progress. Currently, there is no treatment for CP beyond some forms of physical
therapy, mostly focused on children. In recent years, Brain Computer Interfaces
(BCI) have been used successfully to enable persons who are completely immobile
to use their electrical brain signals (EEG) for communication and control of
objects in their environment. However, this approach has had limited success in
persons with CP because most CP individuals are subject to unpredictable body
movements (spasms), and the EEG signals capture such movements, contaminating
the signals for a particular application. Thus the goal of this project is to
explore an alternative platform for EEG-based BCI for cerebral palsy by using a
two-pronged approach. First, new techniques will be used to isolate and analyze
signals of interest, i.e., to identify the useful signal out of its noisy
background. Second, the approach will focus on an individual person with CP (as
opposed to a group). A BCI model from a healthy subject will be transferred and
adapted to the CP subject. The healthy subject, who except for the fact that he
does not suffer from CP, will otherwise be similar in gender, age, cultural
background, educational level, and intellectual
abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this exploratory research
project is to develop a Brain Computer Interface (BCI) for an individual
suffering from Cerebral Palsy (CP), i.e., a project focused on one individual
considering the particular characteristics of that individual's physical and
intellectual abilities. The final objective is to enable this individual to
perform some simple actions (e.g., hold a cup, hold an apple) that healthy
individuals can perform on a routine basis. The BCI approach is based on
capturing brain activity in the form of electroencephalogram (EEG) signals. BCI
for CP subjects is particularly difficult due to the involuntary body movements
(spasms) that afflict CP subjects, which produce unwanted/unneeded brain
signals. To achieve the stated objective, the Research Plan is organized under 4
tasks: 1) compare EEG signals obtained from the CP subject with those from a
healthy subject with similar physical and intellectual abilities; 2) compare,
for each of the two subjects, the EEG signals obtained in a neutral state to
those associated to a cognitive (visual and motor imagining) task; 3) develop a
novel machine learning approach based on fuzzy sets/fuzzy logic and transfer
learning to obtain a model for the CP subject adapted from the model for the
healthy subject; and 4) leverage the previous three tasks to propose a novel,
general procedure for BCI for disabled individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.