* 1936775
* Collaborative Research: MODULUS: A Novel Spatiotemporal Multifractal Analysis to Evaluate Genome Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Paul Bogdan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2024
* USD 543,168.00

Currently there remains an incomplete understanding of how genomic information
translates into organismal phenotypes, how environmental signals alter the flow
of molecular information, and how biology's hierarchical organization of genomic
information impacts information processing and genome dynamics over short and
long-periods of time. This project integrates biological and mathematical
methods to model and investigate mechanisms through which genomic information
responds to change across multiple scales. Using statistical-physics and
analytical methods typically applied to characterizing fractal-properties of
non-biological systems, investigators explore the complex interdependency
between chromosome organization, genome activity and genome evolution. Results
of the work will further understanding of the genome-to-phenome relationship and
spatiotemporal cross-dependencies governing the fungal genomic architecture.
Through an immersive laboratory exchange program students participating in the
project will receive a unique interdisciplinary training experience at the
intersection of biology and mathematics. Investigators will also engage various
cohorts of learners through the University of Southern California's Viterbi
Summer Undergraduate Research Experience (SURE) and Kansas State University's
Girls Researching Our World (GROW) programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
great need to decode the complex interdependency between chromosome
organization, genome activity and genome evolution and understand the genome-to-
phenome relationships modulated by biological processes that span multiple
spatial and temporal scales. The interdisciplinary team of investigators will
use multi-fractal analysis, statistical physics and differential geometry to
model and identify causal links in information processing across high-
dimensional data describing chromatin dynamics. Key research objectives of the
project include: 1) Development of a mathematical framework that integrates
multidimensional genomic information in order to quantify the multi-scale nature
of genome structure and predict the phenomenological consequences associated
with temporally and environmentally driven genomic modulation; 2) Determination
of the information processing machinery and multi-scale characterization of the
flow of genetic information in concordance to changes in genome organization and
environmental stress; 3) Using the mathematical framework developed, investigate
whether DNA changes are purely random or if and to what extent physical,
chemical and environmental stressors inform the formation of genomic regions of
high evolvability. Outcomes of this project will provide insight into broader
organizational principles of fungal and eukaryotic genomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by Systems and Synthetic Biology
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Mathematical
Biology Program of the Division of Mathematical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.