* 1936021
* 3rd International Conference on CRISPR Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Chase Beisel, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2021
* USD 39,775.00

The 3rd International Conference on CRISPR Technologies will be held in
Wurzburg, Germany on September 16-18, 2019. This conference provides a
multidisciplinary forum for biologists, chemists, engineers, and ethicists to
advance Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR)
technologies for genetic manipulation. Organized under the auspices of the
Society for Biological Engineering (SBE), a technical community within the
American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE), this international conference
will bring together renowned experts, established researchers, young
investigators, private sector scientists and engineers, and graduate students.
This group will assess the state of CRISPR technologies and identify the
challenges of integrating genome engineering approaches in cells, plants, and
animals. Importantly, the social, ethical, and economic implications of CRISPR-
based technologies will be heavily emphasized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRISPR
technologies have advanced rapidly in the past decade and have already proven to
be transformational for genome engineering. Present and future applications of
CRISPR technologies range from medicinal therapeutics and organ transplantation
to uses in livestock, crops, food organisms, and industrial microbes. While our
knowledge of different CRISPR systems is rapidly advancing, the lack of
integration between biologists and engineers impairs the safe and effective
implementation of basic research into clinical and industrial applications. For
example, an integrated approach that brings biologists and engineers together
would greatly benefit efforts to produce CRISPR-edited organoids from engineered
cells to ultimately reconstruct tissues that could be transplanted into
patients. Additionally, CRISPR-based approaches will be critical in engineering
livestock and agriculture that can better perform in our rapidly changing
climate. These ambitious goals require the intersection of viewpoints,
knowledge, and technologies from multiple disciplines, and this conference will
provide a mechanism for such collaborations. Furthermore, the broader social and
ethical implications of genome editing will be a highlighted topic of
discussion. The Society for Biological Engineering has a very strong track
record in organizing important new scientific meetings, and the proceedings of
the conference will be disseminated to the public on AIChE's
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.