* 1936847
* 2019 NSF Campus Cyberinfrastructure and Cybersecurity Innovation for Cyberinfrastructure PI Workshop
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Gwendolyn Huntoon, Keystone Initiative for Network Based Education and Research
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 90,000.00

The 2019 Campus Cyberinfrastructure and Cybersecurity Innovation for
Cyberinfrastructure PI Workshop builds upon the success of the previous Campus
Cyberinfrastructure Workshops providing an opportunity for recipients of all
active NSF Campus Cyberinfrastructure (CC*) and Cybersecurity Innovation for
Cyberinfrastructure (CICI) awards to meet in person, exchange project findings,
interact with national cyberinfrastructure experts and collaborate across
project areas and project regions. By again co-locating with the Quilt Fall
Member Meeting, the broader scope encourages relationships between campus
cyberinfrastructure, science driven applications, cybersecurity, and regional
and national cyberinfrastructure resources. Based on last year's experience, the
meeting schedule has been updated to provide additional opportunities for
interaction between PIs themselves as well as between the three groups
participating in the meetings. Included in the 2019 PI Workshop is an expanded
pre-workshop set of breakout sessions half-day breakout sessions on topics
relevant to academic research networking challenges facing campuses and CC* and
CICI PI teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is
the exchange of project findings, interaction between national
cyberinfrastructure experts, collaboration across project areas and project
regions that will lead to new ideas, relationships and collaborations associated
with an in person workshop. The half-day cyberinfrastructure engineering session
will provide timely insights into growing practice of cyberinfrastructure
facilitation in the campus environment that can be shared with the co-located
meeting attendees as well as the community in general. The broader impact
associated with the workshop includes the dissemination of workshop information,
including the workshop presentations. By co-locating with the Quilt meeting the
workshop continues to bring together stakeholders with a vested interest in
leveraging campus cyberinfrastructure investments to provide the opportunity to
develop stronger ties between campus cyberinfrastructure, science driven
applications and regional and national cyberinfrastructure resources, leading to
a broader set of collaborations and lasting impact on national campus
cyberinfrastructure and science driven applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.