* 1936963
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Sustainable Rubber Products: Innovation, Science and Engineering = SuRPrISE
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Julia Kornfield, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,611.00

Within the framework of "Sustainable Engineering for the Next Millennium"
established by the National Science Foundation (NSF) the vision of the proposed
Engineering Research Center (ERC) is to unravel the mystery of natural rubber
(NR) biosynthesis, the last "holy grail" of rubber science and technology.
Plastic and rubber waste have created an enormous societal impact. We must find
solutions to address sustainable production and recycling, closing the loop. The
proposed ERC will focus on renewal of rubber technology, revolutionizing a field
that has been based on science and engineering from the last millennium. Bio-
based AND fully recyclable polymers are sorely needed since humankind is being
overtaken by plastic and rubber waste. This Planning Grant proposal will enable
us to put together the best program and team possible, helping mankind to save
our Earth. In spite of almost a 4,000 year history and the tools of modern
biology, we still do not fully understand how natural rubber is made by plants.
The United States has no commercial bio-based rubber production of its own and
in 2018 imported over $1.5 billion worth of this raw material, critical to an
economy that requires $13 billion worth of natural rubber for natural rubber
containing tires, as well as many other natural rubber products. As demand for
natural rubber continues to increase, we now face a significant supply problem.
The proposed ERC will generate the knowledge needed to find the holy grail and
understand how different plant species produce natural rubber, provide the
methods essential to producing synthetic rubber using monomers from renewable
resources that matches the properties of Hevea rubber, and cultivate and scale
domestic rubber crops to industrial-level production. Inclusion and diversity in
this ERC are addressed, for example: the initial leadership team has 3 women and
2 men, and a specific subset of young people on the autistic and dyslexic
spectrum will be engaged. Providing opportunities to high functioning students
from these groups will leverage their absolute strength in abstract spatial
reasoning in discussion, interpretation and prediction, to benefit and SuRPrISE
the more conventional "normal" thinkers.

The proposed ERC will address strategically focused fundamental research in
natural rubbers, with special emphasis on domestic crops that biosynthesize
macromolecules that match natural rubber from rubber trees (Hevea), viz., high
molecular weight cis-1,4 polyisoprene. We aim at seamless blending of science
and engineering that leads to sustainable and ecologically-sound scalability,
built with industrial collaborations that will translate new discoveries into
commercially viable applications within a resilient bio-economy. More
specifically, the Center will address strategic fundamental research in
elastomers and crosslinked rubbers to achieve absolute gains in sustainability,
while meeting or exceeding current levels of performance required by both legacy
and new applications. New ways of approaching material needs and gaps will be
developed and validated, creating a robust, broadly applicable demonstration of
commercial resiliency informed by sustainable and resilient natural systems,
accepted by our industrial collaborators and their customers. To achieve this,
the Center intends to: 1) understand natural rubber biosynthesis, including NR
structure, and the structure of enzymes involved in NR biosynthesis; 2) overcome
limitations to expansion of alternative NR crops in the US; 3) discover
synthetic polymer analogs of NR by combining true biomimicry with chemical,
biochemical and biologically-sustainable production systems; 4) synthesize new
recyclable crosslinked rubbers and composite materials with novel combinations
of mechanical properties from renewable resources, especially focusing on un-met
performance and structural needs; 5) qualify all discoveries through analysis
and prediction of their commercial viability and sustainability as industrial
adoption and production moves from niche markets to commodity scale. These goals
can only be achieved by a well-organized ERC, the goal of this planning grant
addressing societal impact, convergence, stakeholder community, and team
formation having effective leadership/management. The proposed vision requires
interdisciplinary collaboration among academe, industry and government
organizations. Based on these collaborations a new discipline of "Scalable
Scigineering" can be established, which will integrate science and engineering
at a fundamental and scalable level.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.