* 1937780
* Collaborative Research:  EUREC4A-iso--Constraining the Interplay between Clouds, Convection, and Circulation with Stable Isotopologues of Water Vapor
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* David Noone, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2023
* USD 453,602.00

Low-level clouds over tropical oceans cool the earth's climate by reflecting
sunlight back to space. In global climate models (GCMs) these clouds generally
amplify greenhouse gas-induced warming, as warming reduces cloud cover and
allows more sunlight to reach the surface, causing further warming. But the
strength of this amplification varies considerably from model to model and
contributes substantially to the large range of warming estimates from GCMs.
Moreover, cloud simulations from fine-scale, small-domain models which
explicitly represent low clouds show less reduction in cloudiness than GCMs,
which represent low clouds indirectly through parameterizations. On the other
hand, cloud cover in the fine-scale models can reduce significantly with warming
if the low clouds organize into clusters, a behavior not captured in
GCMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research suggests that low cloud sensitivity
differences among GCMs, and between GCMs and fine-scale models, can be
understood in terms of the various ways in which models balance the moistening
and drying effects of precipitation, surface evaporation, turbulent mixing, and
cloud updrafts and downdrafts over tropical oceans. This research has identified
specific balances which lead to higher or lower cloud sensitivity to warming,
allowing tests against observations to be made. New observations are required to
conduct such tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work supported under this award
collects observations of the isotopic composition of water vapor, raindrops, and
sea water to examine the moistening and drying processes that determine low
cloud properties and sensitivities. Ordinary water (H2O) consists of two
hydrogen atoms and one oxygen-16 atom, but some water molecules contain atoms of
the heavier isotopes deuterium, oxygen-17, and oxygen-18. Water molecules
containing heavier isotopes condense more readily and evaporate more sluggishly
than ordinary H2O. Thus air samples with the same humidity can have different
concentrations of heavy isotopes depending on the processes through which that
humidity came about. For instance, if the humidity level is set by the mixing of
dry air above the cloud layer and moist air near the ocean surface,
concentrations of heavy isotopes will generally be higher than if the same
humidity level is established by condensing water out of moist low-level air.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water isotope data is collected as part of a field
campaign with the acronym EUREC4A, for Elucidating the Role of Clouds-
Circulation Coupling in Climate. EUREC4A is a multinational campaign led by the
Max Planck Institute in Germany and the Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique in
France, with a deployment based in Barbados from January 20th to February 20th
2020. This award supports isotope sampling from two ships, an aircraft, and the
Barbados Cloud Observatory. Data collection and analysis is combined with model
simulations in a variety of ways. Much of the work involves models which
simulate the distinct behaviors of heavy isotopes so that direct comparisons
with isotopic data can be made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has broader
impacts due to its potential for reducing uncertainty in GCM-based estimates of
the severity of future climate change. The EUREC4A campaign also provides an
opportunity to enhance international scientific collaboration, and the project
provides field experience for two graduate students. Outreach to the public is
conducted during the campaign through a blog, and the PIs have partnered with
the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science to perform outreach through
programs including the Young Explorers Summer Science Camp and the Junior Docent
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.