* 1937158
* Bladder Volume Awareness for Individuals Living with Spinal Cord Injury
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Soheil Ghiasi, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 02/29/2024
* USD 389,926.00

Approximately 300,000 individuals in the US suffer from the consequences of
spinal cord injury (SCI). Although many of these individuals have obvious
limitations in mobility, unbeknownst to the general public is that nearly all
lack control of their bladder and have to use catheters, typically 4 to 6 times
per day, to empty their bladder. This high frequency of emptying adds "insult to
injury." A common problem is making the difficult trip to the bathroom in a
wheelchair or requesting help from a caregiver to only find a small amount of
urine in the bladder, or not making it to the bathroom in time and leaking urine
because the bladder was too full. Lack of the bladder fullness sensation is a
major problem for individuals living with SCI, which significantly reduces their
social activities and quality of life and increases their care complexity and
cost. To address this problem, the project aims to build a non-invasive wearable
device, which can be discreetly worn by SCI patients under their clothing, to
receive (or to send to their caregivers) timely alerts for starting to look for
a bathroom to perform self- or assisted-catheterization. The accuracy of the
device will automatically and incrementally improve every time the SCI subject
or his/her caregiver provides feedback on its performance. Furthermore, the
project includes specific education and outreach activities that are driven by
integration of research results into courses and recruitment and retention of
students from underrepresented backgrounds into STEM education. Of particular
note are efforts to reach out to local high school and middle school students,
parents, and their teachers via the UC-Davis CSTEM center and the Sacramento
Regional Science &amp; Engineering Fair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most individuals
living with spinal cord injury (SCI) have neurogenic lower urinary tract
dysfunction (NLUTD) and lack sensation and control of their bladder, which
typically leads to scheduled catheterizations that are often not needed or are
too late. Thus, the goal of this project is to develop a non-invasive, patch-
like device that can be worn by SCI patients to receive timely alerts for
starting to look for a bathroom to perform catheterization. The Research Plan is
organized under three aims: The FIRST Aim is to leverage the principles of near
infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)to build a device that utilizes an array of light-
emitting diodes (LEDs) and photodetectors with fixed distances to infer
information about spatial expansion of the bladder. The underlying physical
principle exploited by the device is measurement of back scattered light at
wavelengths for which water has an appropriate absorption coefficient, while
other tissue chromophores are not highly absorptive (e.g., 975 nm). The device
will be designed to be worn discreetly on the lower abdomen in the pelvic area,
to run on the battery for at least a full waking day, to be very flexible, to
have an area about twice that of a credit card, and to be only a few millimeters
thick. The fundamental tradeoffs between system complexity and usefulness to
patients will be investigated, e.g., the number of LEDs and photodetectors in
the optical probe, the LED driving current and the battery size. Monte Carlo
simulations of light propagation in bladder models will be used to estimate the
quality of design candidates, and a cost function based on the number of
LED/detectors and probe size will be developed. The SECOND Aim is to build and
train machine learning models for bladder fill state prediction. Design
tradeoffs among algorithm complexity, prediction accuracy, energy consumptions,
and value proposition to SCI patients will be considered in determining what
features and algorithms should be used. Algorithms will first be investigated
for their ability to output discrete outcomes, e.g., alert (bladder volume is
high enough) or no alert (bladder volume is too low). If relatively simple
algorithms such as logistic regression and linear support vector machine (SVM)
do not achieve the desired level of accuracy using a reasonable number of
features, more sophisticated nonlinear SVMs using kernel trick with different
choices of kernels will be used. Similarly, the possibility of regression
methods that can predict the bladder volume from the collected features will be
investigated. Algorithms will also be designed to automatically and adaptively
determine the next time instance for measuring the diffuse optical signal and to
incorporate the user's feedback to continuously improve the device's prediction
accuracy. The THIRD Aim is to evaluate the feasibility of the approach in both
short and day-long studies in 25 healthy and 25 SCI human subjects. The
evaluation plan includes collecting real patient/caregiver feedback on practical
issues that users will face as the device is used and to collect sufficient
amount of data for development of predictive models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.