* 1937860
* EAGER: Spatial-Mode Entanglement and Spatial-Mode-Selective Quantum Frequency Conversion in Few-Mode Fibers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Michael Vasilyev, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2021
* USD 130,001.00

Optical fiber loss limits the rate of data transmission of long-distance quantum
communication links, which are essential for secure information exchange and
future quantum cloud computing. The only way to scale up the quantum
communication rate is by increasing the number of degrees of freedom (modes)
used by the transmitted photons. While polarization and frequency degrees of
freedom have already been extensively explored, encoding the quantum information
into the spatial modes (beam profiles) propagating in low-loss few-mode fibers
has received little attention so far. This project aims to change this situation
and open the spatial degrees of freedom for quantum communications by
implementing encoders and decoders of spatial quantum information directly
inside the fiber. &lt;br/&gt;Opening up a large number of spatial degrees of
freedom will dramatically increase quantum communication rates and enable many
future long-distance quantum networking applications. In addition, the developed
spatial-mode selection technology could find its use also in classical
telecommunications, e.g., in mode demultiplexing or in transfer of information
between spatial and frequency modes. This project will train two students in
nonlinear optics, quantum information processing, and optical communications.
UTA is a minority-serving institution, and we will stimulate the interest in
photonics from undergraduates and K-12 students via Open Lab events and
visually-appealing demos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this exploratory project is to realize two key
functions necessary for transmitting and receiving quantum information over
spatially-multimode or few-mode optical fibers - the spatially-entangled photon-
pair generation and spatial-mode-selective quantum frequency conversion -
directly in a few-mode fiber (FMF) by means of inter-modal four-wave mixing. By
employing pumps in two FMF modes, we will generate a signal-idler photon pair in
these two orthogonal spatial modes. The FMF phase-matching conditions will
enable two simultaneous FWM processes driven by two-wavelength pumps in each of
the modes, which can be adapted to realize both functions mentioned above.
Implementation of this spatial-quantum-information-processing functionality
directly in FMF, unlike the previous approaches relying on second-order
nonlinearity in exotic multimode waveguides, eliminates any coupling loss and
crosstalk and utilizes the FMF medium that is already available commercially and
is also widely customizable by a number of vendors and research institutions.
This work could have a transformative impact on high-capacity quantum
communications by enabling spatially-multimode-fiber-based quantum
links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.