* 1937715
* Collaborative Research: Ecology and Evolution of Microbial Interactions in a Changing Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 06/05/2019,02/29/2024
* Gwenn Hennon, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 683,575.00

Carbon dioxide released from fossil fuels is causing the ocean to become more
acidic. Much attention has been given to how this will affect shelled animals
like corals, but acidification also affects the algae that form the base of the
ocean food chain. It is possible that future algal communities will look very
different than they do today, with potentially negative consequences for
fisheries, recreation, and climate. Alternatively, it is possible that these
algae will be able to adapt rapidly enough to avoid the worst of it. This study
looks at algae adapting to acidification in real time in the lab, focusing on
"marketplace" interactions between the algae and the bacteria they live
alongside. The researchers also go to sea to learn whether adaptations from the
lab experiments are beneficial under real-world conditions. Ultimately, this
project is helping scientists better understand how the ocean's most important
and most overlooked organisms will respond to the changes humans are causing in
their habitat. The researchers also use their scientific work to create fun
educational opportunities from grade school to college, including agar art
classes where students learn about microbial ecology by "painting" with freshly-
isolated ocean bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effect of ocean acidification
on calcifying organisms has been well-studied, but less is known about how
changing pH will affect phytoplankton. Previous work showed that the mutualistic
interaction between the globally abundant cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus and its
"helper" bacterium Alteromonas broke down under projected future CO2 conditions,
leading to a strong decrease in the fitness of Prochlorococcus. It is possible
that such interspecies interactions between microbes are important for many
ecological processes, but a lack of understanding of how these interactions
evolve makes it difficult to predict how important they are. This project is
using laboratory evolution experiments to discover how evolution shapes the
interactions between bacteria and algae like Prochlorococcus, and how these co-
evolutionary dynamics might influence the biogeochemical processes that shape
Earth's climate. Four research cruises to the Bermuda Atlantic Time Series are
also planned to study how natural algal/bacterial communities respond to
acidification, and whether evolved microbes from laboratory experiments have a
competitive advantage in complex, natural communities exposed to elevated CO2.
The ultimate goal of this project is to gain a mechanistic understanding of
microbial interactions that can be used to inform models of Earth's oceans and
biological feedbacks on global climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.