* 1937017
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): MPrint-OKN
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Carol Parish, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 994,433.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
create a knowledge network and design platform (the MPrint-OKN) for the
accelerated, highly targeted creation of advanced products ranging from
medicines to smart materials. The MPrint-OKN plans to create predictive tools
that will attract a user-base eager to contribute their data to the collective
whole in order to gain access to powerful tools that help them maximum the value
of their data. This mutually beneficial exchange will result in an ever-growing
collection of critically important scientific data, revolutionizing the design
and manufacture of more efficient, less costly, and environmentally friendly
end-products. By converging academic, government, and industrial researchers in
computer, data, and formulation science with chemical, materials, and product
engineers, the MPrint-OKN platform will act as a hub with two main goals: 1)
create tools enabling partners to discover molecular systems that provide
improved performance, lower environmental impact, and/or better economics
relative to state of the art and 2) accelerate the speed of research transition
from laboratory to marketplace by decreasing the discovery cycle time. The team
already has partnerships in place with national laboratories and government
agencies (such as Argonne, Idaho, Los Alamos, and NIST) as well as corporations
(including Dow, Merck, Schlumberger, and Suez). This project will foster a
vibrant, collaborative, multi-disciplinary community, and create innovative
approaches to machine learning and data science in important economic sectors
which will help the U.S. maintain its global leadership in data sciences and
material sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of MPrint-OKN is
to create a valuable collaborative system that develops and distributes the most
advanced molecular models, machine learning, data science, and data
visualization tools available to the many disciplines requiring molecular
systems for product development. We seek to reduce both the cost and time of
discovering and developing next-generation molecular-based applications by
placing advanced tools in the hands of more researchers. One aspect of the
intellectual merit of the MPrint-OKN is derived by intersecting quantum-
mechanical molecular representations with experimental data through machine
learning. This creation of these new machine learning tools will enable partners
to predict how molecules interact in complex systems and enable new insight into
the relationships between molecular structure and product performance.
Complementing the development of scientific tools, the MPrint-OKN project will
help foster the ecosystem of thought leaders from all sectors of our economy
that rely on molecules to drive their innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.