* 1937137
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Open Knowledge Network for the Global Energy Data Commons
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Kyle Bradbury, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 974,140.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
create a more robust scientific foundation for energy systems management and
planning that will help energy managers, policy makers, and the communities they
serve meet national and global energy needs in ways that are reliable,
affordable, accessible and sustainable. The phase I effort will begin with
expert and stakeholder-driven identification of energy data needs, data
development opportunities, methods, and priorities that culminates in a Phase 2
implementation plan for creating a Global Energy Data Commons (GEDC). The
planned GEDC will enable researchers, practitioners, and policymakers to access
open energy information with much greater data availability and
interoperability, allowing significantly more effective decision-making.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core project team represents a convergence of diverse
disciplines including engineering, economics, machine learning, and energy
policy and will establish an expert stakeholder working group to collaborate on
identifying priority focus areas for the GEDC (and the wider scientific
community) that can be rapidly catalyzed for short-term impact. The GEDC
platform is intended to (1) inform an energy data research agenda that is driven
by user-demand and real-world problems; (2) improve data interoperability and
establish a closely coordinated research network; and (3) make energy data more
usable to diverse disciplines through curated, centralized databases, online
tools, and visualizations. The GEDC will be open to the public and will enable
access and exploration of data in multiple formats (tabular, geospatial, etc.).
Finally, this project will also contribute to graduate and post-graduate
research training through student and postdoctoral engagement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The energy system presents significant challenges in data
availability and interoperability that limit the ability of stakeholders in
academia, non-profits, industry, and government to plan effectively. This
project will establish a working group of stakeholders who will catalog open
data sources, identify effective modes of enabling data interoperability, and
evaluate feasible methods of data collection including machine learning
approaches for automating the extraction of large-scale energy systems data.
Using this information the working group will identify priority areas for
focused data collection efforts and plan for execution under Phase II. The GEDC
effort has the potential to establish a model for innovative data collection,
curation, and sharing that could be replicated in other types of data, and will
make all resulting findings and tools publicly available. Data generated to
populate the GEDC across both phases I and II will add value to the energy
community in key ways including increased interoperability, expanded geographic
and thematic coverage, higher spatial and temporal fidelity, and centralization
of information that has traditionally been separate. These data and accompanying
analysis and visualization tools will accelerate meaningful inquiry across
numerous disciplines in the social sciences, data sciences, and engineering, and
will also facilitate planning and decision making by practitioners and
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.