* 1937713
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a bioabsorbable tissue adhesive
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,10/31/2021
* RAO BEZWADA, BEZWADA BIOMEDICAL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 10/31/2021
* USD 224,973.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project will
advance the development of a bioabsorbable tissue sealant for use in the closure
of internal surgical site wounds. Wound care is associated with significant
healthcare and economic costs. Surgical wounds account for the majority of acute
wounds, as there are over 100 million surgical incisions a year globally, where
approximately 80% require a closure product. Improper or ineffective closure of
surgical wounds can result in a number of complications, including infection,
scarring, improper healing, and blood loss. Currently available products for use
in closing internal surgical wounds are often limited in their effectiveness due
to low versatility, safety concerns, and slow curing times. An ideal tissue
adhesive would provide sufficient strength and be bioabsorbable, thus providing
for effective wound closure for internal and external applications. Bezwada
Biomedical seeks to meet this unmet need through the development of a
polyurethane-based adhesive for internal surgical wounds that is biodegradable,
easy to use, and biocompatible. Successful commercialization of this technology
will provide clinicians and surgeons with an effective and versatile wound
closure product for surgical applications, thus decreasing the likelihood of
complications that significantly impact patient outcomes and increase the costs
of care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a polyurethane-based tissue adhesive incorporating
hydrolyzable linkage bridging using safe and biocompatible compounds through an
innovative chemistry approach. The hydrolyzable feature differentiates the
technology from existing absorbable polyurethanes and is the result of highly
reactive aromatic isocyanates with a hydrolyzable link connecting the aromatic
rings, allowing for safe and tunable degradation. The overall goal of the
proposed program is to identify a single lead polyurethane formulation with two
Technical Objectives: 1) synthesis of monomers and development of formulations;
2) assessment for physical, mechanical, functional, biocompatibility, and ease-
of-use properties to identify the optimal formulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.