* 1937103
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Autonomous Sustainable Urban Systems (ATLAS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* David Danks, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Autonomous Sustainable Urban
Systems (ATLAS) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed ERC on Autonomous susTainabLe
urbAn Systems (ATLAS) will create a future where autonomous systems in a
community work together to facilitate its sustainability and enhance its
governance, thus significantly improving the quality of life of its residents.
This ERC will address the grand challenge of significantly transforming the way
we build and manage our urban environment and create Sustainable Cities and
Communities, which is a Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) of the United Nations
and aligns with the goals of many agencies including the National Academy of
Engineering?s (NAE) Engineering Grand Challenges. Due to the complexity of the
urban systems underpinning these challenges, this ERC will need to create
fundamentally new approaches to integrate autonomous systems technologies and
urban systems engineering (e.g., smart urban farming, autonomous net-zero energy
communities, etc.) to improve social, economic and environmental sustainability
goals with novel governance strategies that respect the community?s overall
autonomy (e.g., by balancing commercial interests, privacy and governance
implications). This paradigm-shifting set of solutions will require a convergent
research approach that balances the issues around autonomous urban systems
technologies; social, economic and environmental sustainability; and governance,
ethics, and privacy. Similarly, it will combine expertise from multiple
knowledge domains (e.g. science, engineering, philosophy, psychology),
government institutions, industry stakeholders and, crucially, community
associations to ensure their feasibility and applicability in practice. This ERC
planning grant will assemble the right partners and research approaches to make
this vision a reality, including key researchers at other universities so as to
maximize the impact. To ensure that a diversity of voices and perspectives are
included, we will utilize our long-standing work with Women and Diversity in
Transportation Fellowships, CMU?s formal relationship with the Community College
of Allegheny County and CMU College of Engineering?s relationship with
Historically Black Colleges and Universities. The planning effort will provide a
foundation for the academic community?s involvement in supporting and furthering
NSF?s vision, mission, and goals for research programs for urban sustainability,
and for collaboration in research and education programs, projects, and related
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant will foster convergence by
engaging participants from academia, government, and industry, across a range of
disciplines including civil and environmental engineering, electrical and
computer engineering, mechanical engineering, public policy, systems
engineering, economics, artificial intelligence, and social and decision
sciences in a focused dialogue that integrates these communities to identify the
greatest systems-level opportunities for maximizing the sustainability benefits
and minimizing the consequences of integration of urban automation. Our ERC
planning effort has two main objectives: (a) establish the partnerships required
to form a diverse, trans-disciplinary and technically strong stakeholder
community; and (b) identify and elaborate the main research thrusts and research
questions in (and across) the domains of energy, transportation, and food with
respect to the ATLAS vision. A convergent research approach to this problem,
with a focus on testbeds and technology deployment will develop solutions have
direct application to existing communities across the nation. A more systematic
and detailed understanding of the role of autonomous systems for urban
sustainability will also produce lessons that are applicable in other contexts
where autonomy is becoming more prevalent (e.g., space exploration, ecology,
etc.). Moreover, this improved understanding has the potential to directly
improve equity and quality of life for all segments of the
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.