* 1937865
* Workshop: Blue Skies Manufacturing Workshop at the 2020 North American Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC); Cincinnati, Ohio; June 22-26, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Zhijian Pei, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,806.00

This award continues the "Blue Skies Manufacturing Workshop" during North
America's largest manufacturing conference - the co-located 2020 International
Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (MSEC) sponsored by the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the 46th Annual North American
Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC) sponsored by the North American
Manufacturing Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers.
This conference will take place from June 22-26, 2020 and is hosted by the
University of Cincinnati. This is the ideal venue for the workshop, which is
designed to identify bold visions for the manufacturing sector more than ten
years in the future, and to identify the required basic research needed to
achieve that bold vision. These two leading conferences in the Manufacturing
Engineering field act as global bridges between industries, government
laboratories, and academic institutions. Blue Skies Activities will include: 1)
Brief introductory presentations by Workshop organizers and others; 2)
Presentations by 6-8 manufacturing thought leaders; 3) Interactions among
workshop participants, NSF program directors, Manufacturing thought leaders, and
staff of the interagency Advanced Manufacturing National Program Office. The
speakers will be selected from one-page abstracts; their travel to the workshop
will be supported by the award. A panel of judges will evaluate the
presentations and decide upon a winner. The Society of Manufacturing Engineers
continues to award the David Dornfeld Manufacturing Vision Award to the best
presentation. The workshop, expected to be attended by at least 80 attendees of
the conference, is intended to be the first instance of an annual event that
will help articulate and develop a broad manufacturing vision, and to catalyze
support for that vision. The vision will be a useful resource for policy makers,
federal funding agencies, companies developing their own manufacturing
strategies, university researchers, and others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
support will cover (1) the registration fees, and (2) the travel fees for the
speakers and PIs. The call for abstracts is disseminated through the Society of
Manufacturing Engineers and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers; the
submitted applications go through a selection process by the conference
committee. The highest rated applications will be invited to give full
presentations. After the conference, a summary of the Blue Skies visions will be
published as a North American Manufacturing Research Institute white
paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.