* 1937037
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Developing Intelligent Tech. for Workforce Empowerment: Credential Gap Diagnostics and Personalized Recommenders for Jobs and Retraining
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Timothy Menzies, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 985,485.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project results
from its focus on the integration of research, innovation, and education to
address societal challenges. It will develop new Artificial Intelligence (AI)
technologies and innovative educational modules to tackle upskilling,
reemployment, and AI ethics on multiple fronts. We will build scalable
recommendation systems to enhance the public infrastructure of upskilling and
reemployment, increase academia-industry partnerships, and develop
multidisciplinary educational modules on ethics, transferrable soft skills, and
job application strategies in the era of AI recruitment. Our interdisciplinary
team brings expertise in computer science, industrial engineering, technical
communication, philosophy, healthcare, and psychology. Our goal is to provide
reemployment support by developing a free, accessible prototype of a
personalized AI-driven user interface to help current and future workers with
retraining and upskilling. Integrating diverse perspectives through academia-
industry-community partnerships, we will develop, test, and evaluate public-
facing credential gap diagnostics, interview probability analytics, and
reskilling and job recommendation systems. A publicly accessible web portal will
be provided as the central clearinghouse for all research and teaching
materials. Success in this project will enable us to build a "Google of
reemployment preparation and upskilling" for future workers and a "service
supermarket Uber" for retraining programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Convergence Accelerator Phase I project aims to develop what we know to be the
first public-facing AI platform that assists individual workers with upskilling
and reemployment in a labor market increasingly characterized by automation,
technological disruption, and AI recruiting. To start a retraining revolution,
we will develop, implement, and test, on real-world data, a novel set of natural
language processing, data mining, machine learning, and matching algorithms.
Meanwhile, cutting-edge research will be conducted on AI ethics, AI-assisted
recruiting, and soft skill transfer to address the challenges of workforce
empowerment. Focusing on manufacturing, this project will develop reemployment
support for machine operation, an occupation predicted to lose about 20% jobs to
automation by 2026. It trains innovative AI tools with data about job
responsibilities, competences, skills, occupations requiring complementary
skills, and geographically scattered retraining resources. These AI tools then
automate credential gap diagnostics and interview probability analysis before
delivering personalized recommendations. This project promises to advance the
frontier of workforce empowerment, professional communication, and AI ethics
with scalable technical solutions, natural language processing, algorithm
audits, and ethics reviews. A prototype of the AI-driven toolkit will be
implemented to explore the technical requirements and scalability of AI-assisted
workforce empowerment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.