* 1937369
* Mentoring the Next Generation of Parallel Processing Researchers at IEEE-CSTCPP Sponsored Conferences
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jaroslaw Zola, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Student mentoring programs play an important role in providing younger attendees
with the necessary tools to take advantage of their participation at
conferences. From their attendance to conferences, students can benefit from
professional connections and establish collaborations, market themselves to
potential employers, get exposed to a wider network of mentors, and find
inspiration for novel research avenues. Student programs have emerged in several
leading conferences, but are still far from being widely adopted. In particular
the International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS) has been
hosting a Ph.D. forum and student program for over a decade. This program has
evolved into a comprehensive training workshop that includes sessions on career
planning and hands on tutorials on writing and presentation skills; it also
provides effective opportunities for student networking. This project seeks to
expand the IPDPS mentoring and outreach model into other conferences that fall
under the broad field of parallel and distributed processing and are sponsored
by IEEE-CS Technical Committee on Parallel Processing. Parallel and distributed
processing has become increasingly important for a variety of disciplines where
traditional computational methods lack the mechanisms to deal with large data
volumes or expensive computations. As stated by NSF's mission, this project
supports education and diversity, while promoting the progress of science by
mentoring the next-generation workforce in the high performance computing
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two concrete goals: 1)
supporting student participation at the IEEE International Parallel and
Distributed Processing Symposium. IPDPS is an international conference for
engineers and scientists from around the world to present their latest research
findings in all aspects of parallel computation. 2) promoting the adoption of
student mentoring programs in other IEEE TCPP conferences, such as DS-RT, HiPC,
PACT, and PerCom. The beneficiary conferences are required to facilitate an
introductory session where students network with peers and mentors.
Additionally, conference organizers are provided with the logistic plan of
IPDPS's PhD Forum and are encouraged to have similar proven activities;
including a poster session and mentoring workshops. Only students currently
studying at U.S. universities are eligible to receive support from this NSF-
funded project. This project targets especially students that typically cannot
attended these conferences without financial support, such as undergraduate
students, graduate students in their first years, and students attending their
first conference. In order to increase the diversity of attendees, the project
strongly encourages the participation of females and other underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.