* 1937829
* Collaborative Research: Production of Solar Quality Silicon by Model-Driven Molten Salt Electrolysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Uday Pal, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2023
* USD 434,000.00

Silicon is the dominant solar material because of its abundance, low cost, and
high solar efficiency. But manufacturing high-purity silicon required for solar
energy is very complex, hard to scale, and unsafe since it involves handling
toxic flammable gases. This award lays the scientific foundations for a new
solar silicon production technology based on molten salt electrolysis. This
process uses high purity quartzite or silica as its raw material. By this
method, the production cost of solar silicon is expected to fall from $10 per kg
today to just $1-2 per kg. The new silicon process uses significantly less
energy than current practice and eliminates all direct CO₂ and related
emissions. These advances in solar energy production technology contribute to
the economic competitiveness of the U.S. solar industry. The fundamental
knowledge gained in this research can be used to devise similar novel
environmentally sound and efficient production methods for high-melting
refractory metals, as well as silicon carbide and other semiconducting
materials. The project’s impact is also further broadened through published
model data and code, educational modules developed from the research results,
and student training in a collaborative and multidisciplinary environment which
includes both computational and experimental work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project establishes four integrated mathematical models of the process based on
new experimental data which help in the understanding of silicon molten salt
electrolysis and its scale-up. The first molten salt structure (MSS) model
involves spectroscopic analysis coupled with atomistic models to understand the
molecular structure of complex ions in the five-component molten salt. The
second CALculation of PHAse Diagrams (CALPHAD) model to understand and predict
thermodynamic and thermophysical properties of the molten salt including silica
solubility, silicon compound volatility and ion mobility. These properties are
experimentally validated and used in a third transport model to study the
reaction and diffusion kinetics of silicon electrodeposition at the cathode-
electrolyte interface to predict deposit structure and composition. A fourth
phase field model uses these molten salt properties to study the transport of
silicon to the cathode and oxygen to the anode to understand boundary layer
structure and improve the deposition rate. Using these models, a new current
wave-form switching system is developed to maintain stable dendrite-free silicon
growth at high current density. The new low-cost single operation silicon molten
salt electrolysis replaces multiple energy-intensive unit operations of
carbothermic silicon production, acid digestion, trichlorosilane synthesis,
distillation, and chemical vapor deposition used in the current Siemens
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.