* 1937815
* NSFDEB-NERC: Integrating phylogenomics, biophysics, and functional genomics to unravel the evolution of hearing and singing in Ensifera (katydids, crickets and relatives)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Nathan Bailey, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2024
* USD 884,474.00

Just as humans use voices to talk to one another, many other animals also use
sound for communication. The use of sound to send and receive messages, known as
acoustic communication, is found in many different types of animals, including
insects, birds, frogs, and mammals. Among these animals, singing insects, such
as crickets and katydids, were the first to evolve the ability to hear and
produce sound an estimated 300 million years ago. Since then, crickets,
katydids, and relatives (Ensifera) have diversified extensively, giving rise to
an estimated 15,000 known species, and several different mechanisms of hearing
and singing. They now represent the most diverse group of organisms that rely on
acoustic communication. Therefore, studying how hearing and singing evolved and
diversified in these insects can reveal important insights about the origin and
evolution of animal communication. This collaborative research project including
scientists from the United States, the United Kingdom, and France will gather a
massive amount of genetic data to reconstruct evolutionary relationships among
crickets, katydids, and relatives. The team will also employ cutting-edge
techniques in three-dimensional imaging, biophysics, and genomics to investigate
the diverse mechanisms of hearing and singing in these insects. This project
will fill important gaps in understanding the biodiversity and bioacoustics of
the group and provide unique educational opportunities including, project-
enabled outreach activities targeting K-12 students, hands-on undergraduate
research experience to six Polynesian and Hispanic undergraduate students, as
well as training of two graduate students and two postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a comprehensive
dated phylogeny of Ensifera (crickets, katydids, and relatives), the most
speciose and ancient lineage of the extant singing insects, based on 1,600
species and 1,000 loci generated from target capture DNA sequencing. Using this
phylogeny as a robust comparative framework, the researchers will generate an
unprecedented amount of detailed morphological, biophysical, and genetic data
using X-ray micro- and nano- computed tomography (CT) scanning, micro-scanning
laser Doppler vibrometry, and RNA-seq across major ensiferan lineages to
identify mechanisms of hearing and singing. Researchers will measure real-time
ear function and compare 3-dimensional anatomy and biophysical properties of
hearing organs, conduct a large-scale comparative analysis of sound-producing
organs and their corresponding song frequencies using both extinct and extant
species, and generate and compare wing venation genes and tibial hearing organ
transcriptomes. Using these data, researchers will address several longstanding
questions about when acoustic communication first evolved and how often it has
been lost, how lineages independently evolved different hearing and signaling
mechanisms, what the physical, neural and genetic bases of these hearing and
signaling mechanisms are, and how signaling diversity is linked to
diversification and speciation. These findings will collectively reveal general
insights about the evolution of acoustic communication that could serve as a
model for the study of similar mechanisms in other
insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.