* 1937123
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Northwestern Open Access to Court Records Initiative
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* David Schwartz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
facilitate easier access to the full range of court records, which should enable
more effective systematic research and promote greater analysis on how the
federal courts operate and are utilized. The US litigation system is the primary
mechanism through which our laws are formally enforced. Understanding how
effectively the litigation system operates is critical to maintaining public
trust, which is one reason why the courts maintain detailed records of all
federal litigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of the proposed
Northwestern Open Access to Court Records Initiative (NOACRI) open resource
brings together legal scholars, criminologist, sociologists, computer
scientists, statisticians, and complexity scholars to build a unique open
knowledge network that will enable the convergence of a broad range of diverse
communities--including legal scholars, social scientists, economists,
journalists, and public policy stakeholders to more systematically study the
federal legal system. NOACRI proposes to enable both analytically savvy and
inexperienced users to interrogate the court data assembled. The project
proposes to create unparalleled access to both raw case data and data
annotations, including data annotated by the project team and data that are
community-annotated. This more accessible data should also enable development of
machine-learning and artificial intelligence (AI) tools to study court data
systematically.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to expand the
substantial scholarly potential of court records by bringing recent
methodological advances in big data analytics to bear on the field of legal
research. To date, researchers have, by necessity, tended to focus primarily on
the text of judicial opinions. This project will create an open and free
resource of public litigation data, linked to supplementary publicly available
data, that will dramatically advance the quantitative understanding of the
workings of the federal court system. Importantly, it seeks to make visible and
measurable data on cases that are settled or dismissed. Settled and dismissed
cases may constitute well over half of federal court activity but is rarely
published on court websites or otherwise available for free, limiting systematic
study. This research will also aid in the development of data federation
standards and natural language querying approaches that will benefit researchers
in other subject areas that have a similar need to extract systematic insights
from text.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.