* 1937251
* ECR: BCSER: IRM: Building Big Data Capacity for Education and Social Science Research Communities Using Restricted Administrative Data
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Jason Owen-Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,195,630.00

The project will train and support diverse education and social science
researchers to develop the skills necessary to effectively use large scale,
privacy-protected administrative data to analyze core questions pertaining to
STEM education. The goals are to provide technical training, methodological
training, technical support for research project development, and community
building for participants. The capacity building efforts leverage a successful
research infrastructure, accessible data, and well-established history of
innovative training to improve the technical and analytic readiness of diverse
researchers. While the primary focus will be on the use of linked university
research and education data in concert with public workforce information, the
skills that learners will acquire will be broadly applicable to many large-scale
data analysis projects. Systematic efforts will be made to connect training
opportunities to the cultivation of research community, sustained proposal
development efforts, and mechanisms that allow both to influence the growth of
infrastructure and interdisciplinary capacity of STEM education
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institute will conduct two annual sets of
training activities anchored by multi-day workshops hosted at the University of
Michigan Institute for Social Research (ISR). ISR is the institutional home of
the Institutes for Research on Innovation and Science (IRIS) and of the Inter-
university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR). The institute
will target 150-165 diverse researchers from less research-intensive and
minority-serving institutions. The project team will integrate the proposed
capacity building activities with ICPSR summer institute curricula and community
building activities while structuring these to align with deadlines for multiple
external funding opportunities. The primary data for the course will come from
the Universities Measuring the Effects of Research on Innovation,
Competitiveness and Science (UMETRICS) dataset, augmented by data on all
enrolled students for a subset of participating campuses. These datasets will be
integrated with public-use workforce data such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Quarterly Census of Employments Statistics data and Post-Secondary Employment
Outcomes project. Together, these data and associated training materials will
provide participants with new tools and opportunities that offer additional
avenues to develop research questions that build on their research interests. In
addition to building capacity in STEM education research, the project also
addresses core components of NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution Big Idea by
expanding access to tools and technologies to a research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported through the EHR Core
Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition
that is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high quality
fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.