* 1937396
* RTML: Small: Real-Time Model-Based Bayesian Reinforcement Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jiang Hu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The applicability of many machine-learning techniques is limited to very
specific, fixed application environments. As opposed to this, model-based
Bayesian reinforcement learning technique is a more sophisticated framework,
enabling human-like decision-making with evolving objectives and without
complete knowledge of the environment. However, its computational complexity is
very high, and consequently, its progress has been limited to small-scale
demonstrations on limited applications. The goal of this project is to overcome
this hurdle by developing innovative algorithm-hardware co-design techniques.
The research outcome is expected to greatly accelerate the computation of model-
based Bayesian reinforcement learning for practical, large-scale real-life
applications, especially those with real-time constraints. The research results
will benefit many fields that directly impact society, e.g., driver-less cars,
unmanned aerial vehicles, smart agricultural irrigation, robotics for disaster
relief and robotic assistants for handicapped people. The research will also
train students, including women and other underrepresented groups, for the much
needed U.S. workforce in related areas of technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
computational kernel of model-based Bayesian reinforcement learning is random
sampling over a decision tree. In this project, the computational acceleration
will be realized by making use of the intrinsic parallelism offered by the
sampling process. Both the memory and the arithmetic bottlenecks of traditional
approaches will be addressed. First, a logic circuit based technique will be
developed to represent probabilities, and thereby greatly reduce the memory
utilization of the algorithm. Second, powerful new arithmetic techniques will be
explored to achieve area-efficient computations for the newly proposed number
representation. Third, a new sampling method, that is friendly to circuit
implementation, will be investigated. Fourth, an approximation technique will be
studied to alleviate the complexity arising from tracing sampling histories.
Finally, path-aware parallel sampling will be exploited to avoid the redundant
computations in software implementations. These techniques and their overall
effectiveness will be validated via experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.