* 1937923
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Synergistic Effect of Graphene Plasmonics and Nanoscale Spatial Confinement on Solar-Driven Water Phase Change
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Eungkyu Lee, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2023
* USD 210,000.00

Water desalination and wastewater treatment rely on the consumption of
significant amounts of energy. For distributed water treatment systems, the cost
can be ten times higher than that of the centralized plants. The ability to use
renewable energy such as solar energy to replace completely, or in part, the
energy needed for water treatment may lead to substantial impacts on the
sustainability of the global energy and water supply. Efficient solar-thermal
energy conversion for vapor generation is an important green technology that
could reduce the energy demands of water desalination and wastewater treatment.
However, the low vapor evaporation rate remains a challenge for many practical
applications. Graphene plasmonics, which refers to the collective electron
oscillation in graphene flakes when excited by light, is believed to contribute
to the enhanced solar-to-thermal conversion efficiency of graphene nanopetal
structures. In this research project, computer modeling and experiments will be
combined to understand the synergistic effects of graphene plasmonics and
spatial confinement on thermodynamic properties of water and the solar-driven
water evaporation rate. The knowledge gained from this study will assist in
developing new graphene plasmonic materials for solar thermal evaporation
applications. The project will also include significant educational activities,
such as outreach programs for local K-12 students and teachers and undergraduate
research programs with open-ended design projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this research project is to understand how the plasmon resonance-induced
local electric field due to extreme light confinement along the unique nanopetal
edges either aligns or dis-aligns water molecular dipoles confined between the
vertically freestanding graphene flakes in a porous structure. The research
project integrates full electromagnetic wave calculations, molecular
simulations, and experimental validation. Some of the specific objectives
include understanding the fundamental mechanisms governing the influence of
graphene plasmonics-induced thermodynamic property change of nano-confined water
on vapor evaporation rate. A combination of electromagnetic wave calculations
and molecular simulations will be used to model this system. Additionally, the
researchers will validate the modeling results through experiments on solar-
driven water phase change mediated by anomalous near-infrared plasmons in
uniquely synthesized porous graphene nanopetal structures. This project is
expected to reveal new mechanisms of graphene plasmon resonance-mediated water
phase transition, which may contribute to improving solar-thermal energy
conversion technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.