* 1937501
* RTML: Large: Co-design of Hardware and Algorithms for Energy-efficient Robot Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sertac Karaman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Miniature low-energy autonomous robotic vehicles, ranging from insect-size
flyers to palm- size satellites, hold the potential for tremendous impact in a
diverse set of industries, including consumer electronics, high-bandwidth
communications, search and rescue operations, and space exploration, just to
name a few. Next-generation low-energy computing hardware that will enable these
applications must be adaptable, i.e., recognizing new environments on the fly,
learning their characteristic features in real time, and adapting its computing
strategy to minimize the energy consumption required for computing task. This
project will help realize vehicles that are able to improve the accuracy of
their perception and decision making algorithms, simply by experimenting with
obtaining a diverse set of viewpoints of the environment and utilizing the
knowledge of its motion to ground and improve its observation via machine
learning. The project also seeks to develop new graduate and undergraduate
courses at MIT, it will enable outreach for high school students, involve women
and underrepresented groups, thus helping train the future US workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop real-time robot learning
algorithms and hardware focusing on three core areas. Firstly, the project will
develop real-time continuous robot learning systems that improve performance of
robot perception and decision making by rapid learning in new environments.
Secondly, the project will develop real-time active robot learning systems to
efficiently decide the balance between improving accuracy of perception and
decision making algorithms and focusing on accomplishing the task at hand.
Thirdly, the project will develop real-time adaptable robot learning systems for
energy scalable perception and decision making, where the design allows for
efficient accuracy-energy tradeoffs. The project will help develop new hardware
and algorithms for real-time robot learning, by enabling new low-energy robotic
systems. The project will also collaborate with a synergistic DARPA program for
related hardware development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.