* 1937225
* Northern Cheyenne Environmental Research Center
* EDU,EES
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2024
* Gary Ramsey, Chief Dull Knife Memorial College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 10/31/2024
* USD 4,200,000.00

The TCU Enterprise Advancement Centers (TEA Centers) strand allows TCUP
institutions to capitalize on their investments in STEM instruction and
research. A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to
increase the intellectual leadership of TCUP institutions so that they can
address scientific or engineering needs or interests, specifically for their
tribes or communities, or broadly for the Nation. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will impact the economic strength of the Northern
Cheyenne tribe by fostering new STEM employment opportunities and, through
multiple pathways, providing the high-skilled workforce required for those
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chief Dull Knife College (CDKC) will
establish a fully equipped, industry standard laboratory for water quality
research and environmental assessment and monitoring on the Northern Cheyenne
reservation and surrounding areas. The Environmental Research Center (ERC)
addresses a critical juncture in the STEM education pipeline for American Indian
students and the coalescing of tribal government, tribal college, and industry
partners to engage students in environmental issues and strategies for
mitigation. The TEA Center project will add value to students and to the
community. Many tribal residents are subjected to inadequate or toxic water
supplies. In addition, tribal lands have been impacted by years of abuse by
mineral extraction or other land uses which harm the environment and/or
ecosystems. The Environmental Research Center will be a collection point for
physical data and a hub for land management discussions, training and
environmental studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.