* 1937641
* EAGER: Electronic Modulation of Binding and Catalysis on Metal-Oxides: CO Oxidation on NiO
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Paul Dauenhauer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 200,001.00

Catalysts are key materials used to accelerate and improve the energy efficiency
of many processes for manufacturing fuels and chemicals. The project
investigates a new concept - dynamic catalyst modulation - for further
accelerating the rates of catalytic reactions, with corresponding improvements
in energy utilization and reduced capital costs of process equipment. If
successful, the concept is potentially applicable to a wide range of industrial
catalytic processes. The investigators will incorporate the principles of
dynamic catalyst modulation into various educational
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The catalytic activity of materials is dictated by
the binding energetics of key reaction intermediates, described through energy
scaling relationships, which predicts a maximum in the catalytic activity -
characterized by the well-known Sabatier principle - achievable only through
material design. The study will investigate the extent to which field-effect
modulation can be used to induce periodic oscillations in applied potential, on
the timescale of turnover events, that alter the binding energetics of nickel
oxide catalyst films on back-gated devices. Operating catalysts under a
constantly oscillating applied potential, where binding energetics of reaction
intermediates are constantly changing, allows a single catalyst to mimic the
performance of multiple materials in a periodic fashion. Altering the Fermi
level will allow for the design of catalysts that break past the current
limitations imposed by scaling relationships, to reach unprecedented levels of
catalytic activity. The variation in binding energy of a carbon monoxide and
oxygen on nickel oxide model system as a function of temperature and back-gate
voltage will be characterized to determine carbon monoxide oxidation kinetics as
a function of back gate voltage at steady state and oscillatory
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.