* 1937153
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Leveraging Financial and Economic Data - Business OKN
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Louiqa Raschid, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jemin George
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,117.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
lay the foundation for capturing the essential knowledge about businesses,
innovation, and markets and to use the latest techniques in computer science to
make this knowledge freely available in easily usable forms. The project is a
partnership between faculty in business schools and computer science departments
and will engage partners in regulatory agencies as well as financial technology
companies. The proposed Business Open Knowledge Network (BOKN) will provide the
resources necessary for entrepreneurs to fully understand the competitive
landscape as they create small businesses, allow regulators to quickly identify
issues to help prevent the next financial crisis, and enable researchers to
develop and test theories to transform our nation's business practices. Using
the BOKN resource, a new generation of students and scholars will be able to
blend computational solutions with theories, models, and methodologies from
finance, economics, mathematics, and statistics leading to increased
understanding as well as broader opportunities for
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project efforts to develop the BOKN will
require the development of new research approaches that can combine state-of-
the-art computational approaches for extracting, representing, linking, and
analyzing data with complex and nuanced knowledge about the business domain. The
project team will develop business and finance-specific computational tools that
can leverage a wealth of unstructured data on the Web, as well as semi-
structured data and time series datasets provided for regulatory or legal
purposes, and reference datasets with standard identifiers and metadata that
enable cross-resource federation. Business expertise will drive these
computational tools by defining a concrete ontology of concepts, identifying the
key entities of interest, and validating the extracted knowledge and downstream
predictions in a series of practical use cases. One expected technical result is
the creation of a hybrid knowledge graph that supports traditional symbolic
knowledge representation and reasoning enhanced by high-dimensional vector space
embeddings capturing temporal evolution and semantic relationships that support
machine learning applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.