* 1937642
* Modern Meta-Analysis Research Institute
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Therese Pigott, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 719,537.00

The project is supported through the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in
STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build
individual capacity to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education
research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM fields, and STEM workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the Modern Meta-Analysis Research Institute (MMARI) is to improve the quality of
meta-analyses conducted in STEM education by increasing the capacity of STEM
researchers to conduct high quality meta-analyses. The training will enable
graduate students and early career scholars to broaden their expertise and
skills to conduct rigorous research on STEM. The training Institute will focus
on the recruitment of scholars from underrepresented minorities in STEM.
Participants will learn to conduct a high-quality meta-analysis, developing the
requisite background to continue to grow their knowledge as new methods are
developed. Increasing the capacity of the field to conduct high quality meta-
analyses is essential to foster new and more effective interventions in STEM
education through understanding what interventions work for whom and under what
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 5-day workshop will provide STEM
researchers with a comprehensive, introductory meta-analysis Research Institute
focused on state-of-the-art methods including use of the program R. This
Research Institute is specifically targeted to early-career STEM education
researchers with no previous experience with meta-analysis. Unlike other
introductory workshops, the content of this workshop will provide data analysis
skills in R to implement best-practice statistical methods. At the conclusion of
the workshop, participants should be able to: use R for meta- analysis;
understand differences between effect sizes and compute effect sizes from the
most common types of data reported in studies; specify an appropriate meta-
analysis model; estimate and report both an average effect size and the extent
of variation in effect sizes; explore and interpret heterogeneity of effect
sizes using meta-regression models, and conduct appropriate publication bias
analyses and interpret the effect of possible bias on
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.