* 1937825
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 International Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling, Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Ranadip Pal, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

The Sixth International Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling,
Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC 2019) will be held in Niagara Falls, New York,
September 7, 2019. The workshop will be organized in conjunction with the 10th
ACM Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics
(ACM-BCB 2019). The continuing partnership with ACM-BCB will enhance the
visibility of the workshop and attract researchers from various disciplines
across engineering, computer science, statistics, biology, and medicine. CNB-MAC
2019 aims to provide an international scientific forum for presenting recent
advances in computational network biology and boost the awareness of the
importance of rigorous mathematical modeling in transforming big biomedical data
into reproducible and meaningful scientific knowledge. One of the missions of
CNB-MAC that is of foremost importance is to foster next-generation scientists
in the emerging field of computational network biology. The workshop aims to
offer keynote, tutorial, and research talks to provide future research
directions for participating graduate students and post-doctoral researchers,
especially women and minorities. CNB-MAC 2019 will provide travel awards to
encourage graduate students to participate in the workshop and present their
latest research findings. Specifically, the workshop plans to allocate a minimum
of 15% of the awards to female and minority students to encourage their
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation high-throughput profiling
technologies have enabled more systematic and comprehensive studies of living
systems. Network models play crucial roles in understanding the complex
interactions that govern biological systems, and their interactions with the
external environment. The main emphasis of CNB-MAC 2019 will be on rigorous
mathematical models and efficient computational approaches for studying
biological networks, integrative analysis of large-scale OMICS data, developing
mathematical models for the investigation of human-microbiome-environment
interactions, and other topics relevant to computational network biology.
Complementary to the focus of ACM-BCB 2019 on informatics tools and learning
algorithms for big biomedical data, CNB-MAC's main focus is on computational
network biology that involves modeling, analysis, and control of biological
systems under different conditions, and system-oriented analysis of large-scale
OMICS data with the goal of providing a dynamic international scientific forum
for presenting the latest advances in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks travel support for eight graduate students to attend CNB-MAC
2019, present their latest research findings, and actively engage in
interactions with other researchers in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.