* 1937983
* EAGER: An Atomistic-Continuum Formulation for the Mechanics of Monolayer Transition Metal Dichalcogenides
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Susanta Ghosh, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 02/28/2022
* USD 170,604.00

Two-dimensional materials are made of chemical elements or compounds of elements
while maintaining a single atomic layer crystalline structure. Two-dimensional
materials, especially Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (TMDs), have shown
tremendous promise to be transformed into advanced material systems and devices,
e.g., field-effect transistors, solar cells, photodetectors, fuel cells,
sensors, and transparent flexible displays. To achieve broader use of TMDs
across cutting-edge applications, complex deformations for large-area TMDs must
be better understood. Large-area TMDs can be simulated and analyzed through
predictive modeling, a capability that is currently lacking. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports fundamental research that
overcomes current challenges in large-scale atomistic modeling to obtain an
efficient but reliable continuum model for single-layer TMDs containing billions
of atoms. The model will be translational and will contribute towards the
development of a wide range of applications in the nanotechnology, electronics,
and alternative energy industries. The award will further support development of
an advanced graduate-level course on multiscale modeling and organization of
symposia in two international conferences on mechanics of two-dimensional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental samples of TMDs contain billions of
atoms and hence are inaccessible to the state-of-the-art molecular dynamics
simulations. Moreover, existing crystal elastic models for surfaces cannot be
applied to multi-atom thick 2D TMDs due to the presence of interatomic bonds
across the atomic surfaces. The crystal elastic model aims to solve this problem
by projecting all interatomic bonds onto the mid-surface to track their
deformations. The actual deformed bonds will, therefore, be computed using the
deformations of the mid-surface. Additionally, a technique will be derived to
incorporate the effects of curvature and stretching of TMDs on their
interactions with substrates. The model will be exercised to generate insights
into the mechanical instabilities and the role of substrate interactions on
them. The coarse-grained model will overcome the computational bottleneck of
molecular dynamics models to simulate TMDs samples comprising billions of
atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.