* 1937135
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Sustainable Urban Ecosystems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Christopher Reddick, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 12/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Sustainable Urban
Ecosystems&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Abstract&lt;br/&gt;-Part 1: The Engineering
Research Center for Sustainable Urban Ecosystems will develop transforming
technologies for one of the most important societal problems we presently face:
managing the growth of large population centers so it remains sustainable and
does not harm the safety and wellbeing of residents. To achieve this mission,
the center will develop science and engineering systems needed by authorities
and the private sector to make decisions that yield the most benefit to urban
residents. Sustainable growth of large population centers is a very complex
societal problem that will require advances in data science and engineering to
improve efficiency, minimize the consumption of natural resources, and enhance
the ability to adapt to disruptions of different types and magnitudes. The
research center will address this need by developing distributed technologies
such as instrument arrays, cloud computing, intelligent systems, and connected
devices that enhance performance, eliminate inefficiencies, and allow large
urban centers to cope with increasing demand for services, particularly during
strenuous circumstances. . &lt;br/&gt;-Part 2: The Engineering Research Center
for Sustainable Urban Ecosystems will develop transforming technologies for one
of the most important societal problems we presently face: engineering of urban
ecosystems to achieve sustainable growth without harming the safety and
wellbeing of residents. Sustainability compels dual objectives of minimizing
consumption of natural resources under normal operating conditions and
possessing the ability to adapt rapidly and efficiently to disruptions of
different orders of magnitude and duration. &lt;br/&gt;To achieve this mission,
the center will develop the underlying science needed to create a distributed
sensor and data science framework to assist authorities and the private sector
make decisions most beneficial to urban residents. The proposed center will
enable research and technology to improve urban infrastructure resilience
through real-time data processing, storage, and dissemination, accelerating
processing of large datasets in digital communities. Data analytics, machine
learning, and artificial intelligence experts will advance fundamental knowledge
in their collective domains. Computing researchers will have access to the
complete data flow chain and be able to study networking weaknesses against
cyber-attacks. The networking will include narrowband and broadband wireless and
wired data communication, networking with traditional and emerging sensor cloud
environments, and various interfaces. Researchers will develop urban ecosystem
and health informatics applications capable of exploring interdependences
between these domains. Infrastructure researchers will leverage these advances
to improve efficiency and resilience of urban infrastructures using real-time
data during normal operating conditions, and during different types of
disruptions such as cyberattacks, hurricanes, floods, and chemical spills.
&lt;br/&gt;Through this planning grant, a diverse group on stakeholders will
join forces to develop consensus on advances in science and engineering needed
to achieve sustainable growth of urban ecosystems through convergent research.
The outcomes of the planning will provide a roadmap to guide future research
efforts and foster new collaborations not previously considered. Research on
sustainable urban ecosystems will have a broad impact on society due to the
large percentage of the population it affects (90% by 2050). The impact of
inadequate services and disruptions is unevenly distributed among communities
due to different exposures and vulnerabilities, with the highest levels of
vulnerability and low adaptive capacity linked to underserved and underinvested
communities. The planning grant will benefit large communities by strengthening
collaboration between stakeholders to improve quality of life and resilience of
urban ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.