* 1937698
* An EHR Core Research (ECR) Data Resource Hub to catalyze culture change and community building for improving rigor and reproducibility in STEM education research
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2024
* Brian Nosek, Center for Open Science
* Standard Grant
* David Daniel
* 10/31/2024
* USD 997,381.00

The Center for Open Science (COS) will create an EHR Core Research (ECR) Data
Resource Hub to facilitate rigorous and reproducible research practices such as
data sharing and study registration across the STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) education research community. The Hub will
integrate training materials, infrastructure, community engagement, and
innovation in research to advance rigorous research skills and behavior. In
addition, the Hub will foster innovation in open and reproducible research
practices for the breadth of research activities in education including
experimental, observational, longitudinal, and qualitative methods. Finally, the
Hub will connect the STEM education research community with related disciplinary
and multi-disciplinary research communities to leverage shared insights and
knowledge building. This effort is funded by the ECR program which invests in
STEM education research that emphasizes rigorous development of theory and
accumulation of knowledge to inform efforts to address challenges in STEM
interest, learning and participation, for all groups and all ages in formal and
informal settings. ECR strives to further fundamental research that informs
knowledge across three research tracks: Research on STEM Learning and Learning
Environments, Research on Broadening Participation in STEM fields, and Research
on STEM Workforce Development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With partners across the
education research community, COS will create the ECR Data Resource Hub to serve
four integrated functions organized into a single portal: 1) Knowledge: The Hub
will consolidate existing education, training, and support materials for the
what, why, and how of doing rigorous, open, reproducible science. 2)
Infrastructure: The Hub will link together existing services that support STEM
education research and leveraging COS's existing public Open Science Framework
and SHARE dataset infrastructure services. These connections will improve
discovery of tools and content and facilitating adoption of new behaviors. 3)
Social: The Hub will conduct outreach and community building to catalyze a
grassroots movement for improving research practices. This will include webinars
and training for methodology innovations and providing researchers with
technical assistance. The Hub will also host action-oriented conferences and
organize formal and informal events at other society meetings. 4) Innovation:
The Hub will foster innovation in education, training, and support materials for
STEM education research methodologies. In particular, the Hub will coordinate
community engagement for improving research rigor (registration, sharing
standards) for observational studies, longitudinal research, qualitative
research, and research with existing datasets. With an emphasis on fostering a
grassroots network and integrating existing technologies, the Hub will become a
sustainable, integrated catalyst of knowledge and innovation for the STEM
education research enterprise. The result will be a community of scholars,
services, and events that will foster continuous improvement in the rigor of
STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.