* 1937650
* Transcription Factors in Cnidarian Immunity, Symbiosis, and Bleaching
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Sarah Davies, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 920,972.00

The research to be carried out in this project will provide increased knowledge
of the molecular factors (genes and proteins) that are involved in immunity and
stress responses in a group of natural and model marine organisms, including
corals and sea anemones. This project will investigate the role of a cellular
transcription factor, NF-kappaB, which is important for immunity. The research
will identify genes that are activated by NF-kappaB when an algal symbiont is
removed from its host coral or when coral is stressed by bleaching. This
information will be helpful in understanding how corals and sea anemones are
affected by changes in their environments. It will also identify how the algal
symbiont of a coral helps the coral stay healthy. Finally, it will enhance the
understanding of the NF-kappaB protein, which is a highly conserved protein and
important for immunity in other animals, including humans. Thus, these results
could also lead to new insights with implications for human health. The
interdisciplinary research team comprises a junior scientist with expertise in
areas of marine ecology and gene expression and a senior scientist with
expertise in molecular pathway analysis. In addition, the research will provide
training to students (especially undergraduate and graduate students) who will
be able to pursue careers in related areas in academia, the private sector, or
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will further the understanding of
molecular processes that regulate a key symbiosis, and how disruption of those
processes can lead to dysbiosis. The marine symbiosis to be studied is that
which occurs between certain cnidarian hosts (sea anemones and corals) and algae
of the family Symbiodiniaceae. Specifically, this research will provide insights
into the function of NF-kappaB and other signaling pathways in cnidarian
immunity, and the biological significance of modulation of NF-kappaB and other
transcription factors for cnidarian-algal symbiosis. The conserved NF-kappaB
transcription factor controls innate immune and stress responses in a variety of
organisms. NF-kappaB carries out its biological effects by regulating the
expression of genes that program relevant biological responses. As such, three
major experimental goals will be addressed. (1) To identify target genes of NF-
kappaB that are affected by loss of symbiosis in laboratory controlled
experiments in the sea anemone model Aiptasia, as well as the regulation of NF-
kappaB by internal and external cues. (2) Using a novel high-throughput
approach, additional transcription factors altered by loss of symbiosis in
Aiptasia will also be identified. (3) The effects of the establishment and loss
of symbiosis on NF-kappaB, and other signaling pathways in corals, using
laboratory and field collected specimens, will also be pursued. The research
will enhance the understanding of the evolutionary underpinnings of a key signal
transduction pathway (NF-kappaB), its role in symbiosis, and how such signaling
pathways can direct biological outcomes in response to environmental
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.