* 1937021
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Continuous Membrane-enabled Manufacturing of Pharmaceutical (CMMP)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Ranil Wickramasinghe, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 12/31/2020
* USD 94,433.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.

Development of continuous membrane-enabled manufacturing of pharmaceuticals will
open hitherto nonexistent opportunities for both conventional and reactive
separations in the chemical, fine chemicals and petrochemical industries.
Membrane technologies are compact, modular, easily scalable, highly energy
efficient and are capable of extraordinary separations in a continuous fashion.
Membrane reactors can achieve a synthesis level not achievable by conventional
tubular reactors and are now well-established as a process intensification tool.
To overcome many deficiencies of batch manufacturing, we propose an ERC for
Continuous Membrane-Enabled Manufacturing of Pharmaceuticals (CMMP) using
membrane technologies. The proposed ERC has three goals: (1) Develop, adapt and
transition new membranes, novel membrane technologies and membrane reaction-
separation concepts developed by the CMMP team and others into individual steps
of continuous manufacturing of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) in the
molecular weight range of about 150-1000 Da; (2)Integrate the individual
membrane-based steps into a multistep API production process and demonstrate the
feasibility of a primarily membrane-based continuous process equipped with
process analytical technology (PAT) to synthesize APIs economically with high
efficiency, quality, and safety;(3) Develop an educational program and foster an
environment that transforms education relevant to pharmaceutical production as
well as influences fine chemicals manufacturing processes with the program-
developed innovations.

In this Planning Grant, academic stakeholders from six universities will work
with stakeholders from major pharmaceutical companies, contract manufacturing
organizations, membrane manufacturers, and process system developers to identify
key pharmaceutical systems with synthesis-cum-separation steps ready for
introduction of new membrane technologies. During this grant, stakeholders will
deliberate on potential membrane-based demonstration systems for multistep
synthesis of select APIs. These systems will form the basis of the ERC pre-
proposal. A stakeholder community will be formed to guide progress of CMMP and
creation of a strong academic program to assist high school, undergraduate and
graduate students learn the paradigm change when transitioning from batch
production into continuous membrane-based API manufacturing. Membrane
technologies have very limited footprint in pharmaceutical manufacturing due to
perceived concerns regarding reduced solvent resistance and limited
selectivities in organic solvent-based systems. New dense membranes are emerging
with very high solvent resistance (HSR) and exquisite selectivities that can
separate mixtures of smaller molecules and organic solvents via processes such
as, organic solvent reverse osmosis, organic solvent nanofiltration and membrane
pervaporation. Their further development will usher in a new era of membranes
with extraordinary performance and understanding of how to design them.
Microporous HSR membranes can be used for nondispersive solvent extraction, gas-
liquid membrane contactors and reactors for hydrogenation, dehydrogenation,
ozonation, membrane mixing, crystallization and adsorption. Dense, nanoporous
membranes may be used in membrane reactors to achieve high selectivity and
yield. Introduction of such membranes operating continuously into each step of
the API synthesis train will radically transform pharmaceutical production
introducing high efficiencies with compact/scalable membrane modules. This grant
will allow stakeholders to identify membrane processes for API production that
substantially enhance performances of reaction and separation steps. This grant
will also guide an ERC pre-proposal in selecting API synthesis examples having a
train of continuously operated membrane-based reaction and separation steps
thereby demonstrating the capability of membrane devices to operate with high
efficiency and reduced cost.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.