* 1937099
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): The Urban Flooding Open Knowledge Network
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Sankarasubraman Arumugam, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,027,958.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
minimize economic and human losses from future urban flooding in the United
States. Floods impact a series of interconnected urban systems (referred to in
this project as the Urban Multiplex) that include the power grid and
transportation networks, surface water and groundwater, sewerage and drinking
water systems, inland navigation and dams, and other system, all of which are
intertwined with the socioeconomic and public health sectors. This project uses
a convergent approach to integrate these multiple interconnected systems and
merges state-of-the-art practices in hydrologic and hydraulic engineering;
systems analysis, optimization and control; machine learning, data and computer
science; epidemiology; socioeconomics; and transportation and electrical
engineering to develop an Urban Flood Open Knowledge Network (UF-OKN). The UF-
OKN will be built by bringing together academic and non-academic researchers
from engineering, computer science, social science, and economics. The UF-OKN is
envisioned to empower decision makers and the general public by providing
information not just on how much flooding may occur from a future event, but
also to show the cascading impact of a flood event on natural and engineered
infrastructure of an urban area, so that more effective planning and decision-
making can occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The real impacts of flooding across the
Urban Multiplex is currently unquantifiable because many of the systems,
although interconnected, are independently designed and managed. Therefore, an
open knowledge network that facilitates detailed understanding of the
interconnectedness of these systems and how they impact each other is critically
needed. An important gap that this Phase I effort will fill is the development
of a common set of ontologies for describing and traversing the data
relationships among Urban Multiplex subsystems. This Phase I effort will lay the
groundwork for a production-scale UF-OKN in Phase II but will also make publicly
available the prototype UF-OKN and its applications. The outcome of a potential
Phase II project would be a fully functional UF-OKN that would respond to plain
English Internet queries with actionable information on what infrastructure
across the Urban Multiplex would be impacted during storms and flooding,
facilitating both short-term and long-term planning with information on
sustainability metrics associated with different decisions. This deliverable
would be potentially transformative to researchers, decision-makers and the
general public in terms of how they engage with and act upon information about
urban flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.