* 1937741
* The Pro-Qual Institute for Research Methods in STEM Education - A Novel Problem-Led and Research-Quality-Focused Approach
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Joachim Walther, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 999,998.00

The ProQual Institute (PQI) is designed to implement a novel, problem-led,
research quality-focused approach to developing STEM education research
capacity. The approach starts with the problem, idea, or general topic of
interest, and researchers are then guided to identify and visually map a "social
reality" of interest to articulate clear and purposeful research questions and
to inform a coherent use of theoretical frameworks to undergird the study. Based
on understanding the scope and nature of the research object, participants will
be guided to explore appropriate methodological frameworks and methods that can
be used to investigate that social reality and answer the research questions.
The advantage of this concept is that by understanding the specific roles
theories and methodologies play in a study, these frameworks can be more
purposefully and productively used by novice educational researchers to
conceptualize and empirically investigate the social reality of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute will design and implement six week-long
Summer/Winter Schools for 125 diverse participants who will (1) gain an
understanding of core ontological and epistemological differences between STEM
and education research, (2) learn how to empirically investigate a "social
reality" of interest by selecting and using appropriate theoretical and
methodological frameworks and research methods, and (3) acquire an appreciation
for incorporating research quality considerations throughout the duration of
qualitative and mixed methods educational research projects. The design of the
Summer/Winter Schools will be informed by constructivist and
situated/experiential learning theories. The Institute also will create and
manage a virtual community of PQI participants to provide ongoing support after
completion of the one-week, face-to-face program and evaluate the impact of the
PQI on participants' self-efficacy as qualitative and mixed-methods researchers.
The project will help to broaden and deepen the contributions that STEM
education research can make to fundamental understandings of STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;the project is supported through the EHR Core
Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition that is
designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high quality fundamental
STEM education research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.