* 1937152
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Convergence Hub for the Exploration of Space Science (CHESS)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Ryan McGranaghan, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 892,316.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will
be to forge the new convergent relationships necessary to respond to the grand
challenges of space weather and fuse new capabilities that connect space weather
and societal impacts. "Space weather" is the colloquial term used to describe
the conditions and variability of the near-Earth space environment and its
tangible impacts on technology, including critical infrastructure like the power
grid, satellite services, navigation and communication systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase I, this project will focus on one of the most
important and immediate impacts of space weather disturbances: disruptive and
potentially catastrophic induced currents in the electric power grid known as
geomagnetically induced currents (GICs); however, the outcomes will be more
broad, providing a foundation for the growth of a space weather Open Knowledge
Network in which new data providers can join and become a node in the network.
The project intends to embrace a diverse community: diverse in discipline, in
sector of society (i.e., across academia, industry, and the public sector), and
in representation, and propose to adopt an ethos of 'open by default' by
facilitating broad participation in this work through open source efforts and
community engagement. The outcome will be extended capabilities of existing data
resources, robust and efficient approaches to answering important research
questions, and a practical framework to capture and access knowledge - each of
which will be freely available. The experience gained through the project
activities will provide lessons learned that will be used to help create a newly
capable data literate workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this work will be to respond to three barriers that stand in the way of an
understanding of space weather impact on the power grid commensurate with
society's needs: (1) the lack of a cohesive community, due to the wide variety
of subject matter experts working on topics related in various ways to space
weather, (2) the lack of effective data sharing, coordination, and analysis
(e.g., data science) to leverage existing resources and knowledge efficiently;
and (3) the diversity of physically dominant processes in each section of the
space weather environment, making it difficult to relate various models and
observations. The Convergence Hub for the Exploration of Space Science (CHESS)
plans to create new modes of data-driven discovery. The power grid will serve as
a valuable first use case to cultivate a convergent community of space
scientists, geophysicists, data scientists, and the industries most affected by
space weather. By embracing a data science-driven perspective, that addresses
the full data lifecycle from collection to management to processing/analysis and
visualization, CHESS has the potential to have lasting impacts across each
community. A specific goal of this effort is to respond to the central goal of
the Heliophysics decadal survey to "determine the dynamics and coupling of
Earth's magnetosphere, ionosphere, and atmosphere and their response to solar
and terrestrial inputs" and the most pressing need identified in the 2019 Space
Weather Strategy and Action Plan to "enhanc[e] the protection of critical
infrastructure and national security assets."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.