* 1937036
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Skill-LeARn: Affordable Augmented Reality Platform for Scaling Up Manufacturing Workforce, Skilling, a
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/
potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will be
immediately applicable to the manufacturing sector, which has a multiplier
effect on the economy and jobs. Automation is splitting the American labor force
into two worlds: a relatively small number of highly educated professionals
earning good wages, and less-educated workers who are left with businesses that
pay low wages. Although we have had technology breakthroughs, the overall
productivity growth is slow partly due to a workforce that lacks critical new
competencies, such as procedural instruction learning, digital fluency, and
other essential skills. The current and future workforce needs to be geared up
for a culture of constant change. Companies have been relying on the age-old way
of one-on-one Worker Apprenticeship model to train their new workforce. However,
the recent need for larger scale and rapid training has created a bottleneck in
terms of time and cost, especially for small and medium enterprises (SMEs). This
research team comprising of mechanical and electrical engineers, psychologists,
computer scientists, and education researchers will work toward accomplishing a
goal of creating a scalable low-cost solution for (re)skilling the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to address this (re)skilling challenge, we
propose to emulate the worker apprenticeship and develop a new low-cost and
flexible way for SMEs themselves to author in Augmented Reality (AR). By
overlaying digital content over the physical world we will address issues of
worker training that SMEs continue to face. We plan to break down the problem of
worker (re)skilling into three categories: Authoring: knowledge transfer,
Training-Learning: system scaling for consumption, and Feedback: providing
active feedback to users. AR has shown to be a reliable mode of instructional
training, improving speed and reliability, minimizing errors, and reducing the
cognitive load of the user, especially for spatially situated instructions. SMEs
are often unaware, reluctant, and lack access because of the high overhead
costs, unknown returns, and lack of expertise involved in designing, creating,
and maintaining the AR content for the success of this technology. We propose to
develop technologies which enable experts in the SMEs to create content on their
own and provide a smooth transfer of knowledge. The ease of creation of AR, and
elimination of dependency on programming experts, will translate to a reduction
in AR development time and cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.