* 1937759
* Examining Factors that Build a Sisterhood in Computing (BaSiC)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Yolanda Rankin, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 12/31/2023
* USD 342,566.00

The project aims to create a digital archive of the "networked ecosystem" that
documents the social capital of Black women in computing to provide resources,
information, and access to potential mentors to increase the representation of
Black women in this field. The research study will help develop strategies to
leverage the social capital of successful Black women in computing to encourage
aspiring Black women to pursue and thrive in this profession. The digital
archive entitled: Building a Sisterhood in Computing (BaSiC) will serve as a
resource for this population. To support the effort to carry out this research
program, the investigator will engage in structured professional development
activities that include summer courses in quantitative methods at the University
of Michigan and qualitative methods at the University of North Carolina. In
addition, the investigator will receive guidance from a research advisory board
comprised of individuals who have expertise studying underrepresentation of
women in STEM and socio-cultural factors that have affected them. The long-term
goal of the combined research and professional development plan is to position
the investigator to contribute knowledge that could increase retention of
African American women in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will
collect and qualitatively and quantitatively analyze personal narratives of 60
Black women in computing to determine positive and negative influences on their
careers. This will include a mix of undergraduate students, graduate students,
early career, and seasoned professionals. Questions will include memberships in
professional societies, use of technology, and other factors that have shaped
their experiences, behaviors, and attitudes. An additional 350 Black women in
various stages of their computing career journeys will be surveyed to analyze
and document parameters that influenced their career pathways. The rationale is
that evidence-based retention strategies based on social factors will be
identified. The BaSiC platform will help foster a sense of community and
solidarity among a diverse group of Black women who are currently involved in
computing and further provide social capital for Black women interested in
pursuing careers in computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported
through the EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research
competition that is designed to build individuals? capacity to carry out high
quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.