* 1937181
* Support for Core Research Activities and Studies of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,700,791.00

This Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Directorate special
project supports part of the core operations of the Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National Academy of Sciences for the next
3 years. It also funds three CSTB studies of issues and technologies emerging in
the field of computer science. The CSTB provides objective, nonpartisan,
scholarly analysis, blending expertise in computer science, electrical
engineering, telecommunications, and various applications and impacts of
information technology (IT). CSTB's work is known and used by a wide and growing
circle of agencies, officials, and experts in the field. CSTB has come to be
seen as an authoritative source on IT trends, IT policies, and their
implications for broader public policy. CSTB delivers its reports and provides
briefings to key decision-makers and practitioners in the research, education,
and policy-making communities. Its study groups engage significant numbers of
women, minorities, and people from across the country. Core support enables it
to plan for, oversee, and follow up on projects and to be forward-thinking and
proactive in formulating new activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
provides a source of strategic thinking for researchers, educators, and research
funding agencies on research and education needs, computing and communications
trends and issues, and their implications for broader public policy. Through its
membership of national leaders and industry, CSTB engages experts from CISE
research and technical communities in mixed collaborative groups, developing
ideas, explanations, assessments, and recommendations reflecting diverse points
of view and rigorous peer review. The CSTB studies produce reports that
represent the consensus views of an expert committee and leverage deep insights
into computing and communications technologies, including future directions and
insights from other related fields. CSTB is a focal point for engaging the
research community in the development of new research agendas and in raising the
level of policy debate. Core support enables the CSTB to plan, oversee, and
follow up on projects and studies and to continue to provide strategic
leadership in an area of critical importance to the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.