* 1937587
* Examining the Persistance and Motivation of STEM Pre-Service Teachers of Color in the Sherman STEM Teacher Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Ramon Goings, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 01/31/2021
* USD 147,822.00

This project will support fundamental STEM education research that examines
broadening participation within the STEM teacher workforce. By investigating the
factors that influence undergraduate student persistence in STEM and teacher
education, it has the potential to contribute new knowledge about the
recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority pre-service STEM
teachers. The investigator has designed a professional development plan that
will support building his capacity to do explanatory sequential mixed methods
research design and advanced inferential statistical analysis. Professional
development activities include participating in mixed method workshops and
quantitative research methodology courses. The investigator will be mentored by
a team of experts in STEM education methodology and quantitative analysis.
Aligning a research pilot project with professional development in STEM
education research will position the investigator to contribute research
findings that can inform efforts to increase representation of minorities in the
STEM teacher workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research project
is to understand components of the Sherman STEM Teacher Scholars program at the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County, that affect recruitment and retention
of underrepresented minority students in STEM teacher education. Guided by
social cognitive theory, the study will address three questions relevant to the
study variables: (1) What major effects and interactions significantly influence
underrepresented minority students to pursue teaching careers? (2) What factors
propel students to persist in their STEM courses? and (3) What factors
contribute to degree completion and pursuit of teaching careers? The research
design employs an explanatory sequential mixed method approach that includes the
collection and analysis of quantitative and qualitative data. The expected
impacts include informing best practices through which pre-service STEM teacher
preparation programs can increase minority representation. The project could
lead to the creation of a replicable STEM teacher education model for other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported through the EHR
Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER)
competition that is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high
quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.