* 1937533
* CIBR: Collaborative Research: CIBR Expanding structure coverage of genomes to facilitate macromolecular assembly determination.
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* David Baker, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 473,564.00

The Protein Data Bank (PDB) is the single global archive of three-dimensional
(3D) structures of large biological molecules. Despite a steady increase in its
holdings, the growth of the PDB is far outstripped by the growth in the
available protein sequence data. Resources like Genome3D (genome3d.eu), funded
by the BBSRC, aim to fill the gap in structure coverage of the protein sequence
space with reliable predictions of structures. These approaches largely model
proteins that are closely related to a protein of known structure. The Rosetta
method for predicting protein structures, a world-leading approach developed by
the Baker lab in the USA, was recently enhanced with information derived from
evolutionary analyses of protein sequence data, yielding reliable models even
for cases where sequence identity between the model and the available
experimental structures is very low. This project will integrate Rosetta models
into Genome3D to expand the coverage of structural data for important organisms
for health and food security. It will also enrich both the experimentally
determined and computationally predicted structures with valuable functional
annotations, such as information pertaining to surface interfaces, a key
ingredient in understanding how proteins interact with each other and with other
biological molecules. By focusing on proteins dissimilar to those with known
structures, this portal will help fill the gaps in structure coverage of the
protein sequence space and will make structure data much more readily available
and accessible. Finally, novel visualization tools integrating the presentation
of the predicted and experimentally determined structures will be developed,
maintaining a clear distinction between what is predicted and what is
experimentally determined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expanded set of 3D models
derived from this project will in turn help to expand the coverage of sequence
space even further, since these models can be used to guide the experimental
determination of protein structures being obtained by powerful new structural
biology techniques like cryo-Electron Microscopy (EM). This project will also
endeavor, where possible, to improve the assembly of individual protein
structures into macromolecular complexes which can be analyzed to determine
their biological role. Scientists in both academia and industrial sectors will
benefit from access to such an integrated portal, assisting them in designing
new medicines, understanding the mechanism of disease, or in designing proteins
with novel properties. Recent advances in Electron Microscopy allows near
routine determination of structures of large molecular machines and is in need
of a large repertoire of "building blocks" in interpreting the experimental
results, a need which will be partially addressed by the new portal and its
provision of expanded domain structure libraries. The portal will also have ways
to access the assembled data programmatically, benefiting power users: software
developers and maintainers of other resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.