* 1937033
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Building the Federalism Data and Advanced Statistics Hub (FDASH)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Stephanie Moller, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jemin George
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is
the development of a single, comprehensive source of data and analysis on
governing institutions and public policies across the states of the United
States of America. This resource, which the project calls the Federalism Data
and Advanced Statistics Hub (F-DASH), has the potential to provide significant
benefits to researchers, educators, and the public by integrating an
unprecedented amount policy, social, and economic data, as well as developing
analytic tools that will allow users to easily explore, visualize, and analyze
these data. The project is a convergence research effort encompassing applied
statistics, computer science, geography, philosophy, political science, public
policy, and sociology. It also draws on technical expertise and channels for
connecting the work to users through collaborations with several partner
organizations, such as Open States, the Society for Public Health Educators, and
the State Politics and Policy Section of the American Political Science
Association. These collaborations and the overall F-DASH effort should
facilitate breakthroughs by researchers, innovations by practitioners, new
classroom materials for teachers, and new opportunities for engagement by
citizens. Public policy at the state level has a direct impact on citizens?
daily lives, including their health, education, and employment, and this phase I
F-DASH project will provide immediate and accessible information on these and
other topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of public policy is the study of
how representative government in a federal system translates citizen preferences
into laws that impact society. The American states represent an ideal venue for
understanding the effects of policy choices because states routinely experiment
with different solutions to important challenges. However, the decentralized
nature of the American federal system impedes efforts to compare economic,
social, or other outcomes across the states. Indeed, researchers must often
engage in 50 separate data collection processes due to the unique challenges of
data acquisition in each state. Consequently, researchers or government agencies
commonly collect only the minimum of what they need to address a particular
question. Moreover, they often do not share these data, and those who do make
data publicly available have no obvious way to connect their data to data
collected by others. The F-DASH will provide a centralized location for data
collection and analysis related to institutions, policies, and their
implications in the American states. These data will include policy documents
produced by government, such as legislative bills, as well as commonly-used
derivative measures. In addition, the F-DASH will promote innovation in complex
database design and provide an extensive test-bed for researchers interested in
text mining, large-scale relational databases, static and dynamic network
analysis, and many other topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.