* 1937514
* RAPID: Invasion of Geoengineering Earthworms in Alaska: Extents, Mechanisms, and Impacts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Kyungsoo Yoo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 168,397.00

Almost all of Earth's northern biomes have evolved in the absence of earthworms
since the last glacial maximum. This status quo is rapidly changing, however,
due to advancing human disturbances and land use changes in the cold regions of
the world. Invasive European earthworms are now beginning to appear at the edge
of Alaskan permafrost. Among these invasive earthworms, geoengineering
earthworms include species that physically disturb soil environments. Invasion
of geoengineering earthworms is an irreversible process resulting in rapid
deterioration of ecosystem functions including soil carbon and nutrient cycling
and reduction of floral and faunal biodiversity. Early intervention is key, and
it is urgent to establish the underlying scientific knowledge of earthworm
invasion in Alaska. Here the principal investigator proposes to conduct rapid
assessments of the distribution and primary introduction mechanisms of exotic
earthworms across diverse ecoregions in Alaska. This research will also reveal
the extents that the invasive earthworms, where present, disturb boreal and
tundra soils in Alaska. By collaborating with Kenai National Wildlife Refuge,
Agricultural Extension Station of the University of Alaska, Fairbanks, and the
University of Alaska Museum, the investigator will leverage this RAPID project
as a way to facilitate agency-, public-, and policy-level actions to stop
earthworm invasion in Alaska in its infancy - before it is too late to
act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vast boreal forests and tundra of Alaska are
increasingly threatened by ongoing climate change. Global scale climate impacts
on soil biogeochemistry can, however, be substantially accelerated by increasing
introductions of exotic European geoengineering earthworms. The project goal is
to (1) urgently prepare research community for this upcoming change and (2)
facilitate early intervention to stop earthworm invasion in Alaska. The
investigator seeks to test the following hypotheses: 1) human introduction (not
climate conditions) primarily limits the current earthworm distribution in
Alaska; 2) impacts of exotic geoengineering earthworms on Alaskan soils are more
dramatic than those reported for the formerly glaciated temperate forests in the
contiguous U.S.; 3) species composition of exotic geoengineering earthworms
differs by human introduction mechanisms in Alaska; and 4) earthworms' ability
to invade into boreal and tundra depend on their population compositions. To
test the hypotheses, the investigator will examine earthworm populations and
their impacts on soils at the interfaces between human-disturbed areas and the
surrounding natural vegetation at field sites that reflect the major eco-regions
and range of climate conditions including extents of permafrost in Alaska. This
RAPID project will contribute to advancing science by newly highlighting the
vulnerability of the Alaskan Arctic to the combination of both human land use
changes and climate change. In addition to peer-reviewed publications, the
investigator will publish a booklet that helps land managers and citizens to
identify exotic geoengineering earthworms on their properties and assess their
impacts on the natural vegetation and soils in Alaska. Collected earthworm
specimens will be archived in the University of Alaska Museum, and specimen-
specific information will be published online through the Museum's database for
the broader scientific community and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.