* 1937057
* Planning Grant: Engineering  Tools for Education Research (EnTER)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Sameer Sonkusale, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The proposing team envisions an Engineering Research Center that will transform
learning and instruction with a focus on active learning in STEM education.
Current efforts to understand what takes place in such environments are limited
to choosing between studies using compact, simple forms of data (such as grades
or surveys), and studies employing video and written records of students' work.
Compact data provide insight but are removed from the classroom setting, while
detailed record reviews are small-scale because of the labor-intensive methods
required to analyze these rich, qualitative data. The compromises associated
with both strategies have severely limited progress in developing a scientific
understanding of the classroom environment and using this information to impact
real-world classrooms. Radically altering the way educational environments
foster learning requires a multi-pronged approach bringing together researchers
with expertise in cognitive and learning sciences, bio-sensing, data analytics
and computer systems. The resulting engineered system will address fundamental
research questions concerning how students learn best as individuals, in teams,
and in classroom communities. This knowledge can subsequently be translated into
practical tools to provide instructors with in-classroom insight into students'
thinking and engagement in active learning environments at scale. This ERC
planning grant will facilitate the development of a team and Center structure
that the National Academies of Science and Engineering believe is necessary to
Advance Personalized Learning in the next century. Knowledge developed through
these tools will, in an inclusive and ethically sensitive manner, lead to
advances in curriculum, pedagogy, and the design of engineered systems in
support of learning and instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active learning
environments with multiple concurrent conversations and activities are a
challenge to study; however, understanding their dynamics is central to the
advancement of learning science. Our engineering team will invent new sensors,
embedded in low-power wearable computing platforms, whose data will be processed
by next-generation machine learning algorithms. The ERC planning grant will
bring together researchers in convergent disciplines through workshops and data
hackathons to understand the research problems and demonstrate potential
technologies. These instrumented learning environments will allow researchers to
formulate and evaluate the hypotheses rapidly and at a scale well beyond that
which can be achieved today. The ERC planning team will directly engage a range
of stakeholders with an interest in the education of the next generation
workforce. These stakeholders include students, educators, researchers,
administrators, industry and accreditation agencies that will be engaged to
build an ecosystem around the proposed center. Given the nature of the effort,
privacy and ethical treatment of human subjects will be central to all aspects
of the project. The hackathons and workshop activities will impact the broader
research community beyond Tufts University by showing the potential of these
technologies for educational research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.