* 1937277
* US-Liberia Workshop on Engineering Leadership; Monrovia, Liberia; 13-26 August 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Aline Cotel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 41,900.00

This award, co-funded by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation and the Division of Engineering Education and Centers, supports
travel for members of the Society of Women Engineers at the University of
Michigan to travel to Monrovia, Liberia in August 2019 for a workshop and
training program for rising female engineering leaders. The University of
Michigan team members represent Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering,
Civil and Environmental Engineering, the School for the Environment and
Sustainability, and Materials Science Engineering. This workshop provides an
unprecedented educational, training and mentoring opportunity for Engineering
students to work with peers from an African university, with the objective of
Broadening Participation in Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and
Manufacturing Research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Michigan student
group will partner with the Liberia Society of Women Engineers student
organization for an Engineering leadership camp for 40 female STEM students. The
goals of this camp are two-fold (i) to empower the US and Liberian women
engineers with the skills, support, and inspiration necessary to becoming
successful and well- rounded engineering professionals; and (ii) to strengthen
the community of female engineers in the US and Liberia by building cross-
cultural partnerships among female engineering students, resulting in a global
network of women engineers. The undergraduate students will participate in
workshops led by Engineering graduate students which will include an overview of
the graduate school application process, GRE preparation, proposal writing,
resume building, networking skills, and hands-on engineering projects focused on
Civil and Mechanical Engineering. Additionally, the US and Liberian
undergraduate students will lead workshops on student organization development
and STEM outreach in order to strengthen their organization and provide
strategies for persisting and thriving as part of underrepresented minority
groups in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.