* 1937358
* The Role of Geosciences in Transforming Education and Career Pathways to Help Broaden Participation in STEM
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Mintesinot Jiru, Coppin State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,862.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Hosting its 91st Annual Conference with a theme "Preparing the
Next Generation of Technical Leaders for the New Global Economy", the The
National Technical Association (NTA)continues to be the voice for equal
opportunity, access, diversity, inclusion and leadership in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics matters and interests in the U.S. NTA partnering
with the Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Geosciences Working
Group is an expression of its reach and insight to the untapped resources of
Historically Black Colleges and Universities. The workshop plans for 50
participants, including representatives of NSF and a broad cross-section of
academic, federal and community stakeholders. The Broader impact of the workshop
is to promote collaborative, interdisciplinary, culturally relevant and
intergenerational perspectives that help build and sustain transformative STEM
education and career pathways. It will also encourage a greater commitment to
building opportunities for strategic university/community-based initiatives at
the faculty, undergraduate and graduate levels. Finally, the workshop will
strengthen HBCU networking capacity that will directly and indirectly promote
inclusion and diversity across STEM/Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop seeks to continue the conversation on the NTA-
HBCU Geosciences collaborative strategic action plan. This collaboration,
between the community-based NTA and the campus-based HBCU Geoscience Working
Group (HBCU GWG), is an untapped resource for broadening participation in STEM
through a local, regional and national effort. This workshop will provide a
forum to convene HBCU Geosciences and other STEM stakeholders to build on the
recent 2018 Hampton University NTA-HBCU geosciences workshop and
recommendations; facilitate collaborative efforts and establish a geoscience
agenda that contributes to broadening participation; and formalize the HBCU
Geosciences Action Plan and assign responsibilities with a timeline for
execution.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the 2019 HBCU Geosciences workshop are
to:&lt;br/&gt;- Share the progress and update on NSF Geopaths Grant Award:
Expanding HBCU Pathways for Geoscience Education - Sue Ebanks, PI;&lt;br/&gt;-
Share the research findings of the NSF InTeGrate Subaward: Impacts of InTeGrate
Geoscience Modules on HBCU students - Richard Schulterbrandt Gragg,
PI;&lt;br/&gt;- Identify, explore and discuss the collaborative role of NTA and
HBCU-GWG in addressing and implementing the NSF?f 10 BIG IDEAS; and&lt;br/&gt;-
Continue the conversation on the NTA-HBCU Geosciences Collaborative Strategic
Action Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.