* 1937653
* EAGER: Three-Dimensional Printing of Functional Nanobots for Precision Gene Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Joseph Wang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 331,788.00

Over 100,000 human diseases are caused by genetic alterations in the genome, and
only a very small portion of these diseases can be cured. Gene editing
represents a pivotal development in disease therapeutics as a powerful tool to
correct defects and mutations within the genome. In particular, Clustered
Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) Cas9 represents a
paradigm shift in the ability to make precise, targeted genomic change.
Recently, a few approaches have been developed for intracellular delivery of
CRISPR/Cas9 complexes. While these approaches have some degree of success, it
remains extremely challenging to achieve highly effective and efficient
intracellular CRISPR/Cas9 delivery. This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) grant supports research to design, manufacture, and test
nanobots or nanoscale robots that can precisely target and deliver CRISPR/Cas9
to diseased cells and release the gene-editing agencies in a controlled fashion.
The three-dimensional nanoscale printing method for fabricating the nanobots
involves multi-materials printing and could be a powerful tool for scalable
nanomanufacturing of functional nanoscale machines for a variety of
applications. The nanobots could revolutionize gene or drug delivery to repair
genetic disorder of many human diseases, which would have a strong impact on
human health. The project offers exciting interdisciplinary training that
integrates content from manufacturing to biomaterials to nanomachines to
therapeutics for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students.
Nanoscale printing and nanobots are excellent tools for laboratory
demonstrations to attract high school students and teachers, and women and
underrepresented minority researchers to science and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate the
nanomanufacturing processing of a novel nanobot system for targeted gene or drug
delivery at the single cell level. The collaborative research team designs the
nanobot using biocompatible materials and uses a nanoscale 3D printing system to
fabricate it. The nanobot consists of a magnetic nanomotor and a biodegradable
nano-cargo. The nanomotor, which is typically 200 nm round and 400 nm long, is
3D printed by embedding iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles in hydrogel. The nano-
cargo, which is of similar dimensions, is also 3D printed by encapsulating
CRISPR/Cas9 in a biodegradable hydrogel, so that CRISPR/Cas9 can be released
through biodegradation once inside the cell. Fundamental research focuses on
investigating the effects of material composition and properties, and
nanomanufacturing processing parameters on the nanobot performance. The team
also tests the efficacy of the nanobot to deliver CRISPR/Cas9 into cancer cells
for tumor suppression. The scalability of the nanomanufacturing process is
demonstrated through the reproducible fabrication of an array of
nanobots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.