* 1937509
* Collaborative Research: ECR Data Resource Hub: Partnership for Expanding Education Research in STEM (PEERS)
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Margaret Levenstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 01/31/2024
* USD 874,447.00

The Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) at the
University of Michigan and the American Education Research Association (AERA)
propose to create an ECR Data Resource Hub, Partnership for Expanding Education
Research in STEM (PEERS). The goal is to connect, educate, and build community
around relevant forms of data and offer professional development focused on data
skills, tools, and resources. PEERS will connect researchers to repositories and
data sources as well as to materials on data sharing and learning tools for
analyzing data to foster research transparency and reproducibility. PEERS will
engage with producers or custodians of novel data, including administrative,
video capture, streaming, and other non-designed data. PEERS also will engage
data scientists in developing new approaches for discovering, accessing, and
analyzing such designed and non-designed data to support their use for STEM
education research, and it will work with librarians who are expert in the use
of new technologies to catalogue and create user-friendly finding aids. PEERS
will enhance research to advance new knowledge and address issues related to
policy and practice in STEM education and learning. It will broaden and
diversify the community of STEM education research scholars and facilitate a
faster translation of research results into new research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to 1) coordinate with
existing data repositories and data providers to help researchers locate and
leverage existing data collections; 2) identify and support methodological and
substantive innovations, including improving access to and best practices in
using non-designed data and linking designed and non-designed data; 3) foster a
culture of research transparency and cumulative knowledge; 4) build community
among researchers and data providers; and 5) conduct targeted outreach to STEM
education researchers. ICPSR and AERA will highlight extant data sources to
encourage secondary analysis of existing data and build a single point of
discovery for researchers. They will increase the discoverability of providers’
data through sharing of metadata and adoption of practices that increase dataset
discovery. In addition, the PEERS website will provide descriptions of other key
datasets with links and instructions for accessing the data. To address the
barriers associated with multimedia and other big data, PEERS will preserve and
provide access to content created from these resources and encourage research to
automate content created from these resources. To support replication,
reproducibility, and cumulative knowledge building in STEM education research,
PEERS will encourage scholars to use the Registry of Efficacy and Effectiveness
Studies and other mechanisms and set up a repository of data and date-related
products for replication studies and further analyses related to STEM education
research using ICPSR’s self-publishing archive infrastructure, OpenICPSR. PEERS
will create and share guidelines for transparency that supplement the AERA’s
Standards for Reporting on Empirical Social Science Research in AERA
publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the EHR Core
Research (ECR): Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition that is
designed to build capacity to carry out high quality STEM education research
that will enhance the nation’s STEM education
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.