* 1937403
* RTML: Large: Real-Time Autonomic Decision Making on Sparsity-Aware Accelerated Hardware via Online Machine Learning and Approximation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Dario Pompili, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,695,998.00

Real-time smart and autonomic decision making involves two major stages, sensing
(of sensor data and then transformation into actionable knowledge) and planning
(taking decisions using this knowledge). These two stages happen in both
internal and external operations of an Intelligent Physical System (IPS). In
case of internal operations, sensing refers to reading data from on-board
sensors and planning refers to smart execution of the firmware running on the
IPS. In case of external operations, sensing refers to sensing data from
externally-mounted sensors and planning refers to executing the software that
constitutes an application. In the sensing stage, an IPS should be able to cope
with different forms of uncertainty, especially data and model uncertainties.
The goal of this research project is to achieve the objectives of online
autonomic decision making on sparsity-aware accelerated hardware via Real-Time
Machine Learning (RTML) and approximation for a group of IPSs such as drones
performing data collection and/or multi-object tracking/classification and
operating in a highly dynamic environment that is difficult to model.
Remarkably, the techniques adopted in this project generalize well as they can
be applied to a variety of IPS domains including natural calamities, man-made
disasters, and terrorist attacks. The drone-based distributed multi-object
tracking/classification will enable stakeholders such as citizens, government
bodies, rescue agencies, and industries to comprehend the extent of damage, and
to develop more effective mitigation policies. The research will also train
students including minority and underrepresented students in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three specific tasks in this project. In
Task 1, a real-time decision-making approach will be proposed via online deep
reinforcement learning with inherent distributed training capability; temporal
and spatial correlation in streaming video will then be exploited towards real-
time multi-object tracking/detection. In Task 2, novel hardware architectures
will be designed to support sparse Convolution Neural Networks (CNN).
Considering the dual benefits of sparsity on both lower computational and space
complexity for Deep Neural Network (DNN) models, a sparsity-aware CNN
accelerator can achieve significant hardware performance improvements in term of
latency, throughput, and energy efficiency over non-sparsity-aware techniques.
Finally, in Task 3, hardware-aware software engineering solutions will be
studied for accelerated execution. The idea of leveraging compiler optimization
and the underlying hardware features in combination will be investigated in
order to optimize execution performance; then, data-driven modeling techniques
will be presented to replace the time-consuming segments of the ML software
packages with their equivalent data-driven models, namely micro-neural networks.
Once these three research tasks are validated individually via principled
experimentation in terms of their stated goals, they will be integrated into a
unified framework, which will be thoroughly studied via multiple trials on
complementary field scenarios. The project will also collaborate with a
synergistic DARPA program for related hardware
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.