* 1937392
* Evidence-based Transformation of Undergraduate Field Schools to Promote Safety and Inclusivity
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Emily Beahm, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating safe and inclusive
learning environments. Specifically, the project aims to begin a transformation
in the way archaeological field school directors implement policies and
procedures. Undergraduate education for students who plan to become
archaeologists often requires a four- to eight-week field-based learning course,
referred to as a field school. Studies have suggested that field-based learning
environments can make students susceptible to sexual harassment and related
unwelcome behaviors. Undergraduate students who have such experiences may face
negative consequences that can derail academic progress, possibly even causing
them to leave their chosen field of study or drop out of college. Through this
project, the research team will identify and document field school policies,
procedures, and structures that promote safe learning environments for
undergraduate students pursuing careers in archaeology. The project team will
document practical steps that directors of field schools can take to prevent
harassment and assault and, by extension, help retain students in the field,
ensuring a more diverse workforce in archaeology and other field-based sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct this work in three phases.
Phase 1 will consist of a landscape analysis to document current sexual
harassment and assault policies, procedures, and structures that field directors
implement. The research team will use the results to select a sample of eight
field schools as case studies for Phase 2. Phase 2 will focus on understanding
how sexual harassment and assault policies, procedures, and structures are
implemented and will gather students' perceptions of safety, and their identity
and self-efficacy as an archaeologist in the context of these implementations.
The Phase 2 results will allow the project team to identify practices and
structures that hold promise for eliminating harassment and assault at field
schools. During Phase 3, the research will provide supports to field directors
to implement modifications within the sample of case study field schools and
evaluate the efficacy of the modified approaches. The final product of this
research will be a set of evidence-based practices designed to prevent sexual
harassment, assault, and violence at field schools. The research will explore
mechanisms field directors can implement to structure learning environments that
are free of sexual harassment and assault, helping undergraduate students
achieve their full potential to learn. This research will provide foundational
data to begin building theory and models to support all undergraduate students
to safely engage in field-based research courses. This project is funded by the
NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human
Resources, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. It is funded in the
Institutional and Community Transformation track that supports efforts to
transform and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and
disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.