* 1937882
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* David Balenson, Applied Computer Security Associates
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2020
* USD 18,000.00

The Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC) is a top-tier venue
for quick and wide dissemination of cutting-edge research results in computer
security applications. The conference achieves this by hosting several technical
sessions, workshops, training sessions, keynotes by distinguished speakers, case
studies, panels, national interest discussions, work-in-progress talks and
poster sessions. The 2019 ACSAC conference will consist of approximately 48
technical papers across a wide spectrum of computer security and privacy
domains. The hard topic theme of the 2019 conference is "Deployable and
Impactful Security." The conference agenda explores some of the most intriguing
and pressing challenges in the discipline, highlighting open avenues for further
work in these areas. Participation in the conference is thus a valuable
opportunity to students and is an important part of graduate education in cyber-
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides travel support to encourage
participation in the 2019 Annual Computer Security Applications Conference by
students who would normally find it difficult to attend. Criteria for selection
include evidence of a serious interest in the field as demonstrated by statement
of research, CV showing research output, coursework and/or project experience,
etc. Organizers encourage participation of women and students from other under-
represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.