* 1937179
* EAGER: CDS&amp;E: A Computational Roadmap for a Universal Gas Sensor
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Christopher Wilmer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Most gas sensors can only detect a single gas species (e.g., a smoke detector).
Some more advanced gas sensors called "electronic noses" are able to distinguish
among a few gas species in a gas mixture. However, there is still no "universal"
gas sensor, or a single device that could detect a very broad spectrum of gases
under a wide range of operating conditions. This project seeks develop a
preliminary design of a such a device using computational modeling and
simulations. A portable universal gas sensor would have enormous socioeconomic
impact, similar in magnitude to the digital camera, and would revolutionize
health diagnostics. The investigator plans to create a roadmap for the first
universal gas sensing device whose capabilities could match, and potentially
surpass, those of a dog's nose. The approach will use molecular simulations to
accurately model the behavior of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Also, large-
scale computational optimization will be used to search the vast combinatorial
space of possible sensing arrays. The primary outcome of the proposed research
will be a computationally-derived roadmap for future "electronic nose" research.
The proposed research is expected to have a significant educational impact via
the production of high-quality scientific movies for both undergraduates and the
broader public. The investigator will produce a movie that will cover the
complex mixtures of VOCs emitted from the human body, touching on the many
engineering applications that can benefit from large-scale
computational/simulation approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective
of the proposed research is to develop a "computational road map" guiding
experimental design of a universal gas sensor. It has been shown that trained
dogs can identify various illnesses through smell along, indicating that
detection of diseases via gas sensing is possible. However, prior "electronic
noses" have been unable to compete with canine olfactory abilities because
researchers have been narrowly focused on gas sensing devices with arrays of
20-30 elements (or less). A dog's nose, on the other hand, has 300 million
olfactory receptors, with corresponding receptor types numbering in the
thousands. It is unlikely that an electronic nose with less than 30 sensing
elements can match a dog's nose any more than a digital camera with less than 30
pixels can match a human eye. Moreover, prior work has been entirely
experimentally driven - computational modeling has only been used to analyze the
data generated after the fact. Designing large arrays (100-1000+ elements)
presents a combinatorial challenge and hence is a classic "big data" problem,
which can only be solved using computational data science and engineering
methods. The investigator will use grand canonical Monte Carlo simulations to
model complex gas mixture adsorption in arrays of metal-organic frameworks
(MOFs), which are crystalline nanoporous materials. By computationally exploring
different combinations of MOFs, the investigator will then determine, in
principle, what kind of array could match the sensing performance benchmarks of
a biological nose. The project will examine fundamental questing including: how
does performance scale with array size; at what sizes does one cross benchmark
olfactory performance of animals; and what material characteristics have the
greatest influence on sensing performance?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.