* 1937019
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Preparing the Future Workforce of Architecture, Engineering, and Construction for Robotic Automation Processes
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Shu-Ching Chen, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 973,333.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefits of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will
address a crucial national problem by preparing the nation's workers and
businesses in the Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC) industries
for an increasingly automated future workplace. This convergent research and
development project involves researchers in architecture, construction,
engineering, computer science, STEM education and economic development, as well
as industry collaborators from the robotics, architecture, engineering,
construction and software industries. Its Phase 1 deliverables will benefit
businesses, workers and professionals in the AEC industry cluster, as well as
regional and national economic development policy. Phase 1 provides the platform
for critical solutions: maximizing employment opportunity, minimizing job
displacement, and improving national economic competitiveness in the AEC
industries. Improving AEC industry performance also promises solutions leading
to a more energy efficient and sustainable built
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I project
will contribute to research and application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
immersive virtual environments in education as well as examining economic
impacts of automation technology adoption in the AEC industries. The rapid
adoption of AI and automation promises new employment and business
opportunities, but will also create job displacement and business disruption.
The Project's Phase 1 research objectives are to develop 1) a prototype
interactive virtual reality robotics training and educational software package,
and 2) a new model to measure the economic impact of automation adoption. Phase
1 will provide a platform for an immersive virtual software to teach new skills,
improve process workflows, and increase efficiency in the AEC industries.
Integrating advanced technologies including Reinforcement Learning, Computer
Vision, Augmented and Virtual Reality, the project will advance methods of
remote and on-site training for a large segment of employees in the AEC
industries. By applying STEM learning strategies, the project will contribute to
understanding how people learn in technology rich environments and bridge the
gap between technology advancement and application to practice. The Project's
economic analysis will utilize a "bottom-up" approach to estimating the
employment impacts resulting from the adoption of AI and
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.