* 1937546
* ANT LIA: Collaborative Research: Genetic Underpinnings of Microbial Interactions in Chemically Stratified Antarctic Lakes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Rachael Morgan-Kiss, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 08/31/2024
* USD 306,748.00

Part I: Non-technical description: Microbial communities are of more than just a
scientific curiosity. Microbes represent the single largest source of
evolutionary and biochemical diversity on the planet. They are the major agents
for cycling carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and other elements through the
ecosystem. Despite their importance in ecosystem function, microbes are still
generally overlooked in food web models and nutrient cycles. Moreover, microbes
do not live in isolation: their growth and metabolism are influenced by complex
interactions with other microorganisms. This project will focus on the ecology,
activity and roles of microbial communities in Antarctic Lake ecosystems. The
team will characterize the genetic underpinnings of microbial interactions and
the influence of environmental gradients (e.g. light, nutrients, oxygen, sulfur)
and seasons (e.g. summer vs. winter) on microbial networks in Lake Fryxell and
Lake Bonney in the Taylor Valley within the McMurdo Dry Valley region. Finally,
the project furthers the NSF goals of training new generations of scientists by
including undergraduate and graduate students, a postdoctoral researcher and a
middle school teacher in both lab and field research activities. This
partnership will involve a number of other outreach training activities,
including visits to classrooms and community events, participation in social
media platforms, and webinars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
description: Ecosystem function in the extreme Antarctic Dry Valleys ecosystem
is dependent on complex biogeochemical interactions between physiochemical
environmental factors (e.g. light, nutrients, oxygen, sulfur), time of year
(e.g. summer vs. winter) and microbes. Microbial network complexity can vary in
relation to specific abiotic factors, which has important implications on the
fragility and resilience of ecosystems under threat of environmental change.
This project will evaluate the influence of biogeochemical factors on microbial
interactions and network complexity in two Antarctic ice-covered lakes. The
study will be structured by three main objectives: 1) infer positive and
negative interactions from rich spatial and temporal datasets and investigate
the influence of biogeochemical gradients on microbial network complexity using
a variety of molecular approaches; 2) directly observe interactions among
microbial eukaryotes and their partners using flow cytometry, single-cell
sorting and microscopy; and 3) develop metabolic models of specific interactions
using metagenomics. Outcomes from amplicon sequencing, meta-omics, and single-
cell genomic approaches will be integrated to map specific microbial network
complexity and define the role of interactions and metabolic activity onto
trends in limnological biogeochemistry in different seasons. These studies will
be essential to determine the relationship between network complexity and future
climate conditions. Undergraduate researchers will be recruited from both an REU
program with a track record of attracting underrepresented minorities and two
minority-serving institutions. To further increase polar literacy training and
educational impacts, the field team will include a teacher as part of a
collaboration with the successful NSF-funded PolarTREC program and participation
in activities designed for public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.