* 1937340
* Advance &amp; I-Corps Joint Program
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Matthew Lynall, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 635,968.00

This project will promote the progress of science by realizing the untapped
innovation potential of female faculty, postdoctoral and other researchers. It
will leverage the combination of the already well developed individual resources
of the NSF I-Corps program (including the National Innovation Network), and
ADVANCE Centers by building mutual understanding of the respective programs, and
identifying and initiating synergistic pilot programs to encourage and enable
female researchers to realize the translational potential of their research
outcomes for positive and societal and economic benefit. By involving more women
in I-Corps through insights developed by ADVANCE, there will be enhanced
partnerships between academia and industry and a more diverse American STEM
workforce that is globally competitive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals and Scope:
The project brings together participants in two important NSF programs; the
Innovation-Corps (I-Corps) and NSF Advance: Organizational Change for Gender
Equity in STEM Academic Professions. ADVANCE fosters systemic change that
promotes equity for STEM faculty in academic settings, no matter what gender,
racial or ethnic backgrounds the STEM faculty participants possess. The I-Corps
program prepares participants to extend their focus beyond their university
footprint and to accelerate the economic and societal benefits of NSF-funded,
basic-research projects that are ready to move toward commercialization. For up
to 400 female attendees, this project will create personal and specific
connections in the form of local teams developed between ADVANCE Centers and
I-Corps Sites/Nodes. While learning best practices from the other they will work
to identify and design initiatives to remove barriers and increase accessibility
to positive entrepreneurial and innovation outcomes for female researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential contribution: This program will establish and
make operational a connection that will enable female STEM participants to
extend their focus, ideas and research outcomes beyond their University
footprints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.