* 1937748
* Seasonal Primary Productivity and Nitrogen Cycling in Photosynthetic Mats, Lake Fryxell, McMurdo Dry Valleys
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Dawn Sumner, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 07/31/2024
* USD 799,225.00

Part I: Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on understanding
annual changes in microbial life that grows on the bottom of Lake Fryxell,
Antarctica. Because of its polar latitude, photosynthesis can only occur during
the summer months. During summer, photosynthetic bacteria supply communities
with energy and oxygen. However, it is unknown how the microbes behave in the
dark winter, when observations are not possible. This project will install
environmental monitors and light-blocking shades over parts of these
communities. The shades will extend winter conditions into the spring to allow
researchers to characterize the winter behavior of the microbial communities.
Researchers will measure changes in the water chemistry due to microbial
activities when the shades are removed and the mats first receive light. Results
are expected to provide insights into how organisms interact with and change
their environments. The project includes training of graduate students and early
career scientists in fieldwork, including scientific ice diving techniques. In
addition, the members of the project team will develop a web-based “Guide to
Thrive”, which will compile field tips ranging from basic gear use to advanced
environmental protection techniques. This will be a valuable resource for group
leaders ranging from undergraduate teaching assistants to Antarctic expedition
leaders to lead well-planned and tailored field expeditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will measure seasonal metabolic and biogeochemical changes in benthic mats using
differential gene expression and geochemical gradients. They will identify
seasonal phenotypic differences in microbial communities and ecosystem effects
induced by spring oxygen production. To do so, researchers will install
environmental sensors and opaque shades over mats at three depths in the lake.
The following spring, shaded and unshaded mats will be sampled. The shades will
then be removed, and changes in pore water O2, H2S, pH, and redox will be
measured using microelectrodes. Mats will also be sampled for transcriptomic
gene expression analyses at intervals guided by geochemical changes. Pore water
will be sampled for nutrient analyses. Field research will be supplemented with
laboratory experiments to refine field techniques, gene expression data
analysis, and integration of results into a seasonal model of productivity and
nitrogen cycling in Lake Fryxell. Results will provide insights into several key
priorities for NSF, including how biotic, abiotic and environmental components
of the benthic mats interact to affect Antarctic
lakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.