* 1937023
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Innovations in Resource Loss Reduction, Recovery, and Reuse (InnR3) for Sustainable Food Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Thomas Theis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The United States is the most efficient producer (total value of $560 billion)
and top exporter ($140 billion in 2017) of food in the world. Due to population
growth and economic development, it is conservatively predicted that the U.S.
food industry will need to grow by at least 70% by the year 2050 to meet the
needs of global population reaching 9.7 billion. This is considered a grand
challenge that requires revolutionary technological advances in order to achieve
sustainable food production growth while avoiding negative environmental impact.
A key challenge is that a significant fraction of increasingly limited resources
used for food production is lost. These losses occur through a variety of forms
including bio-wastes, co-products from food processing and ethanol refining,
food wastes, fertilizer runoff, and municipal and agricultural wastewaters.
These losses are causing national and global crises by contributing to many
interconnected problems including resource scarcity (e.g., clean water, soil
nutrients), environmental pollution (e.g., excess levels of nutrients in the
Gulf of Mexico), and high energy consumption (e.g., for treating bio-waste).
Further, increasing climate variability may induce greater variability in
nutrient fluxes and exacerbate these interconnected problems. Despite decades of
efforts by the government and private agencies, the system-wide trend continues
to worsen. The present practices are fragmented and do not provide an effective
solution that society is ready to adopt. This Engineering Research Center (ERC)
planning grant aims to develop activities that will address resource security
and environmental sustainability revolution that will potentially turn these
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and
partners Princeton University, University of Michigan, University of Illinois at
Chicago, and Virginia State University propose an Innovation in Resource loss
Reduction, Recovery and Reuse (InnR3) ERC to generate a holistic, novel solution
that will resolve the interconnected problems. Instead of focusing on a
particular technology for a single problem, this ERC planning grant targets a
convergent solution composed of a coordinated portfolio of technologies coupled
with region specific policies to resolve a system of problems caused by nutrient
loss. The project targets a solid work plan and a qualified team to expand the
technology portfolio of interconnected problems in the entire food production
(primarily in rural areas) and consumption (primarily in urban areas) cycle
across spatial scales from field, farm, industry, small watersheds and large
basins. Through a series of workshops and virtual meetings, this planning
project will identify fundamental knowledge gaps, technology innovation barriers
and institutional barriers for system level integration and adoption. These
activities will also serve to identify additional needed partners through
strategically organized working group discussions. This planning project will
work to create a new, diverse workforce of research, education, and practice
leaders for realizing InnR3 and create an interdisciplinary student-centered
learning framework. Beyond the national concerns regarding degradation of the
Gulf of Mexico and the Great Lakes, this ERC targets societal impacts in terms
of behaviors of food producers and consumers, health of the public,
environmental sustainability, economic growth and prosperity, and regional
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.