* 1937674
* NSF/FDA SIR: Morphologically Complex Tissue-Mimicking Phantoms for Evaluating Tissue Scattering Artifacts in Photoacoustic Imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Jesse Jokerst, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 11/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasound is a powerful tool to image
diseases including cancer, orthopedic disorders, and heart function. One
limitation of ultrasound is that it suffers from low contrast (contrast is the
difference in signal intensity between the region of interest and the background
tissue). Therefore, there is a large body of research into a special kind of
ultrasound known as photoacoustic imaging. Photoacoustic imaging uses light to
generate sound only in the area of interest-this increases the contrast.
Unfortunately, photoacoustic ultrasound is not yet approved for widespread use
in people. This might be partially due to a lack of devices and methods to
validate and standardize the novel imaging equipment needed for photoacoustic
imaging. Therefore, this work will create specialized plastic objects with known
optical and acoustic properties suitable for calibrating and standardizing
photoacoustic imaging equipment. This proposal combines expertise from academia
and the Food and Drug Administration to identify materials that have optical and
acoustic properties similar to human tissue. We will create test objects and
methods that will be useful to instrument manufacturers and physicians. The
resulting test objects will improve knowledge of how to best create
photoacoustic imaging instrumentation and might also streamline regulatory
approval of this equipment. In turn, this will increase patient access to this
important imaging technique to ultimately advance the national health and
quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Photoacoustic imaging provides deep tissue imaging similar
to ultrasound but with enhanced optical contrast and additional functional and
molecular imaging capabilities. However, no standardized performance test
methods or phantoms exist for photoacoustic imaging system evaluation unlike
mature techniques such as computed tomography. The fundamental limitation-and
scientific problem to be studied here is a lack of materials to simultaneously
simulate tissue properties over a broad range of optical wavelengths and
acoustic frequencies. This leaves investigators, instrument manufacturers, and
regulatory agencies without clear strategies to evaluate device safety and
effectiveness. This project with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) builds
stable, biologically relevant imaging phantoms with well-characterized optical
absorption/scattering coefficients, acoustic impedance, etc. that broadly
simulate tissue over a wide range of optical wavelengths and acoustic
frequencies. Objective 1 of this research develops phantoms with biologically
relevant heterogeneous morphologies and light scattering artifacts during
photoacoustic imaging. Phantom material optical and acoustic properties are
rigorously characterized using spectrophotometry and acoustic pulse-transmission
equipment available at FDA. The imaging phantoms contain multiple layers of
background material with different optical and acoustic properties designed to
mimic natural tissue (e.g. breast fat and glandular tissue or muscle and fat
layers) as well as target inclusions. The inclusions have regular shapes
(cylinders, spheres) of varying sizes as well as image-derived, tortuous vessel-
mimicking structures. Objective 2 uses these phantoms to establish test methods
that evaluate the impact of fluence artifacts on device performance in three
different imaging systems. System image uniformity and out-of-plane sensitivity
are evaluated during mechanical scanning of probes over realistic vessel-
mimicking inclusions known to produce volumetric images. Sets of phantoms
containing inclusions mimicking blood absorption at several oxygen saturation
levels-but with different background optical properties and layer morphologies-
serve in parametric studies of device performance in the face of spectral
coloring artifacts. The measurement accuracy of our three photoacoustic imaging
systems is quantified to determine device robustness using various fluence
correction methods (diffusion theory, Monte Carlo simulations). The outcome is a
well-validated tissue-mimicking phantom to support device developers and inform
regulatory decision-making including use as a potential Food and Drug
Administration Medical Device Development Tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.