* 1937957
* Collaborative Research: Real-Time Trajectory Generation Algorithms for Uncertain Autonomous Systems Based on Gaussian Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Efstathios Bakolas, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 09/30/2023
* USD 297,323.00

This grant will contribute new theory and algorithms for control and trajectory
optimization problems for autonomous systems, such as mobile robots and
autonomous vehicles, which are expected to have a significant positive impact on
various aspects of national economy ranging from flexible transportation of
goods by self-driving vehicles and robots to increased productivity and
efficiency in manufacturing. This research will create algorithms and systematic
methods to compute a collection of candidate trajectories or paths that will
transfer an autonomous system to a corresponding collection of destinations
instead of computing a single trajectory or path to a single destination. Having
multiple alternative paths and corresponding destinations provides significant
flexibility to the user. The latter point is consistent with every-day
experience regarding the use of car navigation systems which often provide
alternative routes with different times and traffic conditions in lieu of a
single route. This paradigm shift in trajectory generation problems is motivated
by the fact that in practice, it is hard for the user to accurately predict the
future conditions at which a system will be operating (e.g., weather and traffic
conditions) and thus committing to a single trajectory may not be ideal. One of
the main bottlenecks in this class of problems is dealing with uncertainty in
real-time (for instance, change in weather conditions may render certain
candidate trajectories less suitable than others). The research team will create
tractable model-based and data-driven algorithms which can be executed in real-
time without compromising their ability to handle uncertainty. Finally,
participation of undergraduate and underrepresented students will be encouraged
through an array of research and teaching activities. The research will also
have ramifications to other classes of control problems, including computational
neuroscience and medicine and stochastic thermodynamical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will create scalable and
real-time implementable trajectory generation algorithms for uncertain dynamical
systems based on both model-based and data-driven stochastic optimal control
methods. In this research, the boundary conditions correspond to probability
distributions rather than fixed states. This class of stochastic trajectory
generation problems admits in the most general case an infinite dimensional
representation, which is computationally intractable. This research relies
instead on finite dimensional representations in which the uncertainty is either
represented explicitly using the framework of stochastic differential equations
or indirectly by using generalized polynomial chaos theory. Variational
integrators for both representations will be developed to achieve real time
optimization and provide robustness to discretization errors. This research will
also create data-driven (i.e., model-free) trajectory optimization algorithms,
in which the time-evolution of the first two moments of the uncertain state of
the system is described in terms of machine learning methods (i.e., Gaussian
processes) which leverage data collected along the system’s ensuing trajectory.
The theory and algorithms of this research will be validated by means of
extensive simulations and experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.