* 1937617
* Inclusive Instructor Behaviors in the Calculus Sequence
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Nathanial Brown, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2023
* USD 339,715.00

This project will support an educational research project to design, implement,
and analyze the results of survey that explores inclusive teacher behaviors in
first year calculus classes. In addition, it will support professional
development to enable the principal investigator, a new STEM education
researcher, to develop the skills needed to conduct the project. Research at the
K-12 level provides considerable evidence that classroom environment and teacher
practice affect the growth mindset, sense of belonging, and self-efficacy of
students, particularly underrepresented students. Research also shows that
marginalized groups in STEM may perceive the environment and teacher behavior in
different ways than those from non-marginalized groups. Little work in this area
has been done at the undergraduate level. In this building capacity project, a
survey instrument to measure inclusive instructor behaviors will be developed
and given to over 1000 STEM majors in calculus at Penn State University.
Simultaneously, the investigator will be involved in an intensive, two-part
professional development process. The PI will have a mentor team consisting of
experts in mathematics education and STEM diversity research who will support
him during the entire project. In addition, he will take graduate level classes
in statistics and mathematics education to increase his knowledge and skills in
math education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, an instrument to
measure inclusive teacher behaviors will be developed by using items from
relevant K-12 and undergraduate surveys. The instrument will be piloted in year
one, and then revised based on the results. Students in calculus classes at Penn
State University will be asked to complete the instrument, and the investigator
will analyze and interpret the survey results. In addition, qualitative data
from classroom observations, focus groups, and cognitive interviews will be
gathered and analyzed to help validate instrument validity and interpret the
data. Results of this two-year capacity building project are expected to lay the
foundation for future work related to equitable teaching practices in college
mathematics courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported through the
EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER)
competition that is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high
quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.