* 1937301
* RTML: Large: Continuous Adaptation for Decision Streams
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Oyekunle Olukotun, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,500,000.00

Systems that can efficiently make real-time decisions based on large-scale data
streams will impact broad areas of daily life, including autonomous vehicles,
personal assistants, medicine, and fraud detection tools. Such systems have
become critical as machine learning is increasingly tasked with making richer
decisions over constantly-changing large data streams for both consumer and
industry applications. This project seeks to develop hardware-software systems
capable of making such real-time decisions over large data streams while
flexibly and continuously adapting to changes in their environment. This project
will also support redesign of courses on hardware accelerators and parallel
computing at Stanford University, with large-scale data streaming systems as a
central driver. These courses are designed to provide students with a
sufficiently strong background to engage in systems and machine learning
research, thus enabling a diverse and much desired US workforce in an area of
technology of current importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create
tools and techniques for large-scale data streaming systems by producing
innovations spanning software, hardware, and machine learning. Modern machine
learning requires a vast amount of labeled data, and streaming scenarios only
increase this requirement. To handle the need for more data, techniques for
automatically labeling data (and in particular, temporal data) under real-time
constraints will be developed. Because the environment for data streaming
systems is constantly changing, the proposed project seeks to continuously adapt
and specialize models to the current environment, leading to vastly improved
efficiency. Real-time data streaming systems will require hardware that achieves
both exceptional efficiency, as well as provides sufficient flexibility to
support both real-time model training and inference; this project will develop
such hardware. These innovations will be demonstrated and evaluated on two
applications: next-generation video stream processing in autonomous vehicle,
medical and industrial domains and smart routers for networking systems. The
project will also collaborate with a synergistic DARPA program for related
hardware development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.