* 1937063
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I(RAISE): Rapid Dissemination of AI Microcredentials through Hands-On Industrial Robotics Education (RD-AIM-HIRE)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Ross Higashi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 999,998.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/
potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
facilitate convergence of literature and methodologies from sociology, human-
computer interaction, microcredentialing, software engineering, and improvement
science to improve collaborative development and delivery processes for training
robotics technicians who can meet the needs of American manufacturers both today
and during the impending transition to an "Industry 4.0" paradigm in which
factory floors are transformed into networked cyber-physical systems controlled
by specialized artificial intelligence (AI) software. Technicians will remain
critical in the installation and maintenance of advanced manufacturing systems,
but they must understand such systems in order to troubleshoot them effectively.
Good training is both authentic and consistently deliverable. Achieving this
requires coordination between curriculum designers, subject matter experts,
educational practitioners, and many other stakeholders. The endeavor has been
approached alternately as a "product design" problem from the curriculum
development perspective, or an "organizational coordination" problem from an
organizational policy perspective. Our approach connects these two perspectives
in a transdisciplinary effort to produce a technical training apparatus that can
keep pace with rapid advancement in fields like machine learning and
AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I project takes a
design research approach to fusing the organizations-inward and product-outward
approaches into a single efficient enterprise. Our project employs design and
improvement science methods to answer questions about (i) How to design
effective and deliverable machine learning (ML) curriculum for technician
trainees with little or no STEM background; and (ii) How to design productive
collaborative routines around this objective, given the wide variety of
stakeholders. We start with a "shovel-ready" curriculum concept and an
experienced production team that uses human-centered design (HCD) techniques to
design usable, pedagogically effective activities. In addition to authorial
consultation with AI subject matter experts, HCD involves data collection on
instructors, learners, and their extended learning contexts including
administrative and social aspects. We problematize collaboration patterns of the
production team with other stakeholders during this process, identifying
improved routines to accelerate the collaborative's joint work. This phase of
the project produces knowledge of how to accelerate curriculum design through
enhanced collaborative routines, knowledge of how ML/AI can be integrated into
technician training, prototype ML/AI curriculum for non-four-year audiences, and
direct training impact for pilot participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.