* 1937039
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Wind Integrated with Storage for Energy Resilience (WISER)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Lucy Pao, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Wind energy represents the largest growing energy source nationally and globally
in terms of total added capacity; with an expected 8 GW coming online nationally
in 2019 alone according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). As
the net penetration of wind energy increases, its random delivery of electricity
makes it difficult to use as a demand-focused dispatchable resource within the
electric power grid. The proposed solution of the NSF ERC entitled Wind
Integrated with Storage for Energy Resilience (WISER) is to integrate energy
storage into the wind farm infrastructure to facilitate the economic delivery of
energy on demand. The opportunity to address this challenge is enabled by recent
emergent technologies, including the growing number of larger wind turbines,
advances in autonomous control of wind energy, and, most importantly, new
breakthroughs in chemistry, materials, thermodynamics, and energy economic
analysis. Developing and translating fundamental science in all these areas will
allow more than 24 hours of average power to be stored in a single turbine.
Achieving this will require highly integrated multidisciplinary academic
research and education as well as strong engagement with a wide host of industry
partners, all of which will be considered in the planning grant for a new NSF
ERC entitled Wind Integrated with Storage for Energy Resilience (WISER).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ERC planning grant for high penetration of wind energy
integrated with storage will seek to uncover the key fundamental technical,
economic, and societal questions using cross-pollination of ideas and concepts
across these different fields. These questions will set the stage for an ERC to
develop a new generation of cost-effective wind storage by investigating
compressed air energy storage, liquid metal batteries, and flow batteries
directly integrated into extreme-scale turbines (10+ MW), wind farms, and the
grid itself. Achieving this will require new knowledge and breakthroughs in: a)
the efficiency, formatting, and durability of storage and wind technology at
extreme-scales, b) strategies to integrate and leverage storage with wind energy
generation and grid infrastructure, c) effective use of autonomous power control
for the integrated system dynamics, and d) market-based revenue design and
adaptivity to optimize these systems for grid resilience and power demand. The
WISER planning grant will develop a globally- competitive diverse workforce
through novel student internships, coursework, and pervasive engagement with the
key industry alliances that will commercialize, manufacture, install and operate
this technology. Through these profound impacts, the WISER ERC will provide a
new generation of "renewable energy on demand" that will power increases in
renewable energy penetration and enhance the resilience of the power grid. More
broadly, this will directly enhance the USA's energy independence, environment,
infrastructure, workforce, and global manufacturing
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.