* 1937660
* Physiological Genomics Workshop in St. Louis, MO, April 2020: Finding and Mending the Knowledge Gaps between Plant Physiology and Plant Functional Genetics/Genomics
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Ivan Baxter, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 93,617.00

A two-day workshop will be convened in St. Louis Missouri in April 2020 to
discuss ways to address emerging scientific challenges at the intersection of
plant physiology and genetics/genomics. Current advances in technology have
enabled novel approaches to measure properties of plants and to sequence
thousands of plant samples. These techniques are complex and communities of
researchers have grown around them. To truly make sense of the complicated
interactions that drive plant growth, scientists must be able to work across the
disciplines. The facilitated workshop will be devoted to identifying successful
strategies to bring research communities together, and will address challenges
to scientific progress and strategies to overcome barriers to research progress.
The workshop will include scholars from diverse career stages, institutional
types, geographical locations, gender, and ethnic backgrounds and will result in
a white paper summarizing discussions and
conclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how plants interact
with the environment requires understanding how information moves from the
genome to cellular phenotypes to tissue level responses that determine
organismal responses and ecosystem outcomes. Historically, these questions have
been addressed by separate fields, such as genomics/genetics and physiology. In
order to form links between fields, it is important to understand what are the
cultural, institutional and human obstacles that researchers trying to bridge
these gaps are encountering. To address some of these gaps, a workshop will be
convened of scientists working across the plant physiology and genetics/genomics
problem space to (1) identify successful strategies that use plant physiology,
genetics and genomics to understand how plants respond to the environment; (2)
identify scientific and technology gaps that could be bridged by
interdisciplinary approaches; (3) identify communication and collaboration
challenges to overcome; and (4) propose solutions and directions to advance the
interdisciplinary field. In order to disseminate these results, a whitepaper
will be written to summarize the findings and published in a plant society
journal. The development and dissemination of the whitepaper is anticipated to
support cross-disciplinary dialogue that advance the development of solutions.
The workshop will include scholars from diverse career stages, institutional
types, geographical locations, gender, and ethnic
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.