* 1937062
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Hybrid Inorganic Photonic Integrated Circuits (HIPICs)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Zlatko Sitar, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photonic integrated circuit technology is
critical to national security. This technology provides a low-cost, high speed,
and energy-efficient device platform in a broad range of applications including
telecommunication, life-science, transportation, precision manufacturing,
computation, and energy. Devices such as lasers and critical fiber-optic
communication systems rely on this technology. The proposed Engineering Research
Center for Hybrid Inorganic Photonic Integrated Circuits will drive innovation
and engineering of this technology and expand their applications. The planning
activity workshops will define the research activities, key knowledge experts
and stakeholders necessary for the proposed Engineering Research Center. This
planning stage will be fundamental for developing an eventual Engineering
Research Center on this topic that will allow for the robust research and
diverse work-force training needed for success. The success of the proposed
Engineering Research Center will lead to innovations in this critical technology
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant for the proposed Hybrid Inorganic
Photonic Integrated Circuits (HIPIC) Engineering Research Center will support
the research and education team building necessary to address challenges and
identify opportunities. In the last twenty years, most PIC devices operate at
the near-infrared wavelengths. As such, this technology platform utilizes
devices including lasers, waveguides and optical elements which are specifically
designed for the NIR wavelength range. This planning award will enable the team
to investigate the integration of light sources based on hybrid semiconductors
with conventional wide-gap semiconductors as a technology platform that would
lead to a possible ERC. The ultimate goal of the planning activities will be to
develop a convergent approach to integrate photonic devices based on III-nitride
and hybrid perovskites for future photonic integrated circuits. The resulting
technology platform could enable massive high-speed data processing for advanced
optical computing or communications. This paradigm shift will also offer the
potential to replace existing technologies in medical diagnostics, chemical
sensing, optical characterization, accelerometry and navigation. During this
planning period for the HIPIC ERC, experts in wide bandgap semiconductors and
hybrid perovskites and other fields will be invited to participate in workshops
with the objective of generating a detailed research, education, and inclusion
plan for this potential ERC. The proposed program will converge partners from
academia including minority-serving institutions, government partners and
industry partners to realize this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.