* 1937746
* EAGER: Ultra-Efficient, Scalable, and Fault-Tolerant DC-DC Converters for Medium/High-Voltage Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Deepakraj Divan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 219,937.00

EAGER: Ultra-Efficient, Scalable, and Fault-Tolerant DC-DC Converters for
Medium/High-Voltage Applications&lt;br/&gt; With the growing demand for
exploiting distributed energy resources and the need for dynamic and
reconfigurable power grids with ever increasing power density, reliability, and
efficiency requirements, the concept of direct current (dc) power systems is
gaining traction. Lower losses and higher power densities enabled by dc power
transmission and distribution has sparked further implementation of high-voltage
and medium-voltage dc transmission and distribution systems. It is envisioned
that the dc grids will improve functionality, stability, and reliability of the
legacy power grid while simultaneously decreasing the conversion losses and
investment cost.&lt;br/&gt; The envisioned dc grids are not necessarily at the
same voltage level and their expansion towards the future grid calls for ultra-
efficient, scalable, power-dense and fault-tolerant medium- and high-voltage dc-
dc power converters, which will enable voltage matching when connecting two or
more dc systems operating at different voltage levels. The objective of this
research is to realize a new class of dc-dc converters, which pushes the
boundaries of efficiency, scalability, power density and fault
tolerance/reliability and expedites further expansion of dc grids. To this end,
two new promising converter topologies, one based on the voltage-sourced
converter concept and the other one based on the current-sourced converter
concept, are fully explored. The project will focus on modeling, analysis,
control, short-circuit fault protection, and design optimization of these
converter topologies, demonstrating the ability to achieve the objectives
including compact, ultra-efficient, power dense, and embedded fault blocking
capability. The proposed educational activities will help educate and equip
next-generation power engineers/scientists with the required knowledge and
skills to tackle energy chal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.