* 1937215
* Research Training Group in Groups and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Lewis Bowen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,401,468.00

This award will facilitate a variety of new activities by the University of
Texas at Austin Groups and Dynamics (UTGD) research group. These activities are
designed to foster a rich educational environment for undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdocs at UT by increasing introductory research opportunities
for undergraduates and research-level training for graduate students. The
overall goals of this initiative are to increase the number of math majors going
to top-tier graduate schools, increase the number of Ph.D.s obtaining top-tier
postdocs, improve the career placement of postdoctoral fellows after their time
at UT, and increase the number of women and minorities pursuing advanced degrees
and careers in mathematics research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UTGD
is led by seven faculty members at UT Austin. The group brings a wealth of
different viewpoints and motivations together, from low-dimensional topology and
geometry, to amenability, representation theory, random walks and ergodic
theory. Building on a departmental Group Theory and Dynamics Seminar that has
run for the past five years, the emphasis and resources of the grant will bring
together expertise in the many areas represented by the research group while
providing an arena for new mathematics and for the training of new
mathematicians. To increase the number of graduate students entering into fields
involving higher mathematics, UTGD will provide a summer Directed Reading
Program (DRP) designed to prepare undergraduates for graduate school. UTGD will
create a course, Experimental Mathematics, and enhance another, Discrete Math,
to help prepare students for research. To improve the placement of graduating UT
Ph.D.s, this award will enhance the UT graduate program by providing graduate
fellowships/traineeships and travel funds and support for graduate mini-Schools
and a Groups and Dynamics junior seminar. To build the departmental activity
centered around Groups and Dynamics, this award will add four postdoctoral
positions and provide visitors to work with postdocs, graduate students, and
faculty. In the use of these resources, the management team will actively seek
to increase the proportion of members of underrepresented groups in mathematics.
The grant also proposes a number of ways to impact mathematics outside the
department. The materials resulting from any of the projects will be made
available through a dedicated website. The mini-Schools will draw from graduate
students nationwide; the undergraduate conference, and the summer DRP will draw
broadly from Texas schools. The Julia Robinson Math Festival will bring engaging
and new mathematical experiences to K-12 students in the Austin area. The
activities with the Math Teachers' Circle will create a stronger working
relationship between the faculty and students of the math department and local
K-12 teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.