* 1937461
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2019 IEEE North American School of Information Theory (NASIT 2019)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Bobak Nazer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This project funds U.S. student participation at the 12th annual IEEE North
American School for Information Theory (NASIT). Information Theory studies the
transmission, processing, and use of information in many contexts; it draws from
and contributes to a large number of disciplines in the engineering, computer,
and mathematical sciences. The types of research topics presented by students at
this summer school and the tutorial areas discussed by lecturers, will span
foundational theory, algorithmic design, and implementation in practice. This
travel award can help the participating students get a fuller understanding of
the various facets of information theory, helping build out their professional
networks and enrich their research experience overall.

NASIT is an annual educational event initiated in 2008 by the IEEE Information
Theory Society, and regularly involves between 60 to 100 graduate student
participants from across North America. The format consists of several half-day
tutorials delivered by high-profile researchers from within and adjacent to the
information theory community. Students are also given an opportunity to present
posters of their ongoing research and receive feedback from each other as well
as tutorial speakers and faculty organizers. Approximately 60 students will
receive partial travel support to cover their costs of attending this event.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.