* 1937986
* Super-Resolution In Vivo Optical Imaging as a Window to Parkinson's Disease Pathogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 12/31/2023
* USD 403,400.00

Parkinson's disease is a debilitating neurodegenerative disorder afflicting 5
million people worldwide, costing $14 billion a year in the United States alone.
The causes of most cases are unknown, but genetic and environmental factors are
linked to increased risk. This project will reveal the molecular events related
to Parkinson's disease neuropathology and progression, thus facilitating new
therapeutic interventions and more accurate prognoses. More generally, a tool
will be developed for identifying the molecular basis of other central nervous
system disorders related to protein folding, such as Alzheimer's disease and
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and for evaluating new treatment methods for
these diseases. Undergraduate students will be incorporated into aspects of this
project with graduate students. The research will be used to enhance
demonstrations for the Purdue Women in Engineering program and at the Brain Bowl
during Purdue's Spring Fest, both of which target K-12. The laboratories
involved on this project will be opened to students in classes that the
investigators teach to illustrate concepts and demonstrate the relevance of
class material to research, an exciting tool for encouraging graduate research
and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new fluorescence-based optical molecular
imaging method suitable for the living brain will be developed and applied as a
means to elucidate, for the first time, pathogenic mechanisms relating to the
temporal and spatial development of Parkinson's disease neuropathology. Abnormal
protein aggregation of the presynaptic protein alpha-synuclein is thought to be
a critical early pathogenic event, and aggregation is postulated to occur first
systemically, then in the brain stem, and then in later stages in specific areas
of the brain where neuronal loss or dysfunction results in the cardinal motor
and non-motor symptoms. The spread of aggregates through these different brain
regions is thought to be similar to the spread of the prion protein involved in
mad cow disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob syndrome. Understanding the relationship
between alpha-synuclein aggregation and Parkinson's disease is of fundamental
importance, in order to develop detection and treatment options. Aberrant
calcium signaling is also a key Parkinson's disease indicator, and calcium ion
perturbations in vulnerable neurons can be monitored with available fluorescent
reporters. The proposed super-resolution optical imaging method will have the
capacity to determine alpha-synuclein aggregation and site progression as well
as calcium signaling in the brain of a living animal, potentially with a
resolution of ten microns. The Research Plan is organized under two aims. Under
the FIRST Aim, a simultaneous computational imaging and rat model study will be
pursued to investigate the alpha-synuclein prion-like spreading mechanism that
is thought to result in Parkinson's disease progression. Data collected weekly
will be progressively used to aid the determination of precise point locations
for alpha-synuclein aggregation. The fluorescent lifetime distribution of these
sites is also expected to differ, based on aggregation level. Under the SECOND
Aim, temporal signaling information will be obtained from microscope
measurements of fluorescent calcium reporters in cell cultures and used to
simulate neuron activation in the brain. This joint experimental and modeling
effort will build a framework to allow investigation of whether perturbations of
calcium signaling underlie neuron dysfunction or loss in Parkinson's disease,
and the hypothesis that interactions between calcium and alpha-synuclein are
involved in neurotoxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.