* 1937094
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Integrated Mechanobiology for Women's Health (IMWEL)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Xiang-Dong Guo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 05/31/2022
* USD 96,230.00

Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Integrated Mechanobiology for
Women's Health (IMWEL)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical forces have profound
effects on human physiology. The impacts of zero gravity in space travel and of
bone remodeling for world-class athletes serve as powerful examples of how
forces modify the body under extreme performance conditions. Equally striking
examples affecting the broader population are seen in childbirth and post-
menopausal osteoporosis. However, despite new understanding of how mechanical
forces affect molecules, cells, tissues, and organisms, transformation into
advanced strategies for health remains elusive. Women's health topics in
particular have been underserved, despite having clear importance in areas such
as pregnancy, maternal health, and cancer. To bridge this gap, we envision a
Center that brings together engineers, scientists, educators, entrepreneurs, and
medical professionals at this intersection of mechanobiology and women's health,
developing new knowledge and tools. A multidisciplinary Center is needed for
this endeavor, as the underlying fields of mechanobiology and women's health are
dramatically underserved, and real progress will require convergent thinking and
creative solutions. By bringing together these often-disparate groups,
investment in this Center through NSF aims to dramatically advance the science
and practice of women's health through mechanobiology, leading to knowledge that
will be transformed into new tools for modern
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Planning Grant is to expand a
core group of investigators at Columbia University into a larger, more diverse
team that will be strategically suited to lead the envisioned Engineering
Research Center for Integrated Mechanobiology for Women?s Health (IMWEL).
Columbia University has a rich history in biomechanics, which continues to adapt
to contemporary challenges. Today, topics in biomechanics at Columbia University
include how forces affect molecules involved in cellular function, how tissues
actively change during pregnancy, and in developing the computational frameworks
needed to turn basic science into realistic models and solutions. These
investigators have, in small teams, developed connections with researchers
around the United States of America that focus on different aspects of
biomechanics. Through this Planning Grant, they intend to further develop these
and additional connections across the country to ensure that the resultant IMWEL
leadership team brings convergent expertise representing a diverse range of
capabilities, insights, and societal groups. This will be accomplished through a
series of workshops around mechanobiology and women's health, which will be
complemented by later visits to the participating teams outside of Columbia
University. Furthermore, this Planning Grant will include discussions and visits
with complementary NSF-supported Centers to identify ways that the larger
program can effectively interact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.