* 1937162
* Travel Grant: 10th International Conference on Multiscale Materials Modeling; Baltimore, Maryland; October 19-22, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Jaafar El-Awady, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2022
* USD 90,000.00

This grant provides travel support for the 10th International Conference on
Multiscale Materials Modeling, which will be held at the Johns Hopkins
University campus in Baltimore, Maryland, on October 19-22, 2020. The conference
will be jointly hosted by George Mason University, Georgetown University, and
the University of Maryland. Multiscale materials modeling (MMM) is a branch of
computational mechanics, computational biomechanics, and computational materials
science in which existing and emerging methods from interdisciplinary fields are
combined to bridge phenomena, which are inherent to complex material systems,
across different length and time scales. MMM provides direct insights on how
materials (or living matter) deform and/or adapt their form and function in
response to different mechanical, electrical, magnetic, or environmental
exciters, and trace this to material structure and molecular (or cellular) level
mechanisms. MMM is also indispensable for expediting the development and
manufacturing of reliable materials with superior performance by moving away
from empirical trial-and-error techniques, to state-of-the-art and
experimentally verified multi-scale computational methods. This grant will help
to considerably subsidize travel costs, through scholarships, for 50 graduate
students and 25 junior researchers, with emphasis on under-representative
groups, to participate, showcase their work, as well as interact with leaders in
the MMM community who regularly attend this conference. These travel fellowships
will also help promote/highlight NSF-funded research focused on
MMM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This four-day conference brings together researchers
from academia, national laboratories, and industry from across the globe with
interdisciplinary research backgrounds in mechanics, biomechanics and
mechanobiology, materials, advanced manufacturing, and computational mechanics
and sciences to share new advancements in the field and identify existing and
future challenges. Each day there will be an hour-long plenary session, two 45
minutes semi-plenary sessions, and 5.5 hours of 9 to 13 parallel technical
sessions. Each technical session will be composed of multiple 20 minutes
contributed presentations and 30 minutes invited presentations. There will also
be two separate evening poster sessions in which a student poster competition
will be held. The outcome of this conference will be disseminated in the form of
several peer reviewed journal special issues that would feature several
conference articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.