* 1937896
* SBIR Phase I:  Electric Blower-Based Emergency Mask Ventilator for Simple Ventilation and Monitoring During Patient Distress and Transport
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Michael Fogarty, MFM LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2020
* USD 224,959.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will significantly improve the safety and outcomes for patients in
emergency situations requiring intubation, a process recognized as flawed, yet
performed millions of times per year in the United States. This project will
enable responders to use a lightweight, portable device that will decrease the
time to stabilize a patient during critical situations by developing a new
device to measure the patient’s tidal volume, or volume of air moved through the
lungs in a ventilation cycle. With this measurement, responders will be able to
treat patients more effectively, efficiently and safely. The resulting
technology of this project will not only increase safety for patients and
increase efficiency of medical responders, it will do so in a cost-effective
manner, making it financially feasible for buyers to assure every patient has
this life-saving respiratory support.

The proposed project will further develop a device to measure tidal volume and
deliver breaths using tightly controlled pressure levels and respiration rates.
It will calculate and measure tidal volume, respiratory rate, and minute
ventilation; furthermore, it will dynamically adapt to leaks and detect airway
obstruction during emergency ventilation, providing instant and accurate
feedback to responders and avoiding any possible injury to the patient. In this
Phase I project we will extend prior research by building a compact device to be
worn on the responder’s arm or in a sling. We will: 1) build and test smaller
electronics and sensors in a prototype; 2) develop advanced monitoring
algorithms; 3) conduct bench-tests on patient simulators to optimize the system;
4) conduct display and wearability tests. The end goal of this project is to
provide an ultra-portable prototype that meets or exceeds the performance of
ventilators normally used in intensive care unites, broadening the impact to all
patients requiring lifesaving ventilation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.