* 1937115
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Civil Infrastructure Systems Open Knowledge Network (CIS-OKN)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* ChengXiang Zhai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 999,999.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence
Accelerator Phase I project focuses on the grand challenge of restoring and
improving the U.S. national urban infrastructure by creating a Civil
Infrastructure Systems Open Knowledge Network (CIS-OKN). This system will
provide tools to assemble and analyze infrastructure data that can improve
evaluation, planning, design, construction, and operation of our infrastructure
systems. The project includes a multidisciplinary and multi-institutional team
of civil engineering, data science, computer science, and social science experts
and leverages industry and government partnerships to identify and harness the
necessary data to enable safer, more efficient, and cost-effective construction,
operation, and maintenance of U.S. infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CIS-OKN has the potential to transform the way civil infrastructure systems
decision-makers and stakeholders interact with and use what were previously
isolated and heterogeneous data. The project seeks to improve understanding of
the factors contributing to infrastructure deterioration and to help decision-
makers select and prioritize the operations necessary to maintain the
reliability and improve the sustainability of the U.S. infrastructure system.
The project team?s strategic partnerships with industry and government agencies
should enable them to produce an open knowledge network that can have an impact
on civil infrastructure systems practices and thereby help meet the need for
resilient and sustainable infrastructure systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
advances in data analytics and machine learning have created a unique
opportunity to learn from past and current conditions to better assess and
predict the conditions and sustainability of civil infrastructure systems. By
linking, integrating, and analyzing the wealth of data that exist, the CIS-OKN
will facilitate insights relevant to construction, maintenance, and investment
decision-making. The research objective is to develop and test an open, shared,
public cyberinfrastructure for locating and accessing civil infrastructure
systems data from multiple sources and in heterogeneous formats to facilitate
knowledge discovery, predictive analytics, and data-driven decision making. The
effort will include semantically understanding the content and relationships of
different types of data to each other and to the physical infrastructure
components; extracting information about infrastructure system conditions from
unstructured data sources; linking and fusing data from disparate sources, in
different formats, and with different levels of technical and descriptive detail
into a unified knowledge representation; and developing integrated querying,
reasoning, and learning tools for these heterogeneous types of data. The CIS-OKN
has the potential to enable new modes of data-driven discovery, transforming
isolated data into forms that enable integrative data analytics across
disciplines and institutional boundaries, potentially enhancing innovation
across the civil infrastructure systems domain and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.