* 1937849
* Public Awareness of STEM and Advancing the Role of Women in STEM
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Roli Varma, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/28/2022
* USD 99,889.00

This award supports a U.S.-Asia regional workshop on how best to enhance public
awareness of science and technology and advance women's participation in STEM.
The meeting will convene a group of approximately 30 invited scholars and
experts from the fields of Science, Technology &amp; Society (STS), Women in
STEM, and Science Popularization from the U.S. and 9 South Asian and Southeast
Asian countries (Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan,
Singapore, Sri Lanka and Thailand). The meeting will utilize the wealth of data
showing how STEM drives economic development and emphasize the growing
appreciation that education in STEM must be targeted, not only to future STEM
professionals in government and industry, but also to the general public. These
developing Asian countries represent some of the most vibrant emerging economies
in the world, and the U.S. can learn much from better understanding the
opportunities and challenges these countries face in promoting STEM. Thus, this
is a propitious time to gather information from them on how (and perhaps,
whether), national STEM policies are affected by the public's awareness of STEM
as a significant driver of economic growth. Also critical within these countries
(and in the United States) are the challenges related to equity for women in
STEM participation, employment, and leadership. This project will address the
issue of advancement of women in the STEM education and workforce from a cross-
national perspective. Through this interactive workshop, the project team will
gather information on how the informal education and popularization of STEM may
improve the participation of women in selected Asian countries as well as in the
United States. It will address how to build a gender inclusive workforce that
would lead to innovation much needed for both economic growth and social well-
being. Drawing on lessons from data and experience, participants will craft
suggested national and international strategies to promote public awareness and
appreciation of STEM as important factors in economic development and societal
well-being, with a particular focus on gender equity and inclusion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Conference project will produce an up-to-date status
report on issues of gender equity in STEM thorough a series of publications.
Furthermore, this project will lead to establishment of partnerships within the
STS and Science Popularization academic communities in Asian countries and the
U.S. The proposed cross-national engagement will foster international research
on gender in both the STEM workplace and marketplace. Finally, the hybrid
approaches to professional conference facilitation explored at this meeting have
the potential to significantly enhance how organizations across a variety of
STEM disciplines might think about organizing and supporting professional
collaboration and sharing in the future. Overall, this regional project is
expected to trigger meaningful conversations and long term impacts on these
issues among a large international group of scholars and practitioners. This
project is jointly funded by the NSF programs in Science, Technology, and
Society (STS), ADVANCE, and the Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.