* 1937095
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Network Science of Census Data
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Moon Duchin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 962,177.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence
Accelerator Phase I project is focused on a central goal of structuring and pre-
processing data from the U.S. Census (as well as the American Community Survey
and state and local government data) to make it maximally accessible to the
research techniques of network science, machine learning, and artificial
intelligence that are currently at the forefront of scientific inquiry into
complex systems. The broader impacts and social benefit of this project will
emerge from leveraging the large, elaborate, and expensively collected public
resource of census data for research, with strong applications to policy,
planning, public health, and other topics. The ability to apply sophisticated
artificial intelligence and complex networks techniques to Census data - a blend
of demographic, geographic, and socioeconomic information arranged in an
integrated hierarchy - will serve the national interest by providing
opportunities to better understand the nation's population and communities, with
both snapshots and trendlines. Phase I of the project also includes tool
development to provide the processed demographic and civic data to scholars,
legislators, public-sector officials, and the general public through open-source
apps and other interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a convergence
research effort, bringing theoretical mathematicians and computer scientists
(from combinatorics, probability, geometry, dynamics, and algorithms) together
with applied mathematicians and network scientists, buttressed by meaningful
interdisciplinary collaboration in the social sciences. The project seeks to
understand census geography in both graph and network terms, developing new
multi-layer network structures as well as efficient algorithms for clustering,
partitioning, and feature identification. The team plans in phase I to also
expand collaborative relationships between academia, industry, government, and
public-sector organizations. A particular emphasis will be placed on the further
development of techniques for discrete Markov chains on graph partitions, an
area in which the project team already has significant expertise and anticipates
progress on both rigorous and heuristic results about mixing times and
stationary distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.