* 1937770
* NSF-BSF: Assessing the mechanisms of molecular and morphological adaptation by corals to extreme environments
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Gretchen Goodbody-Gringley, Central Caribbean Marine Institute
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 586,500.00

Coral reefs have global ecological, structural, social, and economic importance,
are a fundamental component of marine ecosystems, and a major locus of global
biodiversity. The recent devastating impacts of global warming and local
stressors on shallow-water coral reef communities are expected to increase as
oceans continue to warm, leading to more frequent and severe mortality events.
In recent years, deeper reef systems have gained considerable interest as they
appear to be buffered from impacts affecting shallow-water coral reefs and may,
therefore, serve as important areas of refuge for coral survival. Survival under
rapid environmental change relies, in part, on the ability of organisms to adapt
to new conditions. Species that exist along broad depth gradients are exposed to
a wide range of environmental conditions, requiring a high capacity for
adaptation and/or trait-based selection in response to different conditions. In
this study, we address two primary research questions: (1) how does coral
morphology and physiology differ across depth and (2) are these differences due
to plasticity or evolutionary adaptation? Using a multifaceted approach,
including advanced molecular and imaging techniques, we will examine the
mechanisms that enable corals to thrive across broad depth gradients. As a US-
Israel binational project led by two female early career scientists, we will
promote diversity and create new international collaborations through student
participation, training workshops and exchange. Ultimately, this study will
improve our understanding of coral reef resilience and indicate the potential
for deep reefs to serve as refuges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although corals often
show macromorphological and physiological characteristics distinct for each
species, it is also known that these features may vary along environmental
gradients among individuals of the same species. Changes in such features often
appear to match local conditions in a way that may be beneficial, however,
whether these changes result from phenotypic plasticity or trait-based selection
remains unclear. Here, we examine the relative influence of plasticity versus
selective adaptation on changes to morphology, physiology and gene expression
across a depth gradient to determine if these characteristics differ among
geographic locations with different environmental conditions, if they are
intrinsically or extrinsically controlled, and how they impact recruitment
success. Variations in skeletal morphology, calcification, photosynthesis,
respiration, symbiotic association, fluorescence, nutrient acquisition, and gene
expression will be examined in adult corals from across a depth gradient in the
Red Sea and Caribbean. Corals from shallow and mesophotic corals will then be
reciprocally transplanted and reassessed for changes in the same key
characteristics. Larvae will also be collected from shallow and mesophotic
corals and reciprocally settled in situ, with differences in morphology,
ecology, physiology, and gene expression examined across life stages. Finally,
differential patterns of recruitment across depths, determined using fluorescent
imaging, will determine long-term impacts of adaptation to population
resilience. Together these integrated investigations will provide a
comprehensive assessment of the role of light, temperature, and trophic status
on the plasticity of corals, as well as the molecular and physiological
mechanisms enabling adaptation to environmental conditions experienced in the
mesophotic zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was cofunded by the
Integrative Ecological Physiology Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biological Science and The Biological
Oceanography Program in the Division of Ocean Sciences in the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.