* 1937613
* The Developmental Biology of the Sea Urchin and Other Marine Invertebrates Meeting, Woods Hole, MA, April 15 - 19, 2020.
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Deirdre Lyons, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 18,008.00

All animals alive right now evolved from ancestors that once lived over 500
million years ago in shallow coastal oceans. From those original populations,
their descendants adapted to inhabit many different environments (e.g. deep sea,
fresh water, terrestrial), and to diversify into the dazzling variety of shapes
we see today. Yet, marine organisms remain among the least-understood organisms,
especially in regards to how their development, physiology, and behavior are
controlled at the level of cells and molecules. The Developmental Biology of the
Sea Urchin and Other Marine Invertebrates Meeting brings together scientists who
use marine organisms to discovery how animals are built through the process of
development, with the goal of finding both the similarities and differences
among them. The meeting provides opportunities for undergraduates, graduate
students, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty to present their work through
posters, lightning talks, and concurrent session talks. All meeting participants
are invited to participate in pre-meeting workshops on technology advancement,
and lunchtime workshops on career development. This year’s meeting features
several new initiatives to broaden participation among groups that are
traditionally under-represented in the ocean biosciences. Overall, the meeting
will lead to a deeper and wider understanding of how marine organisms function
and reproduce in their environments; this exchange of knowledge is critical for
understanding basic biological process, as well as for understanding how
organisms will respond to changing ocean environments in the coming decades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Developmental Biology of the Sea Urchin and Other
Marine Invertebrates (DBSUMI) meeting will be held at the Marine Biological
Laboratory in April 2020. It attracts a diverse group of &gt;150 scientists who
use marine invertebrates to study cell biology, developmental biology,
neurobiology, regeneration, immunology, genomics, and evolutionary biology
(among others) in a broad phylogenetic context. The meeting boasts several new
initiatives including: 1) 3 pre-meeting workshops dedicated to hands on training
in emerging technologies (CRISPR, scRNAseq, BAC recombineering), 2) lightning
talks associated with poster sessions to promote student work, 3) a Broadening
Participation Plenary session and poster session to discuss Equity, Diversity
and Inclusion efforts in our fields, 4) lunch time themes on career development,
5) an increased number of non-sea urchin invited speakers, and 6) an associated
Hemichordate satellite meeting. Thus, the organizers of DBSUMI 2020 have an
ambitious new plan to modernize and expand the meeting to make it the nexus for
labs using marine invertebrate systems in their research, teaching, and
outreach. Currently, no other meeting in the world focuses on the comparative
development of marine invertebrates. The meeting will help recruit the next
generation of broadly trained biologists using marine organisms as experimental
systems. The results of the meeting (workshops, oral sessions, career
development sessions) will be disseminated in real time through social media,
and post meeting reports will be published in open access journals and
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.