* 1937908
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Open Knowledge Network for Spatial Decision Support
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Wenwen Li, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 999,739.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is
improved access to spatial data and related software tools that will support
decision making and public participation that are needed to address a wide range
of complex problems. Spatial decision support (SDS) tools are used across a
diversity of domains, including public health, emergency management, city
planning, education, natural resource management, public safety, transportation,
utilities, and the delivery of public and private services more generally.
Despite many successful applications, the effectiveness of spatial decision
support contributions is limited by challenges in integrating information across
complex organizational networks and across an array of data and tools developed
for narrow (often discipline-specific) applications. This project will develop
technologies and participatory methods that will help bridge organizational and
disciplinary boundaries, thereby building a foundation for an open knowledge
network for spatial decision support (OKN-SDS). The interdisciplinary project
team plans to engage stakeholders in three applied case studies: the management
of wildland fire, water quality, and biodiversity conservation. These three use-
cases will be used to develop and test participatory and automated methods for
structuring, tagging and sharing decision-relevant information. These
demonstration projects, the accompanying development of the underlying technical
architecture for the OKN-SDS, and outreach to broader SDS-related communities
will motivate and facilitate the integration of SDS data and tools that is
needed to better address a diverse range of decision-making processes that
require spatial decision support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the project is based on the participatory and open technology development
process that the team will use to develop resources for creating use-inspired
spatial decision support applications relevant to challenges in many
disciplines. The project team will investigate the utility of automated tools
for resource discovery, ontology development, and social network analysis,
validating the methods in the three proposed use cases (wildland fire, water
quality, and biodiversity conservation). Through integration and comparison of
these techniques, the project team will deliver insights into efficient and
effective methods for OKN development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.