* 1937361
* Collaborative Research: 3D Virtual-Rock Models for Testing Category Learning Theory to Improve Student Learning in Physical Geology
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Robert Nosofsky, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 03/31/2024
* USD 89,015.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective undergraduate
STEM education. Specifically, the project aims to enhance the teaching of rock
identification and categorization in introductory undergraduate geoscience
classes. Helping students learn about categorization, such as rock types in
geology, is important in science curricula because categories are the building
blocks of basic thought processes in humans. Categories provide an efficient
means for humans to reason and draw inferences about the nature of the world.
The project hypothesizes that students will learn how to categorize rocks better
if they can study both physical rock samples and three-dimensional computer
models of rocks. Consequently, the project will develop interactive three-
dimensional computer models of rocks to supplement studentsâ€™ interaction with
physical rocks. The project will conduct research on the effect that using the
computer models has on student learning. In addition, the project will develop
teaching resources to supplement the computer models. These resources and the
three-dimensional computer models themselves will be made widely available to
geoscience educators throughout the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of
the project are to: 1) develop 3-D computer models of at least four different
examples of ten different types of rocks; 2) conduct research on how students
develop classification schemes for rocks with consideration of the impact on
learning resulting from the order in which the rocks are viewed; and 3) provide
the new computer models of rocks to the geoscience community of learners. The
domain of rock classification appears to be both a challenging and highly
representative example of natural-science category learning. Therefore, the
experimental results obtained in this project should provide training guidance
across the broad expanse of STEM disciplines in which students are tasked with
learning and inducing categories from the study of individual objects. The
results of the project have the potential to inform and improve standard
practice in teaching science categories, and by so doing assist societal efforts
to promote STEM education. Finally, the technology that will be used in the
project will provide the geoscience-education community with a channel for
instruction of students who are currently underserved because they have limited
access to physical laboratory facilities. This project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources.
Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.