* 1937061
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Unlocking the Power of Data and Science to Empower American Workers
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Susan Athey, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2021
* USD 996,170.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/
potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will be to
empower everyday Americans with the tools to make informed choices for a
successful career, and to improve the effectiveness and impact of publicly-
funded labor training programs. We have brought together a cross-sector team of
leading scientists, state and county governments, and not-for-profit and private
industry leaders. Together, we will unlock the power of administrative data,
science, and technology to support American workers with effective reskilling
programs for a changing work landscape. Our project relies on the convergence
and combined strengths of computer science, economics, education, public policy,
behavioral science, and applied finance. First, we will create scientifically-
valid return on investment measures for publicly-funded labor training programs.
This information will then be available to government and all workers through a
public API and web tool. The tool, which will be launched and usable by 2022,
will help government understand the returns to training programs and
alternatives to higher education; empower workers to make informed decisions
about their future; and incentivize training programs to add value to their
enrollees' ability to find gainful employment today and in the
future.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will
address the fact that, although tens of millions of workers may be displaced and
need to reskill in the coming decades, government currently has few measures to
guide training investment decisions, ensure that training delivers valuable
reskilling and improved outcomes, or help workers choose programs based on
return on investment for the future. To meet growing needs and successfully
support American workers for the jobs of the future, labor training programs
will need to be effective and efficient, delivering measurable success.
Retrospective studies have used administrative data to evaluate isolated
training programs. However, they cannot guide displaced workers currently
seeking training, and do not incentivize program improvement. We will advance
scientific knowledge and help workers prepare for careers of the future by
combining administrative data with causal machine-learning and econometric
methods to deliver scientifically-valid measures of labor training program
success in collaboration with state and local government partners. These
measures will be freely available, support pay-for-success models of procurement
and program management, and be easy for policymakers to own, implement, and
scale. They will empower workers with the information needed to select programs
that deliver skills for gainful employment and successful
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.