* 1937085
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center on Sanitation and Water Infrastructure of the Future for Marginalized Communities (SWIFt-MC)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Qiong Zhang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,999.00

Marginalized communities in the US (e.g., majority black and Hispanic urban-
outskirt (peri-urban) communities and smaller rural municipalities with low
levels of economic and technical resources) are less likely to have access to
critical environmental health infrastructure, such as centralized drinking water
or sewer lines. They also rely more on small and onsite systems and have less
access to technological advances. Multiple studies show that current onsite
systems pose higher health risks than regulated community water and sewer
services. Marginalized communities also bear the brunt of ecological habitat
shifts and natural disasters and lack financial and local resources to embrace
and adapt technological innovations. By focusing on marginalized communities,
the Convergent Engineering Research Center for Sanitation and Water
Infrastructure of the Future for Marginalized Communities (SWIFt-MC) will unlock
innovations that can serve the &gt;60 million US citizens that rely on
decentralized onsite sanitation, the 8% of the US population served by small
drinking water systems and private wells, and the billions of people in emerging
markets without access to acceptable water and
sanitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Engineering Research Center (ERC)
SWlFt-MC will embrace a convergent research approach that will lead to: 1) novel
and improved context-adapted technologies for small and on-site water and
wastewater/sanitation systems, 2) new sensors and techniques for quantifying
chemical and microbial contaminants, 3) new systems- based models and frameworks
that deepen our understanding of exposures, and 4) new solutions and
interventions that incorporate social, economic, and behavioral factors. SWIFt-
MC will lead to research and education that is transformative through advancing
fundamental understanding of basic sciences, environmental sciences, and public
health sciences to develop and test public health infrastructure technologies
and solutions for marginalized communities. This understanding will cut across
and push the boundaries of physical, chemical, biological, social, and
computational sciences in the area water and sanitation. SWIFt-MC will also
catalyze the re-thinking of engineering education. By defining the beneficiaries
of engineering advances, SWIFt-MC will empower underrepresented K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students to address problems affecting the
disadvantaged, and emphasize community engagement and systems- and long-term
thinking. SWIFt-MC will lead to research, education, and outreach that is
translational, as the findings will impact practices and solutions that will be
tested and evaluated in several marginalized communities in the US and around
the world. SWIFt-MC?s vision is to change the current public health
infrastructure within the next ten years, advancing small and on-site systems
from the 1970s to 21st century technology. This planning grant will convene the
necessary stakeholders and thought-leaders around this collective vision through
face-to-face discussions and workshops that feature Systematic Inventive
Thinking (e.g., TRIZ) and the science of team science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.