* 1937105
* Planning Grant: An Engineering Research Center for the Engineering of Emergent Biocomplexity (ERC-EEB)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Gilda Barabino, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Engineering Research Center for the Engineering of Emergent Biocomplexity: Draft
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1: Persistent societal challenges prohibit
broad-based advancement and human flourishing. Cancer and structural heart
defects remain prevalent, unpredictable, and destructive to both families and
public resources. Habitat challenges limit production of high-value crops like
broccoli. Biotechnology employment is oppressively concentrated in a few large
cities, restricting economic opportunity and family planning. These diverse
grand challenges exhibit complex commonalities that motivate an integrated
solution. Specifically, we believe three facets of biocomplexity?developmental,
adaptive, and pathological?are governed by as-yet-unknown emergent construction
principles or Rules of Life (one of the NSF?s 10 Big Ideas). We propose an
Engineering Research Center for the Engineering of Emergent Biocomplexity (EEB).
EEB will pursue foundational science, technology enablement, and economic
translation of the engineering system of Emergent Biocomplexity. We will
identify construction rules that govern emergent biocomplexity by interrogating
three engineering test-beds for which we have extensive expertise and
established experimental systems: 1) Developmental emergence: heart
morphogenesis, 2) Adaptive emergence: inflorescence morphogenesis, and 3)
Pathological emergence: Glioblastoma morphogenesis. Multi-scale, systems-level
understanding from each test-bed will cross-inform mechanisms in the others, and
through convergent research we will achieve transformative engineering outcomes
with high impact: 1) A bench-grown robust, structurally advanced ventricle to
advance quantitative developmental biology and enable direct evaluation of
restorative approaches for malformed hearts. 2) New broccoli amenable to Eastern
US climates with consumer-preferred structural architecture and preservation of
vital nutrients. 3) An engineered glioblastoma tumor test platform to identify
and validate new drug targets based on controlling emergent behaviors
inaccessible to current technologies. In the process of achieving these goals,
we will innovate next generation quantitative live imaging and multi-
scale/multi-valent computational simulation technology that will accelerate and
advance the understanding and control of dynamic biological complexity. We will
leverage these science and engineering gains with innovative emergence-based
STEM training to transform broaden biotechnology related employment access.
Tackling this Grand Challenge requires the deep collaboration of many experts
across diverse disciplines (e.g. Math, Plant science, Engineering,
Epistemology), siloed disciplinary cultures and language barriers, institutional
barriers, and geographical distance. Our institutions: Cornell University, City
College of New York, University of Pittsburgh, and the Ohio State University,
are ideally positioned within key rural and inner-city domains. This planning
grant will help coalesce the academic and industrial expertise and collective
infrastructure, build lines of community trust, and refine our strategic plan to
carry out these goals. Further, this grant will enable us to engage disparate
community stakeholders early in the process to improve our unique emergent
computational workforce development program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: We
will plan an ERC to pursue a new convergent research field of emergence science
and engineering, focused to discover the Rules of Life that are conserved or
unique between diverse emergent biological systems. We will apply deep
convergence and team science to refine the communication of emergence science
across discipline chasms and identify science tools for interrogating variation
and robustness within complex biological systems. This will be achieved through
cross-collaborative, multi-institutional test bed team meetings whereby the
science and engineering frontiers are solidified and well-grounded paths forward
with technical and knowledge success milestones are stratified. Through these
meetings, we will establish and prioritize shared needs for engineering a new
modular multi-valent computational simulation platform and multi-scale
quantitative imaging systems. These systems will provide transformative data
generation and analysis tools for accelerating the science and engineering of
emergent biocomplexity, using each test bed domain to stretch and refine their
capabilities. These technology pipelines will additionally serve as engagement
nodes for computational biotechnology firms as they seek to expand their
footprints into this emerging economic sector. We will engage regional industry
leaders through the planning process to further integrate their technology and
training desires. Further, our leadership team includes communication and team
formation/team performance experts who will study this planning process to
develop models for best practices for ideation and team communication within
convergent research environments. The success of our planning strategy will
establish a compelling cross-platform test case and refine a new process of
cross-disciplinary team engagement for transforming science and engineering
research for identifying and solving shared highly complex problems. The
proposed planning process will also refine stakeholder needs for culturally
responsive workforce generation program for a Center-credentialed computational
gig-economy. We will work with existing remote workforce talent and their
employers to frame training, certification, and advancement ladder ideals for
career sustainability and advancement within computational simulation and
analysis space. This broad based, branded and securely managed system would
eliminate location oppression in the workforce and enable emergent expertise
production. This approach will also catalyze rural engagement in STEM education
and the economy. We will also coalesce and refine our novel emergence science
and engineering concepts through broadly accessible science symposia, from which
focused reviews in leading science journals will evangelize the rationale and
approaches. These meetings will also help refine how we continue to include
diverse voices from across discipline and stakeholder boundaries for sustaining
impact through the ERC period. Finally, these components will then be integrated
into a formal ERC proposal to implement the research, engineering, and workforce
development goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.