* 1937846
* Collaborative Research: IUSE: EHR: Engaged Student Learning Exploration and Design Tier: Engaging and Enabling Learners to Reason Logically about Code
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Joseph Hollingsworth, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2020
* USD 4,295.00

The significance of the project is that it will enhance the logical reasoning
ability of students, and thus improve the quality of the software they develop
after graduation. To make this possible, the project will employ an integrated
system of engaging interactive reasoning guides to help overcome individual and
collective learning obstacles. These guides will facilitate incremental learning
for students and incremental adoption for educators. The automation inherent in
the guides will make them an ideal vehicle for impacting learning in
personalized and online settings and for reaching a diverse
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals include enabling students to
reason correctly about code compositions on all valid inputs, pinpointing fine-
grain learning obstacles using a logical reasoning approach aided by an
automated verification engine, and tailoring the tutoring necessary to help
students overcome those obstacles. The scope includes common code idioms from
the introductory programming repertoire and more advanced component-based
software engineering concepts such as contracts. The underlying verification
engine makes it possible for the interactive guides to offer a class of learner
activities and directed logical feedback not possible with standard IDEs
(Interactive Development Environments) such as Eclipse. Research and evaluation
will focus on how well the guides engage students and how learning is improved.