* 1937777
* Influential Networks for Women of Color in STEM Community College Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Melo-Jean Yap, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 12/31/2021
* USD 349,997.00

This project examines STEM trajectories of women of color who start their STEM
education at two-year public institutions. The goal is to use national and
social network data: to 1) understand the integration of mobility patterns,
student characteristics, college experiences, and institutions to support career
persistence in STEM women of color; and 2) identify what influential networks at
the student- and institutional-level have affected their scientific thinking,
and persistence and success in STEM. To accomplish the research goals, the
investigator will deepen her knowledge of biological sciences education,
qualitative and quantitative research design and methods, and data analysis.
Guided by working with her advisors and mentor, specific professional
development activities include pursuit of a data analytics certificate and
attending network analysis/ softare workshops and STEM conferences. The study
will advance knowledge about successful, first-generation women of color STEM
majors who started their careers in community colleges and the factors that
enabled them to persist. This research has the potential to inform retention
initiatives for underrepresented groups at other academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will use Social Network
Analysis and a mixed methods approach to understand how advisors, peers, and
relatives influence the persistence and STEM career trajectories of women of
color who attend community colleges. The research questions will be answered
through two stages of analysis, including descriptive statistics and multiple
membership random modeling. The investigator will: 1) map the networks that
provide navigational capital to the student participants; 2) quantify a matrix
of resistance for what aids and deters students as they navigate STEM pathways;
and 3) contextualize how influential networks enable students to overcome
personal and institutional challenges. The matrix combines complex systems and
socio-ecological theory to track non-linear, adaptive, and emergent
interactions. The longitudinal and network data will be provided through the
National Center for Education Statistics, Beginning Postsecondary Students
Longitudinal Study, and the Integrated Postsecondary Educational Data System,
questionnaires, and qualitative interviews. The findings will be significant in
mapping the complex pathways of women of color STEM majors and informing
institutions about ways to improve academic services and support for this
understudied group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported through NSF's
EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition that
is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high quality fundamental
STEM education research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.