* 1937230
* Gordon Research Conference: Membranes: Materials and Processes 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Isabel Escobar, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 10/31/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The project provides funds for travel and registration expenses for graduate
student and young postdoctoral research fellow attendees of the Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on Membranes: Materials and Processes, and associated Gordon
Research Seminar (GRS). The coordinated events will be held serially at Colby-
Sawyer College, New London, NH on the dates of August 1-2, 2020 (GRS) and August
2-7, 2020 (GRC). The seminar and conference focus on a broad range of
separations technologies critical to a wide range of industrial and
environmental processes of critical importance to U.S. technology
competitiveness. Additionally, the GRS and GRC provide valuable educational,
career development, and networking opportunity for students and early career
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 20 years, there has been high
level of activity and innovation in membrane science and technology with growing
understanding of how molecular scale phenomena manifest themselves at the
membrane and eventually the system scale. Additionally, critical societal needs
in the areas of energy, water, bioprocessing, and the environment are prviding
exciting new opportunities for membrane technologies. These include the
development of new membrane for hydrogen/oxygen, direct methanol and alkaline
fuel cells, membrane separations for the purification of ethanol produced from
cellulosic biomass, and membrane systems for carbon dioxide removal from gas
streams. The Gordon ResearchConference on membranes will have specific sessions
on molecules, membranes and membrane systems and their application to
contemporary topics dealing with energy production and storage, membrane
technologies for energy efficiency, nanomanufacturing, and membranes for water
purification. The discussions between the speakers and audience will provide
valuable feedback on current research efforts and will enable the participants
to further develop and refine new ideas for their own research and/or to
initiate new membrane projects. Gordon Research Conferences provide a setting
where researchers can present their most recent and, at times, most
controversial results. The conferences also foster informal discussions and
networking that occur outside of the formal lecture sessions. Such interactions
promote the generation of new ideas and new collaborations that assist in moving
forward the field of membrane science. The organizers have also made special
efforts to include women and underrepresented minorities in the conference.
Notably the conference will include a "Power Hour" informal gathering for all
meeting participants to discuss the challenges that women and minorities face in
science. This event helps to create an awareness of these important issues among
the broader community such that the whole community can take actions to support
the professional growth of women in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.