* 1937254
* RTG: Research Training in Applied Mathematics at Columbia University
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Michael Weinstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,147,918.00

This Research Training Group (RTG) project is a joint effort of the Department
of Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics, the Department of Mathematics, and
the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Columbia University. It aims
to create a cutting-edge research and training program in modern applied
mathematics. By substantially enriching research and educational experiences for
trainees, and by directly coupling into key educational and research initiatives
in the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences and across the University, the
activities will have a significant impact on applied mathematics education and
training at Columbia. The RTG project will engage high school as well as
undergraduate students from the New York metropolitan area and across the
country (through the Summer Research Program), inspiring mathematical careers
for underrepresented groups in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes three main ingredients: (i) a group of research topics in
applied mathematics at the frontier of engineering applications; (ii) a coherent
mentoring-learning program on applied mathematics research and career
development for undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
scholars; and (iii) a systematic plan to modernize undergraduate and graduate
curriculum in applied mathematics and scientific computation. The senior
investigators and the trainees will form groups to tackle challenging and
rewarding mathematical and computational problems, including linear and
nonlinear wave propagation in novel complex (and possibly random) structures,
physics- and data-enabled algorithms for material discovery, hybrid inverse
problems and imaging, mathematical theory of machine learning, harmonic analysis
of large data sets, and uncertainty quantification. They will collaborate with
leading engineers at Columbia to connect their mathematical and computational
discoveries with applications in nonlinear optics and photonics, materials
science, medical imaging, climate modeling, and general data science. The senior
members of this RTG project are strongly committed to training and mentoring
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars. Their extensive
and varied experiences in teaching and mentorship will be invaluable to the
professional growth of the trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.