* 1937772
* Building Quantitative Capacity in Contextualized STEM Education Research
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Michael Giamellaro, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 10/31/2023
* USD 275,291.00

The primary goal of the ECR: BCSER Individual Investigator Development (IID) in
STEM education research is to facilitate the acquisition of education research
expertise to enable an investigator to successfully conceive and execute
fundamental research with the potential to meaningfully advance current
knowledge in one of ECR's research domains - learning and learning environments,
broadening participation, and workforce development. This project, titled
"Building Quantitative Capacity in Contextualized STEM Education Research",
focuses on synthesizing, through systematic analysis, the existing body of
knowledge on STEM contextualization and its influence on STEM learning. The
project has two distinct aims: 1) to conduct a multi-faceted literature review
to identify factors that impact the relationship between contextualization and
STEM learning, and 2) to prepare the PI to lead this study through the
realization of a focused professional development plan that relies on mentorship
and participation in workshops and coursework. Findings from the study could
have positive impacts on STEM teaching and learning, curriculum development,
teacher preparation, future research trajectories, and broadening participation
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research approach consists of a
review of existing literature on contextualized STEM learning, including a
bibliometric network review to identify families of antecedent theory, a
systematic landscape analysis of qualitative and quantitative work in the field,
and a meta-analysis to compare effect sizes of contextualization interventions
that were quantitatively evaluated. Ongoing mentorship from three accomplished
science education researchers as well as work with a faculty research cohort
serve to prepare the PI with the skills and knowledge to implement the study.
The completion of online courses, participation in research retreats, and
engagement in a series of workshops on topics relevant to the study (including
bibliometrics, network analysis, meta-analysis, and R programming), also play
substantive roles in building the PI's research capacity. Two graduate students
are supported by the project, contributing to the research and their own growth
as researchers through data collection, management, and analysis. Evaluation of
the project's progress on its two aims is conducted regularly by the project's
mentors, providing practical feedback for optimizing the project's activities
and outcomes. Along with developing the PI's research capacity, significant
intellectual merit lies in the project's potential to generate actionable
information on the cluster of contextualization research, their antecedent
theoretical perspectives, patterns on how contextualization has been
operationalized, and meta-analytic patterns in how, to what degree, and for whom
contextualization can improve STEM learning. Broader impacts are anticipated
through the application of findings to increase the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM. The study's findings will be disseminated
through publications in peer-reviewed journals and presentations at professional
meetings. The project is supported through the EHR Core Research: Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to
build individuals' capacity to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education
research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.