* 1937143
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Credible Open Knowledge Network
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Sibel Adali, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jemin George
* 05/31/2022
* USD 999,870.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
develop new capabilities to ensure the quality and credibility of information
collected in large assemblages of data known as knowledge graphs or knowledge
networks. Many of today's intelligent software products are powered by massive
knowledge assemblages which are often proprietary. Developing an openly
available infrastructure based on public data is one of the overarching tracks
of the overall Convergence Accelerator Pilot in 2019. The goal of this specific
project is to ensure credibility -- integrity, completeness and truthfulness --
in developing such an open knowledge network. As such, this project's efforts
are likely to provide insights and value to many of the Convergence Accelerator
Phase I efforts initiated in 2019. This project plans to develop a resource for
debunking misinformation, which is important to decision making by individuals,
organizations, communities, and policy makers. The project's initial use-cases
will be healthcare, helping to create methodologies that ensure that health-
related data assembled is reliable to support healthcare understanding and
decision making, and mitigating security threats from software vulnerabilities
by looking at the validity and reliability of indicators of compromise within
collections of cyber threat intelligence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
supports a multi-institutional and multidisciplinary team that has valuable
expertise spanning computer science, economics, journalism and communication,
political science, psychology, and public health. The team includes researchers
from industrial partners, government research organizations, academic
institutions, and international organizations with complementary expertise
relevant to information credibility. Phase I of the project will focus on team
formation, research planning, and developing proof-of-concept. If the project
successfully proceeds to phase II it would develop a sustainable ecosystem of
datasets, algorithms, software, as well as a stakeholder community for creating
and fully utilizing credibility tools across an open knowledge
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will conduct use-inspired, convergence
research on several cross-cutting problems: (1) Modeling credible knowledge
graphs, deciding what types of knowledge need to be captured in order to promote
credibility, and how such knowledge should be represented in order to enable
computational approaches. (2) Developing data-driven understanding of what
factors contribute to the persuasiveness of factual statements, what signals
help gauge credibility, and how to employ that information to envision
countermeasures against misinformation. (3) Designing computational methods that
leverage knowledge graphs to vet statements and generate verifiable and reliable
explanations. (4) Procedures and mechanisms for initiating, developing, and
maintaining a credible open knowledge network over time. The findings of this
research have the potential to significantly impact understanding of information
and mis-information creation and consumption and may trigger new lines of
investigation while also helping to create more reliable information in
knowledge networks generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.