* 1937778
* Impact of Ethnic Studies Courses on the sense of belonging, professional identity, self-efficacy and retention of underrepresented students in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 12/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Natalia Caporale, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 02/28/2023
* USD 385,300.00

The project combines a research project aimed at broadening participation in
STEM with a detailed professional development plan focused on facilitating the
principal investigator's transition from a subject-specific focus on the
cellular and network mechanisms of experience-dependent plasticity to a focus on
STEM education research. The research project and professional development plan
will launch a long-term research program focused on combining quantitative and
qualitative approaches to increase recruitment and retention of underrepresented
minorities in STEM. This will be achieved through the development of
interventions rooted in robust multivariate statistical methods and a deep
understanding of the challenges and barriers these students face, examined
through a theoretical lens that combines student-asset models, neurobiology pf
learning and memory and critical race theory. The professional development plan
includes developing research design skills through focused collaborations,
attending quantitative and qualitative research methods summer workshops,
auditing/taking courses on qualitative research methods and Critical Race Theory
frameworks, and attending conferences that focus on these last two areas as they
apply to STEM education research. The outcome of the professional development
plan is to enable the principal investigator to complete an innovative research
study and develop expertise that will allow her to make significant
contributions to the field of STEM education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will apply a mixed methods approach to assess the relationship between taking
Chicano Studies courses and underrepresented minority (URM) students' sense of
belonging, science identity, and self-efficacy, as well as their likelihood to
persist in STEM majors until graduation. To achieve this goal, the investigator
will complete three objectives: (1) Assess the relationship between taking
Chicano Studies courses on the sense of belonging, self-efficacy, and science
identity of URM STEM students; (2) Evaluate the impact of taking Chicano Studies
courses on the sense of belonging, self-efficacy and science identity of URM
students in STEM; and (3) Characterize the reasons why URM students choose to
take Chicano Studies courses and the overall impact of these courses on
students' experiences. The investigator's long-term research plan focuses on
improving outcomes for students of all backgrounds and experiences who are
interested in developing careers in STEM. The long-term research agenda includes
documenting and characterizing the experiences of STEM students along the
academic pathway; identifying, developing, and assessing affordable, scalable,
interventions that can have significant impacts on their experiences; and
exploring the intersection of biological knowledge and learning with students'
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported through the EHR Core
Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR:BCSER) competition
that is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high quality
fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.