* 1937493
* EAGER: Slick Yet Stuck? Using Adhesion to Expose the Conditions of the Buried Cartilage Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* David Burris, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 11/30/2022
* USD 289,523.00

Remarkable adhesive mechanisms have evolved across the animal kingdom to help
jumping spiders stick a landing, octopi catch prey, geckos locomote on vertical
surfaces, and clingfish grip slippery, bio-fouled rocks. In each of these
distinct and well-studied cases, there were strong connections between adhesion
and survival to drive the evolutionary process. This research team has recently
discovered that cartilage, a material well-known for exceptionally low adhesive
friction, generates exceptionally strong adhesive stresses -- comparable to
those of the gecko, octopus, and clingfish. This finding is paradoxical, because
friction and adhesion are fundamentally linked. Additionally, unlike other
natural examples of strong adhesion, there is no obvious evolutionary pressure
for strong joint adhesion. The fact that cartilage simultaneously exhibits both
"super-lubricity" and "super-adhesion" violates long-standing assumptions about
cartilage lubrication while exposing critical clues about the unusual underlying
mechanics. This EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
seeks to resolve this "cartilage lubrication-adhesion" paradox. The results
will: (1) clarify how tensile forces are generated in the joint and what that
implies about joint lubrication; (2) provide original insights into bio-adhesion
while exposing new directions for bio-inspiration and materials discovery; (3)
lend insight into the causes and consequences of "joint cracking", a common,
clinically important, and poorly understood phenomenon. If the understanding of
cartilage functional mechanics are condensed into a single framework, it will
inform substantially improved strategies to protect, treat, or replace
compromised joints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use novel interfacial
tension measurements to quantify interfacial permeability, experimentally
separate the contributions from adhesion (seen in the gecko) and suction (seen
in the clingfish) mechanisms, and systematically assess the intersection between
cartilage friction and adhesion across length scales. Using micro force
microscopy, beam displacements from normal and friction forces will be
quantified on an experimental indenter. Cartilage samples (osteochondral cores)
will be obtained from bovine joints. Three aims have been developed. The first
will isolate the effect of exudation on adhesion, suction, and interfacial gaps
by varying the dwell time prior to pull-off to systematically vary interstitial
fluid loss. The second aim will isolate and quantify adhesive forces by
eliminating the contribution of suction, using quasistatic rates for the pull-
off tests. The third aim will quantify the interfacial properties (e.g. sliding
friction, effective contact modulus, equilibrium modulus, and fluid load
fraction) across length scales by using varying probe radii, which will have
varying effects on suction forces (dependent on radius) and adhesion forces
(independent of radius).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.