* 1937118
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Connecting Indiana's Learn-And-Work Ecosystem
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Kenneth Sauer, CREDENTIAL ENGINE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 404,751.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
enable American workers to successfully navigate their career by accessing and
sharing information pertaining to credentials and jobs using connected data
exchanges. Exchanging career goals, records, credentials, competencies,
assessments, job descriptions, and pathways as machine-actionable data will be
foundational to realizing this goal. Because the education and employment
sectors have many different documentation policies, processes, roles, and
governance, this project engages a wide range of experts. The leadership team
represents multiple disciplines including education, government, business,
computer science, philanthropy, policy, educational psychology, and ethics.
Indiana is an ideal context for this research because multiple related
initiatives are actively but independently being developed across the state.
Phase I activities will build an extensive partner network to document how each
initiative's data exchanges can connect in support of particular use cases.
Identified data gaps limit the value of these initiatives and will be added to a
roadmap for eliminating technical barriers. Similar to how connected data
exchanges have rapidly improved the travel industry, we believe state-level
governance of key data exchanges will accelerate innovative applications for
workers and help other state leaders advance similar
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I project
focuses on a state-level governance gap concerning the connections among key
data exchanges supporting students, education providers, workers, and employers.
In Indiana, as in other states, these data exchanges are at varying points of
development and adoption. Ensuring these data exchanges are sufficiently
connected to support key use cases is dependent upon voluntary efforts and
weakly instantiated into the business processes of specification organizations
themselves. As industries increasingly become "information-based", competing
business models have the potential to delay or even derail innovative
applications and/or inadvertently centralize control of key data exchanges. Our
research objective is to advance knowledge concerning how states could better
address these problems via team-building activities. Specifically, data experts
will be convened to define evaluation criteria for analyzing data exchange
information. Indiana education providers and employers will also be engaged
directly via two multi-disciplinary workshops to document important Indiana use
cases and supportive data exchanges, such as searching for a certificate program
based on a competency required in a job description. As a result, the project
team will create a prioritized roadmap, a toolkit for state leaders, and a Phase
II proposal for connecting Indiana?s learn and work
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.