* 1937661
* Robotics Training in Education and Advanced Manufacturing Sectors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Tim Tewalt, Chippewa Valley Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 524,270.00

The use of robotics is increasing at a dramatic rate in many industries,
including the advanced manufacturing sector. However, employers have difficulty
filling positions responsible for the operation and upkeep of robotics
technology. This need is especially evident in rural areas that lack access to
advanced equipment and high-quality training opportunities. To address these
needs, the project will leverage the Mobile Simulation Laboratory, developed
through previous NSF Advanced Technological Education grants, and laboratories
at three Chippewa Valley Technical College campuses. Through these laboratories,
the project will provide incumbent workers and students with access to state-of-
the-art robotics technology and equipment. Modularized curricula and co-
curricular activities will provide participants with the knowledge and skills
required to obtain or maintain positions in the high-demand, high-skilled
manufacturing/robotics industry. In addition to enhancing awareness of robotics
in manufacturing, the project has the potential to support increased
opportunities for high school students and undergraduates. It is anticipated
this increase in awareness and opportunities will lead to increased enrollments
in related postsecondary programs and subsequent entry into STEM careers.
Through industry-informed curriculum development, a collaborative approach,
innovative equipment and technology, and hands-on application of learning, the
project can positively impact a wide variety of manufacturing
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will: (1) prepare technicians for
automated manufacturing and engineering through applied education of robotics
processes and concepts, and (2) increase the capacity of rural secondary
teachers to provide instruction in robotics operations. The project will draw on
the expertise of regional industry leaders to provide incumbent workers and
students at the secondary and postsecondary level with opportunities to gain
understanding of the concepts at work in today's advanced manufacturing sector,
as well as hands-on, practical experiences in robotics and advanced
manufacturing. Project goals include: (1) preparation of technicians for
automated manufacturing and engineering through applied education of robotics
processes and concepts, and (2) increasing the capacity of rural secondary
teachers to provide instruction in robotics operations. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.