* 1937335
* Neural mechanisms of social status during adolescence
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Brian Trainor, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 02/29/2024
* USD 650,000.00

In animals including humans, winning a competitive encounter increases the
chances of winning in future contests while losing increases the chance losing
again in the future. These effects occur because the experience of winning and
losing have different effects on the brain. What these discoveries do not
explain, is how individuals can transition from losing to winning. This is
especially true during adolescence, when individuals have less competitive
experience and are more likely to lose. A specific type of behavioral strategy,
social vigilance, may be a key mechanism for facilitating this transition.
Social vigilance involves a combination of avoidance and observation of
potentially threatening individuals. In this project, the research team will
test whether increased testosterone secretion during adolescence facilitates a
transition from social vigilance to more assertive aggressive behaviors in
males. In adults, short term increases in testosterone after winning play a key
role in facilitating winner effects. The researchers predict that the
testosterone secretion during adolescence desensitizes neural circuits that
promote social vigilance. To address this question this project will determine
whether testosterone acts during puberty to alter the activity of neurons within
neural circuits that control social vigilance as well as defensive and offensive
vocalizations used in aggressive encounters. The University of California at
Davis is a Hispanic Serving Institution with a strong track record of supporting
an inclusive STEM culture to broaden impact and increase discovery. Support of
this research will provide training opportunities for historically disadvantaged
groups in STEM and increase community engagement via open house
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates behavioral, neuroendocrine,
and physiological levels of analysis of social behavior. Previous work shows
that oxytocin acting in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) increases
social vigilance behavior, and that social stress increases the activity of
oxytocin neurons. A key hypothesis is that the pubertal surge of testosterone
reprograms oxytocin neurons in the BNST to be less sensitive to social stress.
Social vigilance is oxytocin dependent, and more prevalent in juvenile males
than adults. This research will first test whether increased testosterone during
puberty reduces stress-induced vigilance in males and females. The effects of
stress on long term potentiation (LTP) of oxytocin neurons will be examined and
whether the effects of stress on LTP are modulated by pubertal testosterone
exposure. In the rat hippocampus and the zebra finch song control system
testosterone acts during puberty to reduce LTP. Finally, the effects of pubertal
testosterone on territory formation will be studied by observing aggressive
behaviors and the use of well characterized assertive and passive vocalizations
during territory formation. Results from these studies will provide important
insights into the neural circuits that facilitate social transitions that occurs
across vertebrate species. This project will also generate new tools, including
a brain atlas of the adolescent California mouse brain which will be hosted on
brainmaps.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.