* 1937013
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for ENgineered Solutions for rUral REsilience--ENSURE: Food, Energy, Environment, and Infrastructure
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Nathan Hendricks, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,907.00

Kansas State University (KSU) will partner with the University of Nebraska
(UN-L) and Washington State University (WSU) to plan for the Engineering
Research Center for ENgineered Solutions for rUral Resilience - ENSURE: Food,
Energy, Environment, and Infrastructure. ENSURE seeks to create sustainable
rural communities through engineering innovations and in partnership with rural
stakeholders. Rural areas are distributed across the country, and their spread
out nature can enable efficient distribution of food, clean energy, and healthy
environments. This is particularly important since 80% of the U.S. population
lives in cities that are vulnerable to climate change, such as rising sea
levels, storm surges, and heat waves. Agriculture is a key economic driver in
many states and, subsequently, at the heart of many rural communities. Some
examples of ENSURE's research include sustainable and profitable food
production, micro-grids which harness wind energy and use solid oxide fuel
cells, and recovery of nutrients from animal waste. ERC planning activities
include a Research Visioning Meeting hosted at WSU in the fall, three webinars
focusing on research themes, and a Facilitated Workshop hosted at KSU in the
spring; all meetings will bring together academia, industry, and rural
stakeholders, such as small business owners and
farmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ERC planning grant fundamentally questions
the societal assumption that the current migration towards cities is the ideal
resource distribution; investment in infrastructure and systems in rural areas
could create more resilient infrastructure overall (e.g., food systems, energy
resources, healthy environments). The vision of the ERC ENSURE is to generate
resilient, engineered systems in conjunction with rural stakeholders, creating
sufficient capacity in rural communities - across the U.S. and worldwide - to
adapt and respond to shocks and adverse conditions. Using this planning grant,
the team will develop a more complete vision of the rural landscape including
the differences in, and relationships between, the social, political, human, and
cultural capitals in conjunction with the natural, built, and financial
capitals. The proposed team includes engineering (i.e., bio/ag, civil, chemical,
electrical, environmental, and mechanical), public health, sociology,
agricultural economics, agronomy, extension agents, geography, and regional and
community stakeholders. Through a convergent approach, the team will create new
intellectual merit that would not exist through parallel, discipline-based
studies and disparate connections to stakeholders. This project will capture a
more complete understanding of the rural landscape as defined by a wide range of
stakeholders, allowing the team to understand the challenges and create better
engineered solutions. Information gained through the facilitated discussions
will be used to create a detailed database. This database will paint a
contemporary picture of rural landscapes, highlighting the differences in human
and natural capital, and providing the information needed to make informed
decisions. The database will be used to develop multi-criteria decision support
models, planning and analysis tools, and a story map. Outcomes of planning
activities include 1) asking convergent, fundamental research questions; 2)
forming the team using Google?s Project Aristotle framework; 3) creating a
consensus regarding ERC goals; and 4) generating an informational geospatial
database to serve as the foundation of story maps to communicate the
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.