* 1937911
* SBIR Phase I: Fabrication via Ultraviolet LED Irradiation to Realize Stabilized Perovskite Solar Cells with Efficiencies over 25%
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Zhongliang Ouyang, NEXTPRINTED SOLAR LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to greatly advance perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) in terms of
efficiency, stability, and readiness for commercialization. The success of the
proposed research and development (R&amp;D) activities will ensure a smooth
transition from the realization of concepts in Phase I to prototype development
of PVSCs on flexible substrates through slot-die coating in SBIR Phase II. Our
final products will be mass-produced through low-cost roll-to-roll (R2R)
printing and satisfy the customer needs for additional and cheaper electricity.
By integrating our high-performance fully flexible solar panels with freight
trailers/reefers, freight-truck owners can significantly reduce the diesel fuel
consumption (by 30%) and avoid idle run of diesel engine while the drivers are
resting. When our products are attached to the military tents, sufficient
electricity can be generated to meet electricity needs at forward operating
bases (FOBs), thereby significantly relieving the demand for diesel fuel at
remote locations and effectively limiting the casualties related to the fuel
transportation. In addition to its technical and commercial contribution, this
project will impact society by involving and educating the new generation on the
PVSCs with a sub-award to The University of Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will clear the obstacles that currently preventing PVSCs from
upscaling manufacture and commercialization. Metal oxides rather than organic
materials as charge transport layers have been demonstrated to enhance both
device performance and stability. However, high quality metal-oxide films
require high thermal annealing temperatures and long annealing time, which will
destroy both flexible substrates and perovskite absorber layer. Photonic
irradiation will be employed to achieve rapid and layer-specific annealing for
both metal-oxide hole transport layer (HTL) and metal-oxide electron transport
layer (ETL) without damaging other layers in PVSCs. Moreover, the rapid layer-
specific photonic annealing happens in seconds, which is fully compatible with
the R2R printing. With compositional engineering, the perovskite absorber layer
will also go through rapid photonic treatment. The resulted PVSCs will be able
to achieve PCE over 25% with long-term stability and pave the way for large-
scale manufacturing of PVSCs through high-speed printing. The proposed highly-
selective photonic treatment for each stacking layer in HTL/Perovskite/ETL
sandwich structure provides the solution to achieve stabilized PVSCs with
efficiency over 25%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.