* 1937011
* Understanding the Barriers to Institutional Success in STEM at Central Michigan University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Lisa Gandy, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 295,170.00

Central Michigan University (CMU) will implement an ADVANCE Catalyst project to
undertake faculty climate campus survey, focus group interviews with STEM
faculty at CMU, interviews with STEM faculty who left CMU and candidates who
turned down employment offers. The project will include document and
institutional data analyses to understand the barriers to success for STEM women
faculty at CMU. Furthermore, the project will analyze how these barriers are
similar or different depending on the academic department, race/ethnicity,
and/or world region of origin. The project team will visit other ADVANCE
institutions to learn about their success and struggles with similar issues and
will invite expert speakers to come to CMU. They will host a pilot implicit bias
training program for faculty in STEM departments and learn more about implicit
bias and how it plays out in the CMU workplace to inform the development of the
faculty equity strategic plan. This two-year project will prepare the university
for future data collection and data analyses of faculty equity which can be used
by institutional leadership to inform decision-making. The Catalyst work will
also prepare the institution to implement evidence-based strategies to enhance
the university climate for all faculty which will be outlined in a five-year
faculty equity strategic plan that will be produced as part of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional equity assessments
and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic plans at an academic,
non-profit institution of higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.