* 1937714
* Examining the Impact of Historically Black Colleges and Universities on Persistence of African American Women in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Yolanda Bogan, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2021
* USD 349,667.00

The project examines factors that influence the persistence of African American
women in STEM that graduated from an Historically Black College or University
(HBCU) by exploring National Center for Education Statistics datasets. The
research project will use an intersectionality approach to study gender and race
to better understand the experiences of underrepresented minorities in STEM
disciplines at HBCUs. The investigator used the National Postdoctoral
Association guidelines to identify gaps in discipline-specific conceptual
knowledge and STEM education research skills that would be needed to complete
the research project and advance a STEM education research career. The
investigator will implement a professional development plan to improve research
skills in intersectionality research and mixed-methods research methodologies.
Research skills will be enhanced through a mixed-methods research certificate
program, institutes and workshops, mentoring from an advisory board, and
conferences. The proposed project will contribute knowledge about how the HBCU
learning environment impacts STEM persistence among African American women and
position the PI to become an active STEM education
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will complete an exploratory
project that examines patterns among African American women who completed a STEM
degree at an HBCU using the two Postsecondary Education Transcript Studies. Use
of the Baccalaureate and Beyond Longitudinal Study and the Beginning
Postsecondary Students Longitudinal Study will allow data mining to conduct the
analyses to answer he overarching research question: To what extent does HBCU
attendance impact STEM persistence for African American women? The research will
examine academic factors and financial variables that influence persistence. The
study also will consider relevant policies to contextualize the study findings.
The research will contribute to advancing knowledge of how the HBCU experience
impacts STEM persistence and pathways to graduate education and the workforce
for African American women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported
through the EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education research
competition that is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high
quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.