* 1937657
* Bridging Science Education and Psychology Perspectives to Support Science Literacy Theory &amp; Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Jenny Dauer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2023
* USD 349,836.00

It is essential for citizens to develop the science literacy that empowers them
to make informed decisions about challenging real-world issues. Science literacy
is a complex process that involves learning to make sense of information from
multiple sources, to consider social, cultural and economic values, and to
evaluate options for action. To effectively enhance the scientific literacy of
their students, science instructors also need to integrate results of psychology
research that may help students learn to regulate their emotions and remove
potential barriers to engagement when making decisions about controversial
issues. This project will systematically study the thinking processes and the
emotional processes that may influence undergraduate students' reasoning about
complex socioscientific issues. In the process, the project will also develop
the principal investigator's competencies in educational psychology to
complement her expertise in ecology, science education, and qualitative research
methods. By participating in targeted professional development experiences as
she leads this project, the PI will build her capacity to conduct fundamental
research about fostering scientific literacy in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate research and
professional development objectives to support the principal investigator in
developing her knowledge of the theories and methods of educational psychology
needed to achieve her long-term research goals. The project team, including a
postdoctoral scholar, will investigate the relationships among several cognitive
and emotional constructs thought to be important for undergraduate students'
decision-making regarding socioscientific issues. The research questions are:
(1) To what extent is achievement of decision-making skills predicted by
students' emotions and motivation with respect to a particular socioscientific
issue, as well as their personal epistemologies, metacognitive skills and open-
minded thinking? and (2) To what extent do metacognitive and reasoning guides
developed, for a large-enrollment scientific literacy course enhance students'
sophistication with respect to personal epistemologies, open-minded thinking,
and decision-making skills? To address research question 1, the team will
compare student decision-making regarding issues in which many students are
personal stakeholders to their decision-making regarding issues in which most
students have distant relevance. To address research question 2, the researchers
will compare student outcomes with and without the metacognitive and reasoning
guides integrated into the science literacy course. Cognitive and emotional
constructs will be measured using established instruments. Throughout the
process of conducting the research, the project team will be mentored by Dr.
Gale Sinatra, a researcher at the University of Southern California with
expertise in educational psychology and controversial socioscientific issues.
The project team will have frequent virtual and in-person meetings with the
mentor to discuss targeted readings as well as progress and plans for the
research project. The PI will also attend professional conferences and complete
the Advanced Cognitive Psychology in Education course at the University of
Nebraska, Lincoln (UNL) to deepen her theoretical understanding of educational
psychology. Ultimately, the project team's refined approach to teaching the
scientific literary course, including the metacognitive and reasoning guides and
other resources they will develop, are expected to be useful for a broad range
of other STEM courses. The PI will share what she has learned from her research
and professional development experiences via venues such as the UNL's state-wide
Science Literacy Initiative and the Multistate Collaborative for Research on
Food, Energy and Water Education. The mentor and a three-member advisory board
of experts in student reasoning and critical thinking regarding socioscientific
issues will assess the success of the project and support the PI in creating a
five-year future research plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR
BCSER) program, which is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out
high quality fundamental STEM education research in the core areas of STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and
STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.