* 1937370
* Collaborative Proposal: AGNES: Algebraic Geometry NorthEastern Series
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Lev Borisov, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 10/31/2023
* USD 29,680.00

The Algebraic Geometry Northeastern Series (AGNES) is a series of biannual
conferences in the field of algebraic geometry. The conference is hosted on a
rotating basis by an association of universities in the Northeast region. This
award supports six AGNES conferences which will be held at Stony Brook
University on March 27-29, 2020, at the University of Pennsylvania in Fall 2020,
at Brown University in Spring 2021, at Boston College in Fall 2021, at Rutgers
University in Spring 2022, and at the University of Massachusetts Amherst in
Fall 2022. Each AGNES conference has two goals. First, each conference promotes
the dissemination of cutting-edge research in mathematics. The centerpiece of
each conference is a series of research lectures by top mathematicians; there
are also educational talks for graduate students and events which promote new
collaborations or develop peer relationships. Second, each conference includes
several activities designed to support under-represented groups and junior
participants, such as panel discussions or networking events. This award will
allow AGNES to continue to excel at its research goal while broadening the scope
and diversity of outreach activities. Further information about conference
events can be found at the website:
http://www.agneshome.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry is a field in
the mathematical sciences concerned with solution sets of polynomial equations.
It has deep connections to many other areas of pure mathematics, such as
topology, arithmetic, number theory, differential geometry, dynamical systems,
and homological algebra. At the same time algebraic geometry has found important
applications in many subdisciplines of applied mathematics, including
cryptography, complexity theory, mathematical biology, and computer vision. The
scientific scope of AGNES is greatly enriched by lectures from neighboring
mathematical subjects, such as arithmetic geometry, dynamics, complex geometry,
and computational geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.