* 1937888
* Convergence Accelerator Phase 1 (RAISE): Fostering a Diverse Artificial Intelligence (AI) Workforce
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Augustin Chaintreau, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 544,504.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
uncover key factors in engaging underrepresented high school students in
Artificial Intelligence (AI) topics that lead to long-term pursuit of careers
with an ultimate goal of increasing diversity in AI and better meeting the
growing workforce demands. This project will employ an "AI First" model that
emphasizes the concept of code that produces itself from data - a departure from
traditional CS education that emphasizes coding alone. Such a paradigm shift
requires a multi-disciplinary approach. This proposal brings together experts in
the field of Social Work, Computer Science, and STEM education outreach and
leverages existing relationships between multiple universities and a nonprofit
education organization. Through research studies that will uncover best
practices in engaging students with AI and through complementary outreach
efforts that will serve as test beds for research findings, this proposal will
set the foundation for how to build a pipeline at the K-12 level to lead to a
diverse and competitive AI workforce. The end goal is that this diverse
workforce will create new products using AI with less potential for
bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I project aims to
address the lack of qualified and diverse candidate pool for the AI workforce
sector. It also addresses the growing concern that lack of representation among
the AI workforce is resulting in creation of technology that is more likely to
exacerbate societal biases, including sexism and racism. The convergent research
approach employed here involves: 1) refining primary research questions
regarding K-12 engagement with AI curriculum and develop accompanying assessment
tools to evaluate AI outreach programs; 2) identifying best practices in social
work research to create a robust recruitment model that intentionally targets
underrepresented groups in AI to education outreach opportunities; and 3)
utilizing a social work framework to develop a model for a pilot internship
program that connects students to employers and brings them further along in the
pipeline to a career in AI. This research will result in the development of a
Toolkit that will be used widely by K-12 practitioners to engage more students
and thereby create and even stronger pipeline of talent to enter the AI
workforce in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.