* 1937031
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Convergence of Scalable and Sustainable Digital Fabrication of Smart Textiles
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Randall Kamien, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
use of wearable technology is poised to significantly increase in the next
decade. Many flexible electronic devices have begun to be incorporated into
clothing as health monitors, implants, batteries, or accessories. Therefore,
there are ever more pressing needs to bring digital fabrication to create
sustainable products, specifically, smart textiles that will conserve water,
nutrients, and energy in every facet of our lives. Textile-based devices, both
passive and active, will act as platforms to embed intelligence. It offers a
rare opportunity as well as challenges when blending design, sensing,
communication, and advanced manufacturing technologies into unobtrusive
textiles. For textile to perform as devices, it requires a convergence approach
that builds and supports collaboration and synergy that intersects science,
technology, engineering, mathematics and art (STEAM) for a scalable and
sustainable manufacturing fibers and yarns towards the final products, smart
fabrics. If successful, the planned ERC will enable transformation of
traditional textile manufacturing into sustainable digital fabrication, which
will impact wearable electronics, smart clothing, robotics, safety, building
interiors and envelopes, and medical devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned
ERC will have a broad set of university researchers and designers tied to
government and industrial stakeholders to develop a general platform that is not
possible by any existing collaboration or a single institution. It necessitates
system-level design considerations and a convergent approach across disciplines.
The planning grant will allow us to (1) identify research and
education/workforce development challenges given the unconventional
collaborations between different teams; (2) carry out pilot projects to
test/facilitate cross-center initiatives, and plan a workshop to bring together
potential stakeholders for the planned ERC; (3) establish initial vision via
workshop and planning meetings for a general stakeholder-driven research
framework and workflow that can be applied to many different problems. The pilot
projects will 1) Develop predictive modeling and sustainable manufacturing of
textile, including self-folding textiles; 2) Embed intelligence and
sustainability in manufacturing of textile-based health monitors; 3) Create
plant-like "second skins" for energy-harvesting, and self-powering, and 4) Blend
fashion and technology. In the planning grant, we will also create a design data
observatory for large repositories of design information and sensory data. The
planning grant will foster convergence that blends scientists, engineers, and
designers to strengthen the existing collaborations and build consensus around
the planned ERC to address more complex problems. It will accelerate research
innovation, enrich our teaching and learning experience, excite the public, and
prepare a diverse STEAM workforce to advance U.S. leadership in digital
manufacturing. In the planning grant, we will focus on 1) ERC specific
curricular innovation across schools and disciplines to enrich education
experience in STEAM. 2) Faculty development to enhance effectiveness of teaching
and learning, creating replicable, interdisciplinary learning modules in both
the classroom and less formal environments. 3) Engaging potential industrial
partners in the early stage of education and training of students. 4) Building
up technology readiness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.