* 1937207
* CHS: EAGER: Understanding the Socio-Technical Ecologies that Form the Human-Technology Frontier of Work: Successes, Opportunities and Training for Future Workers
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Rebecca Grinter, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2023
* USD 246,187.00

This research will identify how the literature publication industry successfully
works in a complex human-technology frontier. Innovations in online technologies
have changed employment, with new stakeholders and systems offering
opportunities for self-employment. Authors can now independently sell their
products but are responsible for all the work that traditional publishing
companies used to provide. To work at this frontier, authors use a considerable
number of different computer-based tools, to sell but also grow and maintain
their audience of consumers. They also use these same tools to find other people
to help them in their work, such as getting marketing assistance. This human-
technology frontier is an ecology of people and platforms that the writer must
be able use each part of, but also collectively manage the totality of the
ecology to be successful. This pattern of employment mirrors broader trends in
the American workforce, where more people are making money through self-
employment in the gig economy. Despite their successful transitions from working
for others to self-employment, academic research has largely overlooked how that
success happened. Ignoring this human-technology frontier, and the success of
people, poses a risk to our understanding of contemporary patterns of
technologically mediated work. Further, it limits our ability to build systems
to support this type of work, and to help others train for work at this
frontier. Focusing on successful cases of self-employment in the gig economy is
crucial for building best practice understanding for the future American
economy, and the radically transformed literature publication industry is an
effective infrastructure for broadening participation of women and minorities in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be structured in two themes,
addressing a total of five questions. The first theme considers what it means to
use specific systems that make up this human-technology frontier. The two sub-
questions are (1) What characteristics do successful publication sites have? (2)
What do self-employed writers need to know to understand how to leverage the
algorithms that invisibly influence their business? The second theme focuses on
the work of using the socio-technical ecology of people and tools that is their
human-technology frontier. The three sub-questions are (3) What are the new
forms of work? (4) Who are the new workers helping them and what do they do? (5)
What form do the relationships that tie this socio-technical ecology together
take? These questions will be answered through a combination of activities. This
multi-dimensional research will review publicly available materials, use
qualitative methods including interviews and observation at public events, plus
rigorous surveys, and build systems to support work and workers. These
activities will take steps to address these questions, that will collectively
contribute an understanding of the risks and challenges, as well as the
opportunities and rewards, of being self-employed via leveraging an ecology of
people and platforms. Outcomes include scholarly products but go beyond that to
include systems and training materials to teach Americans how to successfully
participate in work at this human-technology frontier. By focusing on overlooked
forms of work, the resulting knowledge will reflect a broader view of computing
than usual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.