* 1937671
* FSML:   Acquisition of a Raman Microscope at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Marc Frischer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 10/31/2021
* USD 207,500.00

This project is to purchase and install a confocal Raman microscope (CRM) at the
University of Georgia's Skidaway Institute of Oceanography (SkIO). Many of the
research problems in marine science involve the study of small particles and
organisms. Most current methods for studying small samples require grouping
large numbers of individual particles together to obtain enough material for
analysis. Pooling samples can obscure critical details of the diversity of
particle composition and structure within them. The CRM can obtain chemical
compositional data for individual particles smaller than a micron in size, and
it can automatically map sample composition over much larger scales in fine
detail. The capacity to image both organic and inorganic chemical structure has
direct application to the fields of marine microbiology, chemistry, ecology and
geology. The presence of a CRM at a southeastern coastal laboratory will allow
regional scientists to address new research questions in ocean science. The new
analytical capabilities will directly improve the funded activities of 75% of
SkIO?s faculty in addition to external, collaborating scientists from the
southeastern US and beyond. Additionally, the highly visual output of the CRM
will allow educators, citizen-scientists, and the public to better understand
the research conducted at SkIO and by visiting scientists.

This proposal seeks funds for the acquisition of a Horiba Jobin Yvon XploRA PLUS
Confocal Raman microscope, equipped with 532 nm and 785 nm lasers, motorized and
software-controlled XYZ sample stage, an integrated safety shield, and
associated autofocus, calibration, particle mapping, chemical identification and
statistical analysis software and uninterruptible power supply. The requested
instrument will add significant, high-resolution imaging and spectroscopic
capability to an existing particle counting and image analysis facility in the
coastal Southeastern US, as well as be synergistic with existing trace element,
stable isotope, and conventional light microscopy facilities located at the
University of Georgia Skidaway Institute of Oceanography (SkIO). The proposed
instrument will allow sub-micron chemical characterization, particle mapping,
and quantification of complex samples from a wide array of projects and fill an
analytical and scientific gap in the region. The requested instrument will allow
on-location, low-cost analysis of samples from existing and future projects in
several critical areas of marine research, both local and regional. It also will
enhance educational opportunities for several established, collaborative, and
upcoming programs at SkIO, many of which target under-represented groups.
Finally, it will provide highly visual data which is invaluable for educational
and outreach efforts. For more information about SkIO, please visit their
website at https://www.skio.uga.edu/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.