* 1937000
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Computer And Network RESIliency and Security for Transportation (CAN-RESIST)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Sitharama Iyengar, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
revolution in multimodal transportation systems is underway thanks to emerging
connectivity, data analytics, and automation technologies. This promises to
transformative roadway transportation (cars, public transit, and freight), rail,
ports, and airports. While this evolution of transportation promises great
benefits, it also brings new challenges, particularly risks from automation and
cyber-enabled technologies. This project facilitates the planning of a research
center, dedicated convergent research, to develop new concepts for connected
transportation system safety and security through a series of workshops,
bringing together broad stakeholder communities from transportation systems and
from cyber-physical systems security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These workshops
address several interrelated strategic objectives for future transportation
systems: (1) assessing the risks in the ever-changing technological and
E-service systems, (2) identifying the business, legal and social contexts of
security threats, (3) engineering strategic security solutions, and (4)
educating a future workforce and building workforce capacity. These workshops
emphasize the development of innovative concepts and technologies for software
security, network security, and device and system security, for multimodal
transportation systems. The workshops cut across disciplinary boundaries in the
fields of transportation, communications, computer science, and the
computational sciences. These advances would greatly benefit smart cities, urban
planners, cyber-manufacturing, and e-commerce. Plans for the center integrate
research and education, create a diverse and inclusive work environment, foster
an ecosystem of innovation in transportation security, and engage the public on
the opportunities and challenges for a safer, more secure, next-generation of
transportation systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.