* 1937992
* Spiralian White Paper Workshop; November 14-17, 2019; St. Augustine, Florida
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Deirdre Lyons, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 19,860.00

Non-Technical Paragraph &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this 4-day 'Spiralian
White Paper Workshop' is to assemble a diverse and dedicated group of scientists
studying animals that belong to the largest metazoan superclade, the Spiralia.
This group includes familiar animals like earthworms, leeches, scallops,
oysters, and octopus, as well as thousands of other less well known, but
fascinating and beautiful species such as deep sea vent worms, giant clams,
nudibranchs, and flatworms. Many of the animals in this group have important
impacts on human health and industry; for example bivalve molluscs are important
species in the global food supply chain; parasitic flatworms are common human
disease vectors, and tube worms are persistent biofouling materials on ships and
docks. On a more basic-research level these animals are excellent models for
studying important aspects of life such as symbiosis, regeneration, and
neurobiology. While many hundreds of labs work on these species, communication
and coordination is hampered by the lack of infrastructure to support research
and teaching efforts. This workshop aims to eliminate that bottle neck by
gathering many of the leaders in the field to devise ways to increase
communication, collaboration, and infrastructure within our community, and to
increase the profile of our work outside the community. Attention will be paid
to diversity and career stage when inviting meeting participants. The results of
the meeting will be published as an a freely available open-access
paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Paragraph&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
metazoan super-clade Spiralia contains more than 14 animal body-plans. Members
include speciose groups like molluscs, annelids, platyhelminths, nemerteans,
brachiopods and bryozoans, as well as many smaller, enigmatic phyla. Spiralians
have been used as model organisms to study development, genome-editing,
transgenesis, genomics, symbiosis, phylogenomics, phylogeography, morphology,
biomineralization, neurogenesis, behavior, regeneration, Eco-Devo, and
evolution. Yet, there has never been a meeting dedicated to the research in this
group. The Spiralian White Paper Workshop is designed to bring the leaders in
the field together to discuss the future direction of their research and to plan
future initiatives for research, teaching, and outreach. This workshop will
result in a more cohesive and organized core community of researchers working
with Spiralians, able to collaborate and interact effectively. Meeting
participants will be invited with particular attention to diversity and to
career stage. A white paper will be written to outline the strengths and
advantages of these organisms as models for research and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.