* 1937053
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Learning Environments with Advanced Robotics for Next-Generation Emergency Responders (LEARNER)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Alexander Leonessa, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 999,327.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
generate technology-based solutions that can support and augment the performance
and safety of emergency response (ER) personnel. Academic researchers, core-
technology developers, stakeholders and an advisory board constituted of leaders
from industry and government will come together to assess opportunities and
challenges related to the use of human augmentation technologies that can
transform the process of foundational, use-inspired solution-finding for ER
work, and in a way that is transferable to other work contexts as well. This
will involve the development of technology prototypes including semi-autonomous
ground robots, wearable robots (powered exoskeletons) and augmented reality
interfaces tailored for ER work; and building and evaluating a mixed-reality
learning environment with physical, augmented, and virtual reality components,
for users to learn to work effectively with multiple augmentation technologies.
Our effort will also contribute to better conceptualization of convergence
research and serve as a model for other research communities that can benefit
from working across traditional disciplinary boundaries in engineering and
computer science. We will share our methods, learnings and findings with the ER
community and the wider world through an open-source knowledge sharing platform
and appropriate dissemination channels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Convergence
Accelerator Phase I project will significantly advance ER operations and
training through the development and prototyping of an adaptive, personalized
mixed-reality learning platform that enables integrating advanced technologies
for human augmentation in ER work, and the creation of principled human-robot
team strategies. Our work will substantially advance the knowledge and state-of-
the-art in exoskeleton control, human-robot interaction, and human-computer
interaction through use-inspired technology design and development of adaptive
human-in-the-loop control to facilitate learning. Furthermore, an opportunity to
field these technologies and develop effective learning platforms has
significant transformative potential as semi-autonomous ground robots,
exoskeletons and AR will enable users to formulate fundamentally new work
strategies at the individual and team levels that are only afforded by their
newly extended physical and perceptual capabilities. Finally, our work will
advance learning by creating a replicable platform that increases the speed for
the integration of innovative and emerging technologies for training future
worker. Our transdisciplinary approach combines and enhances the existing
knowledge from the disciplines of learning science, computer science, virtual
and augmented realities, human factors, cognitive psychology, and systems
engineering to create a framework that integrates training course design,
innovative and emerging technology implementation, and new techniques of
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.