* 1937012
* Planning Grant: Engineering research center for managing complex socio-environmental problems using a generic, tiered system-of-systems (GTSoS) modeling and data-science framework
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Alejandro Salado, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,691.00

Complex socio-environmental problems, including those associated with coastal
and inland flooding, the food/energy/water nexus, and interdependent
infrastructure systems, are among the greatest challenges faced by humanity.
Resilience and sustainability are often used to frame and study these families
of ?wicked? problems. To resolve any of these challenges, solutions must
consider many complex and interrelated socio-environmental systems.
Collectively, these societal challenges, which can only be tackled by effective
interdisciplinary teams, require a convergence research approach. This planning
grant is guided by a vision for an Engineering Research Center (ERC) that aims
to manage several families of complex socio-environmental problems using a
generic, tiered system-of-systems (GTSoS) modeling and data-science framework.
The comprehensive interdisciplinary approach can link domains that do not always
collaborate easily (engineering, natural sciences, and social sciences) in new
and highly productive ways. In addition, productive and durable
transdisciplinary engagement and collaborations among researchers and a broad
cross section of stakeholders will support decision-making that improves
collective governance for some of the world's most difficult
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning project participants will include
biophysical scientists and engineers, social scientists as well as computer and
data scientists. Collectively, this group represents the multiple knowledge
domains, including water resources, ecology, agriculture, systems engineering,
economics, anthropology, health, and education, necessary to address complex
socio-environmental problems. The novel GTSoS framework, which fuses data
science, domain science, and systems modeling, is designed to be both scalable
and extensible, capturing the dynamics of individual systems as well as the
complex dynamics of interconnected socio-environmental systems.To prepare the
foundation of the ERC, the planning team will engage with many experts and
stakeholders in a series of virtual meetings and in-person workshops which will
generate knowledge and insights that will enable the successful design of the
ERC. The workshops will also facilitate the emergence of strong and diverse
teams with appropriate institutional expertise that support the implementation
and management of the ERC. The ERC will initially focus on two core areas, one
of which addresses the methodological approach, while the other tackles
food/energy/water systems. The methodological core generalizes the approach to
solving complex socio-environmental problems and allows additional families of
problems to be added as the ERC matures. Effective interdisciplinary teams will
be achieved by leveraging organizational design with the appropriate deployment
of collaborative technology to overcome disciplinary and geographical boundaries
and to ensure a culture of deep collaboration and inclusion. Principles and
methods from decision analysis, multi-scale decision theory, and social choice
theory will support decision-making, effectively enhancing leadership and
management of the ERC. A primary workshop will have a science and modeling
component to resolve key challenges in the GTSoS modeling and data-science
framework and a process component to reveal how the organizational structure of
the ERC can be optimized to accelerate advancement and discovery. A final
synthesis workshop will develop an effective ERC structure, as well as detailed
outlines of the ERC proposal and a manuscript on lessons
learned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.