* 1937953
* Workshop: Extending Open Access By Bridging the Data Steward Gap: GO FAIR Train-the-Trainer (T3)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Christine Kirkpatrick, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 49,999.00

There are national calls for improved production of research data that are FAIR
(Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) in order to increase
scientific discovery and enhance the societal and economic benefit of federal
research and development (R&amp;D) funding. To stimulate growth of such a FAIR
data ecosystem in the U.S., the concrete action taken by this project is to
increase expert knowledge of FAIR-oriented tools and techniques, thereby
creating new capacity for increasing the value of new and existing data sets.
Developing a community of practice for making data FAIR and increasing the
network of available expert trainers available will serve to accelerate
awareness and build new knowledge in application of FAIR techniques in the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By means of a two-and-a-half-day intensive training
session, the project will bring together practitioners and consultants from
academia, non-profits, and industry. The intended audience for the course is
seasoned data stewards and researchers, research computing staff with depth in
data-driven research, and library and informaticists. The trained teachers will
be prepared to teach researchers, data experts, and research library staff at
universities and research institutions who are dealing with the ever-growing
complexity of data integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.