* 1937565
* EAGER: Improved Situation Awareness of Unknown Environments through a Robotic Augmented Reality Virtual Window
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* J. Edward Swan II, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,956.00

When responding to a search warrant or 911 call, teams of police officers often
have to enter and search a room. The problem the police officers face is that
the contents of the room are unknown and might be dangerous. Therefore, the
activity is stressful, and sometimes results in adverse outcomes. This project
addresses this problem by developing a robot that police officers can send into
a room before they enter. The robot uses cameras and other sensors to see the
room, even in the dark. The police officers wear augmented reality headsets that
allow them to see the room through the robot's cameras. In addition, the
combination of augmented reality and the robot allows the police to see the room
as though they had x-ray vision, giving them a virtual window through an
otherwise solid wall. Seeing the room through this virtual window would make
searching the room more efficient, reduce uncertainty and stress, and result in
avoided injuries and saved lives. More broadly, the project will further the
science of using robots and augmented reality with skilled teams performing
dangerous work. The lessons learned could advance efforts to incorporate robots
into related activities, including additional policing tasks, firefighting,
inspecting buildings and warehouses, responding to alarm activation, searching
and rescuing, and military operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this project are (1) to explore the use of an augmented reality virtual window
to provide x-ray vision, where otherwise invisible objects can be seen, and (2)
to use a robot to locate and identify objects in unknown, potentially dangerous,
and stressful environments. These objectives are pursued in the context of a
common task -- the room-clearing scenario -- undertaken by teams of police
officers. This project will develop a non-weaponized robot, which team members
will send into a simulated apartment with several rooms. The robot will view
each room from robot-mounted cameras and sensors, and will present the view in
an augmented reality (AR) virtual window. The cameras and sensors will see the
room in multiple spectra, including visible, thermal, and laser, which will
allow viewing in varying levels of illumination, including darkness. The project
will leverage the investigators' longstanding relationship with regional police
SWAT teams (Special Weapons And Tactics), who have agreed to provide personnel
to be subject matter experts, design partners, and evaluation subjects. The
project will be conducted in an existing tactical robotic testbed facility, and
spatial understanding and situation awareness will be measured, using both
standard and custom methods and surveys. The work has the potential to advance
the fields of augmented reality, robotics, and human-robot interaction, as well
as to advance the day when robots can be successfully integrated into SWAT
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.