* 1937689
* NSF/FDA SIR: Three-Dimensional In Vitro Modeling of Interactions Between Orthopedic Wear Particles, Biofilm, and Macrophages
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2021
* Jan Stegemann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 11/30/2021
* USD 99,006.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award under the NSF/FDA Scholar-in-
Residence program is for a collaborative project to study how wear particles
from medical devices interact with bacteria in the body, and how this may lead
to loosening of medical implants. The use of total joint implants has been
expanding to younger and more active patient populations. Though effective in
restoring joint motion and enabling patient independence, the surface of joint
implants can wear over time, producing microscopic wear debris. This project
studies how these particles interact with bacteria in the body, and furthermore
how both wear particles and bacteria affect the function of inflammatory cells.
It is a follow-on to previous projects under the same program to design and test
advanced models of tissue for studying interactions between immune cells and
microscopic wear debris generated by medical implants. The project team has
extensive experience fabricating 3D environments mimicking physiological
conditions necessary that can be used to understand the cellular mechanisms of
inflammation. The work presents an opportunity for collaborative research
between academic and government research labs benefitting public health and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this one
year Scholar-in-Residence program is to understand how wear particles, biofilm,
and immune cells act in concert to contribute to aseptic loosening of total
joint arthroplasty devices. Importantly, it applies advanced, biomaterial-based
3D tissue models that mimic the physiological environment. Specifically, the
intellectual merit of this project focuses on using such models to simulate the
in vivo scenario of direct contact between biofilm attached-wear particles and
macrophages contributing to altered inflammatory response and osteolysis. The
project benefits from the expertise of the Stegemann lab (U. Michigan) in
fabricating physiologically-relevant in vitro tissue constructs, in
collaboration with the technology and experience at the OSEL labs at FDA in
physicochemical testing and evaluation of the interaction between wear
particles, biofilm, and macrophages. The first objective of the project is to
evaluate the propensity of wear particles from implant materials for bacterial
adhesion and biofilm formation based on their physicochemical characteristics.
Wear debris from representative materials (Polyethylene, PEEK, PMMA, Co-Cr, CP-
Ti) are comprehensively characterized and their physicochemical properties are
correlated with the ability to support biofilms produced by Staphylococcus
aureus, a bacterium commonly associated with orthopedic infections. The second
objective is to quantitate the inflammatory and osteolytic response of wear
particles in the context of their interactions with biofilm, using 3D in vitro
tissue models with or without bone allograft fragments. Wear particles (+/-
biofilm) and macrophages are incorporated into 3D engineered tissue models and
the biological responses of the materials are assessed. This project has broader
impact on the regulatory priorities of the FDA by developing preclinical models
of materials used in FDA-regulated products, which can be used to detect,
identify, and quantify biological interactions. There is a need for a better
understanding of the interplay between wear particles and biofilm, and their
combined effects on the potential development of serious chronic inflammation
caused by medical devices. Advanced biomaterials-based tools enable FDA to
better evaluate the suitability of newly-emerging materials used in medical
devices, decreasing the regulatory burden, and accelerating their path to the
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.