* 1937419
* RTML: Small: Design of System Software to Facilitate Real-Time Neuromorphic Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Nagarajan Kandasamy, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,855.00

Machine learning methods such as neural networks have been successfully used in
real-time computer vision and signal processing areas. Neuromorphic systems,
which mimic biological neurons and synapses, can be used to implement these
neural networks in energy-constrained computing platforms. However, due to the
absence of a user-friendly programming interface, the use of neuromorphic
systems is currently limited to research. This project will develop such an
interface, allowing for these systems to be more easily programmed and used by
the broader science and engineering community within the U.S. The project will
integrate undergraduate education within multidisciplinary graduate research,
with students at all levels and across different disciplines participating in
the proposed research activities. High school girls will participate in
workshops during the summer, learning how to program robots equipped with
neuromorphic hardware. The open-sourced programming tools will enable faster
development and commercialization of neuromorphic systems in the U.S. and
facilitate collaboration with other such communities
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Executing a program on a computer involves
several steps: compilation, resource allocation, and run-time mapping. Although
very well defined for mainstream computers, no prior work has investigated these
steps in a systematic manner for neuromorphic systems. This project will develop
compiler tool chains to translate a user's machine learning program to low-level
languages that can be interpreted by neuromorphic systems. A key initiative is
to develop a common representation across different platforms. Resource
optimization strategies will be developed to improve program performance; as
well as an Operating System like framework that will allow programmers to easily
deploy their machine learning programs on neuromorphic systems. The technical
contributions will be demonstrated using two case studies: real-time sleep apnea
detection and real-time image segmentation from video.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.