* 1937738
* An Investigator Development Plan for Building Capacity to Explore Diverse Microcultures in Graduate Engineering Research Laboratories
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Cheryl Gomillion, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 12/31/2023
* USD 342,101.00

The proposal focuses on fundamental STEM education research that examines
broadening participation and STEM workforce training in engineering graduate
programs. The research will contribute to expanding the current understanding of
the characteristics and functioning of STEM research labs (microcultures) that
may impact the success of underrepresented graduate students. The Principal
Investigator has designed a professional development plan that will support
individual capacity building in the field of engineering education research. To
achieve the goal of understanding the best practices in supporting students from
underrepresented groups, the investigator's professional plan focuses on
increasing her experience with ethnographic research methodology and training in
qualitative research. The professional development plan includes a mentoring
team of advisors and consultants and activities that will provide preparation in
qualitative research methods. The outcome of the professional development plan
will be to increase the investigator's capacity to complete the proposed
research project and build expertise to contribute to the engineering education
research knowledge base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will apply
ethnographic or autoethnographic methods to collect evidence of graduate student
experiences in high impact research labs and to examine the factors that
contribute to the formation of a cohesive research team and supportive
environment. The study will investigate the features, behavior and best
practices connected with the experiences of graduate students who are members of
diverse STEM research labs. A conceptual framework focused on investigating
communities of practice and socialization, using ethnographic methods, will be
applied to conduct research on graduate student experiences in research labs.
The expected impact includes informing best practices that can provide diverse
and inclusive settings for underrepresented students. The long-term trajectory
of the research is to expand the understanding of micro-cultures in graduate
education to support the goal of broadening participation in the STEM workforce.
An expected outcome of this project includes building capacity of the individual
PI to pursue fundamental STEM education research projects that can advance
current knowledge about broadening participating and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported through the EHR Core
Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition
that is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high quality
fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.