* 1937905
* The Role of Community Colleges in Cybersecurity Education: Future Directions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,01/31/2023
* John Sands, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 01/31/2023
* USD 404,976.00

In 2002, the National Science Foundation and the American Association of
Community Colleges convened a workshop and produced a pioneering report on "The
Role of Community Colleges in Cybersecurity Education." At that time, community
colleges had virtually no courses or curricula focusing on cybersecurity. The
workshop and resulting report provided a blueprint for community colleges to
build cybersecurity programs during the following years. Cybersecurity education
has evolved dramatically since 2002, and the cybersecurity threats and needs of
the nation have also evolved. Today, many fields outside information technology
-- such as energy, biotechnology, healthcare, and the financial sector -- depend
on cybersecurity and need workers with relevant knowledge and skills. In this
project, Whatcom Community College and Moraine Valley Community College, the
homes of two Advanced Technological Education (ATE) centers for cybersecurity
education, will convene a workshop and produce a report that will examine the
state of cybersecurity education at community colleges in 2020 and will identify
challenges, opportunities, and an action plan for the coming
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2020 workshop, which will involve approximately
150 experts from academia, industry, and government, will assess the impact that
community colleges have had on cybersecurity education since the 2002 workshop
and the role that graduates of community college cybersecurity programs have
come to play in the nation's cybersecurity workforce. The workshop will also
identify cutting-edge and emerging topics that community college curricula
should address, with special attention to the cross-disciplinary nature of
cybersecurity today. The resulting report will present needs, challenges,
opportunities, and recommendations for academia, industry, and government. In so
doing, it will update the 2002 vision and shape the role of community colleges
in cybersecurity education for the coming years. Ultimately, this project will
improve and modernize cybersecurity education at community colleges nationwide,
helping to address the persistent need for well-trained graduates to serve the
many economic sectors that depend on workers with some level of cybersecurity
knowledge and skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program, which focuses on the education
of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.