* 1937604
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Phylogenomics, spatial phylogenetics and conservation prioritization in trapdoor spiders (and kin) of the California Floristic Province
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Jason Bond, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2024
* USD 802,171.00

Using a combination of original fieldwork, newly developed analytical methods
for genetically identifying species and their evolutionary and geographic
relationships, this research project will focus on trapdoor spiders and their
relatives as an exemplary group for biodiversity knowledge and conservation in
the California Floristic Province (CA-FP). Long-term surveys will be conducted
at multiple geographic locations that include most major CA-FP habitat types. At
these sites, the presence of spider species and the numbers of individuals in
each will be measured to provide a statistical baseline for future monitoring
efforts. New large DNA datasets, based on analysis of thousands of genes, will
be generated by analysis of the genomes of these species. New methods will be
applied to this data to identify species boundaries, and formal taxonomic
descriptions will be made for all new species. The new information about these
new species and their genetic relationships will be used to assess patterns of
biodiversity in this spider group across the complex geography of the CA-FP.
Statistical comparisons of the geographic patterns of spider species
distribution will be made to CA-FP plants and vertebrates, and these results
will be used to determine whether biodiversity “hotspots” coincide with federal,
state, and locally protected areas. This project will train students and other
researchers in several techniques of field biology research, producing and
analyzing new data from genomes, using cutting edge methods. This research will
encourage participation and train a select group of community college students
from underrepresented groups who plan to transfer to Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) programs in four-year
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California Floristic Province is a planetary
biodiversity hotspot that extends from southwest Oregon to northwest Baja
California and hosts many unique plant and animal species. Many factors,
including drought and changing fire regimes, pose a significant threat to
species restricted to the California Floristic Province. These threats are
potentially greatest for animals that move very little, or occur in special
habitats, such as mygalomorph spiders (tarantulas, trap-door spiders, and their
kin). Over 70 species of mygalomorphs inhabit California, and conservative
estimates indicate dozens of additional species that await discovery. This
project will establish mygalomorph localities for long-term observation and
measurement of trends in population sizes, develop new methods of using genetic
data to distinguish species from one another, and identify areas of the
California landscape that are particularly rich in mygalomorph species and other
taxa. These data will have important implications for conservation
prioritization and will inform scientists about the evolutionary processes that
have contributed to tremendous species diversity in the California Floristic
Province. This project will train students and other researchers in specimen
collection, curation, and techniques in genetic data generation and
computational analysis. Research experience and specialized advising will also
be offered to select community college students from underrepresented groups who
plan to transfer to four-year Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM)
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.