* 1937687
* Institute in Critical Quantitative, Computational, and Mixed Methods Training For Underrepresented Scholars
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Odis Johnson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 06/30/2021
* USD 500,559.00

The project is a collaborative effort lead by Washington University and
involving Vanderbilt University, and the University of Pennsylvania to establish
an Institute in Critical Quantitative, Computational, and Mixed Methods Training
for Underrepresented Scholars. It is designed to mitigate the disparities in the
number of underrepresented scholars that utilize quantitative and computational
research methods and techniques. The goals are to enable participants to
incorporate quantitative and computational methods in conceptualizing research
projects, establish collaborative networks of quantitative and computational
research practitioners, and affirm self-efficacy of underrepresented faculty
through culturally relevant, asset-focused training opportunities. The use of
critical perspectives in race/ethnicity responds to a need for more
underrepresented scholars to practice critical quantitative approaches in
research to complement the larger number who practice critical qualitative
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute will provide a continuum of
training, individual coaching, and a follow-up proposal development workshop.
The project team will conduct an assets assessment of 20 researchers, primarily
faculty at minority-serving institutions, recruited to serve as Fellows to
establish their baseline needs. The Institute will host a five-day summit to (1)
identify possible tensions and transformative practices in using quantitative
and computational methods to critically address race and broadening
participation in data science and analysis and (2) conduct seminars in data-
intensive methods. The curriculum will have a dual focus on core methodological
knowledge and specialization and a critical perspective on the use of
quantitative and computational methods for research on broadening participation.
Topics will include critical theory, research design, fundamentals of
quantitative methods, and grant proposal development. The Institute is expected
to stimulate more underrepresented researchers to employ quantitative and
computational methods in STEM education research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is supported through the EHR Core Research: Building capacity in STEM
Education Research (EHR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build
individuals' capacity to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education
research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.