* 1937883
* GOALI: Reducing Manufacturing Cost for the Energy Industry through Predictive Process Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Tony Schmitz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2021
* USD 204,244.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
fundamental research on the link between machining dynamics and process
performance. Research results can lead to machining high-quality parts under
conditions that are traditionally avoided because they are considered unstable.
This new approach can provide increased material removal rates and,
consequently, reduced machining times, while simultaneously producing high
quality parts. Collaboration with a partner from the energy industry will help
ensure the technology transfer to this and other manufacturing industries. The
award also supports two education outreach efforts: (1) Project Engineering for
Me, one-day events for middle school girls in Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools,
that includes a discussion of engineering careers, a team competition, group
brainstorming to discuss how engineers can impact society, and assessment
through questionnaires; and (2) the Pigskin Professor Advanced Manufacturing
video series that describes advanced manufacturing concepts in simple language.

The research focus is period-n bifurcations (i.e., a special category of
chatter, or self-excited vibration) in low radial immersion milling. The
research objective is to establish relationships: (1) between the period-n
behavior (which describes the number of periods, n, between repetitions of the
vibration state) and milling parameters (spindle speed, axial and radial depths
of cut, and feed per tooth); (2) between the period-n behavior and geometric
accuracy of machined parts; and (3) between the period-n behavior and surface
roughness of machined parts. The approach to achieve the objective is to derive
a comprehensive time domain model by solving a set of second order delay
differential equations that describe the milling process. This time domain model
will be used to predict these relationships. In addition, the time domain model
will be used to select experimental conditions that exhibit period-n
bifurcations. Machining experiments will then be conducted under these
conditions using aluminum, steel, and nickel alloys. For each machining
experiment, the period-n behavior will be measured by a laser vibrometer, part
accuracy will be measured using coordinate metrology, and surface roughness will
be measured by coherence scanning interferometry. The measurement data will then
be compared with the model predictions, including period-n behavior, part
accuracy, and surface roughness.