* 1937540
* IIBR:Informatics:Toward an Automated RNA-seq Bioinformatician
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Carleton Kingsford, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2023
* USD 546,148.00

Measurement of gene expression --- which genes are active in which conditions
--- is an indispensable tool for understanding biological systems. Analysis of
gene expression from modern genomic sequencing technologies requires the use of
sophisticated software such as read mappers, transcript assemblers, and
expression abundance estimators. A software program implementing one of these
steps typically has a large number of user-settable parameters that influence
how the analysis algorithm performs. Scientists,biologists, and clinical
researchers must often tune these parameters by hand or through other ad hoc
means. The goal of this project is to automate this process by designing and
implementing a framework for automatically learning high-performing parameters
for gene expression analysis software. This project also aims to develop
algorithms, software, and methodology to make this framework practical and
useful. This will allow more researchers to obtain high-quality gene expression
analyses with significantly less effort and will also enable improved analysis
of large data sets where per-sample parameter tuning by hand is impractical.
Reproducibility of biological results will also be enhanced since the choice of
parameters is explicitly ceded to an automated, repeatable process. This
research will make biological studies involving gene expression more accurate
and less costly. A number of educational and outreach activities for various
levels of students (elementary through undergraduate) are planned to enhance
community understanding of gene expression and its
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed processes will be implemented in
several wrapper tools for parameter optimization that can be dropped into
existing RNA-seq analysis pipelines to improve accuracy at each step. The
research to design these tools will be broken down into several more tractable
steps. The first step will be learning, for each tool, a collection of
representative parameter vectors by analyzing large collections of existing RNA-
seq samples. In the second step, machine learning methods, based on a
combination of techniques such as Bayesian Optimization, genetic algorithms, and
classification approaches, will be used to design techniques to select parameter
vectors from these sets that are predicted to offer high performance. In the
third step, techniques for providing human-interpretable rationales for the
automatic parameter choices will be designed and implemented. The design of this
system will also enhance our practical knowledge of techniques for such
parameter optimization in other application domains within biology. Results from
the project can be foun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.