* 1937869
* Admissible Lagrangians, Fukaya categories, and homological mirror symmetry.
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Denis Auroux, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 271,878.00

The idea of noncommutative geometry, where one tries to think of spaces in
nonlocal terms and concepts such as position no longer make sense, has emerged
as a promising language to unify diverse areas of mathematics. In symplectic
geometry -- the geometry of phase spaces of classical mechanics -- points are
"too small" to be relevant, and it is more natural to consider a class of half-
dimensional subspaces called Lagrangian submanifolds. Considering the geometry
of these submanifolds, rather than points, naturally gives rise to a
noncommutative space: the Fukaya category. A remarkable mathematical conjecture
inspired by ideas from theoretical physics, "homological mirror symmetry,"
asserts that many Fukaya categories are in fact equivalent to conventional
commutative spaces such as those studied in algebraic geometry. The main goal of
this research project is to expand the range of settings to which mirror
symmetry is applicable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the goal is to
establish homological mirror symmetry in a broad enough setting to exhibit all
(commutative) algebraic spaces defined by systems of polynomial equations as
instances of Fukaya categories. A key step in this program is to study the non-
commutative geometry that arises from a symplectic manifold equipped with one or
more (commuting) functions. More specifically, the main goal of this project is
to prove Kontsevich's homological mirror symmetry conjecture for all complete
intersections in (possibly noncompact) toric varieties. The mirror spaces in
this setting are so-called toric Landau-Ginzburg models (i.e., noncompact toric
Calabi-Yau varieties equipped with regular functions). A key ingredient in the
study of their Fukaya categories is the concept of simultaneous admissibility
with respect to a collection of toric monomials. This gives a new approach to
the Floer-theoretic calculations needed to prove homological mirror symmetry.
The expected outcome will be a framework for understanding mirror symmetry that
places varieties of general type (including noncompact ones) on the same footing
as the more classical Calabi-Yau and Fano cases. This project will also
investigate some apparently new structural features of Fukaya categories for
Landau-Ginzburg models and for affine varieties, which suggest previously
unnoticed functoriality properties of homological mirror symmetry, as well as a
new approach to computations for affine varieties.