* 1937338
* Core support for the Board on Life Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Kavita Berger, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 11/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The Board on Life Sciences (BLS) at the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine serves as the Academies' focal point for a wide range
of technical and policy topics in the life sciences. These include developments
in genetics, including synthetic biology and "gene drives"; the biology of
organisms and ecosystems and the conservation of biodiversity; biosafety and
biosecurity; and basic biomedical research. BLS organizes and oversees studies
that provide advice to the government and the scientific community on the life
sciences and their impacts on society as well as on the improvement of biology
education and the maintenance of a robust life sciences workforce. Throughout
its 35-year history, BLS has produced numerous reports that have had major
impacts on science and policy. Detailed information on BLS's many reports may be
found at http://dels.nas.edu/bls/. For BLS to continue to produce significant
results for the government, the scientific community, and the public, it is
necessary to have "core support" so that BLS can carry out important basic
functions: holding two meetings of its advisory board per year; allowing BLS to
explore emerging areas of biological science and technology to monitor
significant new scientific advances; and supporting the staff in their efforts
to develop new study ideas and disseminate information about completed reports.
The NSF Directorate for Biological Sciences also has interests in fostering the
welfare of the life sciences community and promoting the highest quality
research throughout the life sciences. Over the years, BLS has provided
substantial support to NSF-BIO through the preparation of expert reports that
have complemented NSF-supported research to advance the frontiers of biological
knowledge, increase understanding of complex biological systems, and provide a
theoretical basis for life sciences research. Core support for BLS is an
investment that can provide returns across a wide range of NSF's biological
science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to acquire
general ("core") support for the National Academies' Board on Life Sciences
(BLS). This support will allow BLS to continue to hold two Board meetings per
year; use various means (e.g., webinars, guest speaker seminars, planning
meetings, etc.) to monitor and explore leading edge topics in the life sciences;
and develop ideas for new studies and perform tasks, such as dissemination of
completed studies, for which no project funds are available. Over its 35-year
history, BLS has produced a large number of high impact study reports as well as
conducting other activities with influential results. Some of these have
provided impetus for the initiation of new science projects (e.g., sequencing
the human genome), advancing new fields of science (metagenomics, glycoscience),
fostering new methods of teaching biology (BIO 2010 and its follow on Summer
Institutes), and reinforcing or affirming the value of both new and existing
facilities and infrastructure (e.g. field stations and marine laboratories). BLS
reports have resulted in the establishment of new funding programs or
amplifications or directional shifts in existing programs; produced
organizational change in funding agencies or research plans; highlighted new
research areas or important issues that subsequently received greater emphasis;
or established new policies that were adhered to by the scientific community or
by funding agencies. Studies prepared specifically for the NSF Biology
directorate by BLS have helped inform the Congress to about major investments
like the National Ecological Observatory Network, provided two successive five-
year plans for the National Plant Genome Initiative, and inspired research in
new areas, such as metagenomics and theoretical biological research. BLS reports
have also provided suggestions for ensuring the future of field stations and
marine labs, and a current study to helping to chart a more sustainable future
for biological collections. Because of the convening power of the Academies, BLS
is able to access the best scientific minds to contribute to its projects and
achieve their goals. Core support from NSF helps allow the Board members and
staff to plan and execute studies to assist the Foundation and others with
program planning, analysis, and assessment. BLS's capabilities benefit not only
NSF itself, but also researchers in the large number of life science sub-
disciplines that form NSF BIO's constituencies. More detailed information about
BLS and its work can be found at
http://dels.nas.edu/bls/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.