* 1937629
* I-Corps: Disposable Microflow Cytometer for Point-of-Care and Mobile Testing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Ali Fatih Sarioglu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project arises from the
lack of diagnostic/prognostic flow cytometry platforms that are small and mobile
enough to be employed at the point-of-care. The technology takes the recognized
diagnostics capability, accuracy, and market acceptance of flow cytometry and
places it where real-time testing can impact decision making. Such a platform
can potentially be both lifesaving and cost-effective in the long run due to
enabling rapid triage or early diagnosis. Patients as well as clinicians and
researchers working on the discovery of new drugs and protein engineering would
potentially significantly benefit from this technology. Furthermore, a portable
platform can pave the way for new specialized diagnostic tests that can be
performed at a doctor's office, in mobile settings, or even in disaster-relief
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will further develop a
portable and disposable cytometry platform. The technology monitors the
trajectories of magnetically labeled cells on a microfluidic chip and uses
computational modeling to estimate their membrane antigen expression. This
projectile-based cytometry technique takes the burden of sample discrimination
off the sensor, making it possible to choose an optimal sensing modality for
system integration and data acquisition. The integrated yet disposable
electrical flow cytometer works as simply as a Coulter counter while measuring
the target surface antigen or other biomarkers that otherwise could not directly
be analyzed electrically. Furthermore, the technology embeds the sample
manipulation stage into the cytometry process, opening a path for direct
expression profiling from unprocessed samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.