* 1937267
* Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) National Summit: Inspiring the Future of Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Travis York, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,489,254.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by synthesizing and disseminating research and knowledge about
STEM teaching and learning. The American Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS) will undertake a 60-month project to establish a blog to share
information and to convene a series of meetings and webinars that lead to
increased use of effective undergraduate education strategies. The intended
outcomes of this project are to provide principal investigators in the IUSE
program, evaluators, researchers, and other leaders with an opportunity to: (a)
disseminate innovative, evidence-based practices for transforming undergraduate
STEM education for majors and non-majors, including improving the diversity of
students and faculty participating in STEM education; (b) share STEM education
research studies, particularly those focused on different types of institutions
and diverse student populations; and (c) establish collaborations among
educators, researchers, evaluators, and institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major goals of this project are to (a) synthesize and disseminate research and
knowledge about STEM teaching and learning and (b) increase the use of effective
evidence-based undergraduate curricula and instructional strategies that will
lead to a diverse STEM workforce and a STEM-literate public. To this end, AAAS
will provide opportunities for in-person and virtual learning and dialogue.
Specific activities include two national summits for faculty and staff from
institutions of higher education, as well as professional and educational
organizations. The summits will feature plenary presentations, posters, papers,
investigator-led working and discussion groups, and sessions led by NSF program
directors. Ongoing conversations will be facilitated through post-summit online
forums intended to foster continued dissemination and collaboration among
investigators and the broader STEM education community. In conjunction with NSF
program directors, AAAS will offer IUSE proposal preparation webinars focused on
reviewing and discussing the guidelines for IUSE proposals to encourage broader
participation in this funding opportunity. AAAS will also host a blog on
research and evidence-based strategies to prepare a diverse STEM workforce and
science-literate public featuring expert authors and guest editors across
various sectors and roles. A 2023 follow-up to the AAAS-NSF 2018 "Levers for
Change Working Meeting" is also planned, to assemble STEM education researchers
and practitioners who will assess progress and outline potential high-impact
future directions in undergraduate STEM education. Additional products will
include a printed and electronic report about levers of change in undergraduate
STEM education as well as a project website with online poster and paper
abstract locators and archived summit programs, webinars, blog, and report
resources. The project will include thousands of IUSE principal investigators,
co-investigators, and staff across the more than 400 institutions funded by the
IUSE program, as well as relevant stakeholders beyond those currently funded by
IUSE to promote the generation, exchange, and use of evidence-based practices to
improve the future of undergraduate STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.