* 1937997
* The Allied Genetics Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Mark Johnston, Genetics Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 09/30/2020
* USD 47,000.00

The award will provide support for early career scientists to attend The Allied
Genetics Conference (TAGC) on April 22-26, 2020 in the Washington D.C. metro
area. The conference will bring together over 4000 US and international
investigators to share scientific discoveries, technological advances and
educational experiences that advance biological research. A major goal of TAGC
is to reintegrate distinct communities of geneticists who focus on different
model organisms (e.g., C. elegans, Drosophila, Xenopus, Zebrafish, etc.) through
seminars, poster sessions, workshops and discussions that are organized by
shared scientific themes. In addition, several career development and skills
workshops targeted toward undergraduate-to-mid-career scientists will promote
workforce development and diverse participation in STEM fields.

Advances in genetics have opened up new avenues of discovery and yielded
technological applications for decades. Now, revolutionary advances in the
analysis of genome variation are providing new insights into complex traits;
quantitative genetics promise progress on many challenges, including securing
the world's food supply; new technologies offer insights into the effects of
genetic variation in single cells; genome synthesis and engineering expand the
variety of organisms that can be studied and harnessed for materials production.
These are but a few of the valuable outcomes of multi-disciplinary research in
the field of genetics. The conference will promote progress by facilitating
discussions and fostering collaborations among the participants.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences - Genetic Mechanisms and Systems and Synthetic Biology Clusters, and
by the Division of Environmental Biology - Evolutionary Processes Cluster.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.