* 1937128
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Integrative Manufacturing and Remanufacturing Technologies (iMart) to Spur Rural Development
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Frank Liou, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project envisions a shift of cradle-to-grave
manufacturing paradigm to grave-to-cradle remanufacturing paradigm. Grave-to-
cradle remanufacturing will enable the transformation of a part in various
possible damage conditions to a certified product that can be reintroduced into
the stream of commerce. Remanufacturing, which often leads to cost savings, is
characterized by lower quantity, a large variety of materials and parts, and
diversity of initial conditions (damage). Rural areas have great potential to
address associated challenges due to lower costs of labor and land and the wide
variety of available manufacturing capabilities and suppliers. This planning
grant proposal is to foster and facilitate the planning of an ERC for
Integrative Manufacturing and Remanufacturing Technologies (iMart ERC) to spur
rural development and form convergent research collaborations. The vision of
iMart ERC is to establish strong supply-chain networks by achieving integrative
remanufacturing and manufacturing capabilities in rural areas in the US. The
transformative mission of iMart is to 1) explore a new science of integrative
remanufacturing supply chains; 2) enable remanufacturing automation toward
certification; 3) transform the iMart supply chain system by seamlessly
integrating data science, additive manufacturing, and remanufacturing automation
into iMart remanufacturing; 4) engage stakeholders in the rich environment
deliberately developed within the ERC; 5) integrate a competitive
remanufacturing supply chain among rural areas, and train and retrain workers
within a sustainable working environment while promoting rural area
revitalization; and 6) assess and address issues related to safety, security,
human factors, certification, environmental, societal acceptance, life cycle
mass, and energy savings in remanufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lack of
automation not only results in higher remanufacturing cost, but also introduces
inconsistencies in remanufacturing quality, which dramatically reduces users?
incentive to use restored parts. The novelty of the proposed iMart ERC will
develop the enabling technologies and bring fully automated capability into the
remanufacturing industry. Such a capability will lead to a dramatic improvement
in remanufacturing consistency, thus yielding general acceptance of
remanufacturing. The iMart ERC will overcome barriers through the trans-
disciplinary research expertise, industrial partners, and innovation
facilitators by advancing the proposed fundamental knowledge and innovative
enabling technologies. The planning grant will bring in all stakeholders to
devise a seamless plan for implementing the iMart ERC, with the goal of creating
transformative product remanufacturing technologies that are cost-effective, yet
significantly improve the quality, reliability, availability, and certification
of remanufacturing. The integrative remanufacturing processes involve a large
amount of data needed for the representation of products and processes.
Investigating the use of data science to address challenges associated with
safety, security, certification, environment, societal acceptance, and life
cycle in remanufacturing will provide indepth convergence knowledge. Thus the
iMart ERC also combines current convergent themes in Harnessing the Data
Revolution and Future of Work at the Human-Technology
Frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.