* 1937973
* 12th International Seminar on Speech Production; Providence, RI - June 2020
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Douglas Whalen, Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 16,798.00

This conference, to be held in Providence, RI, in June, 2020, will bring experts
and students together to explore the progress in new and innovative approaches
to the measurement and analyses of the way in which speech is organized at the
physical level. Iterations of the International Seminar on Speech Production
(ISSP) have taken place at three or four year intervals for the past 31 years
with the aim of providing an interdisciplinary forum for researchers working on
all aspects of speech production from fields as diverse as phonology, phonetics,
prosody, mechanics, acoustics, physiology, motor control, neuroscience, speech
technology and human interaction. The conference series has been held throughout
the world, and was last in the US in 1993. Each meeting has attracted a
substantial portion of the active researchers in this important yet challenging
area of speech research. The current project will allow attendance by 10
students at the conference, with special events and one-on-one meetings with
selected senior researchers. Keeping up with the latest in technology and theory
is greatly facilitated by an international meeting such as this one, and it
provides students with an especially useful entry into the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speech is of critical importance to human
communication, and the mechanisms used to produce it are complex and difficult
to quantify. Visible articulators such as the lips and chin (related to jaw
height) are relatively easy to assess, but their accurate measurement is
difficult. Video images can certainly show aspects of the visible articulators,
but the nonlinear compression of the 3D face into a 2D video image makes
measurement unreliable, and generally more sophisticated devices are used.
Modern technology, such as ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
allow a more detailed look at the tongue, which, despite being a major component
of speech production, is quite difficult to measure. These advances in data
collection have begun to feed into improved models of speech motor control. The
8 keynote speakers at the conference will highlight the wide range of relevant
topics, from neuroscience to disordered speech, from acquisition of speech to
aging, from the technology of measurement to the influence of measurement on
consumer technology. In short, the conference is an excellent showcase for the
range and impact of speech production research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.