* 1937695
* RAPID: Radiocarbon Dating of Birnirk Levels at Walakpa, North Slope, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Anne Jensen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2020
* USD 18,833.00

Walakpa, located south of Utqiagvik (formerly Barrow), Alaska, is the only
archaeological site in the U.S. Arctic where the same site was occupied by
multiple groups of people over time. This occupational history makes it easier
to understand how past residents used the site and how those uses changed
through time. The first excavation of Walakpa took place in 1968-69, but much of
the site remained unexplored. A few years ago, Walakpa began eroding into the
sea due to rapid Arctic change, and urgent work to save the data began,
resulting in data from two different excavations that need to be reconciled.
This project identifies artifacts and samples from recent excavations for
radiocarbon dating and chronological modeling to understand the dates of these
archaeological layers with better accuracy and precision, allowing
archaeologists to link archaeological layers identified in 1968-69 with the more
recent rescue excavations, allowing for a more complete picture of the
archaeology of Walakpa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New radiocarbon samples will be
taken from well-provenienced samples from known Birnirk (AD 500-1000) cultural
levels and will be submitted for Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) radiocarbon
dating and isotopic analysis. Bayesian chronological modeling of the Walakpa
site radiocarbon data will be applied to produce realistic estimates for the
dates of the site's Birnirk presence. This work will help establish a better
regional chronology for Birnirk and the transition to the subsequent Thule (AD
1000-1750) period on the North Slope of Alaska. The project will also ensure the
proper packaging, shipment, and curation of materials at the Museum of the North
at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, ensuring the samples are available for
future generations of archaeologists. The results will allow researchers to
study the artifacts from both excavations together and guide future
archaeological research on the North Slope. Information and examples of change
documented through this project, from a site that was occupied for such a long
time through many changes, when combined with information from other similar
sites, will provide a more robust picture of ancient settlement on the North
Slope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.