* 1937994
* NSF Workshop on Security in RF/Analog Microelectronics and Electromagnetics, October, 22-23, 2019 in Alexandria, VA.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Ruonan Han, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 08/31/2020
* USD 75,000.00

The goal of this workshop is to have a group of leading experts from government,
industry, and academia with expertise covering microelectronics, semiconductor
materials, wireless systems, internet-of-things (IoT), RF antennas and
electromagnetic wave propagation, analog/mixed-signal processing, etc. to
discuss how the RF/analog technologies in microelectronics and electromagnetics
can advance the security of future communications and sensing. The workshop will
focus on two main objectives: (1) Security vulnerability in RF/analog
microelectronics and electromagnetics; (2) Secured Communications and Sensing by
RF/analog microelectronics and electromagnetics. The outcome of the workshop
will be a report on the needs and challenges in RF/analog-based security for
future communication and sensing systems. The outcome of the workshop is
expected to encourage researchers from different research communities to work
together and explore opportunities for new security techniques in RF/analog
hardware domain, which may lead to new avenues of important research. The two-
day workshop will feature keynote talks, panel discussions, breakout sessions,
and a wrap-up conclusion session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.