* 1937160
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): A Multi-Scale Open Knowledge Network for Precision Medicine
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Sharat Israni, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 09/30/2020
* USD 979,204.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future.

The goal of this projects is to connect intersecting information across distinct
domains and integrate it in a way that leads to innovation and new knowledge.
For instance, if the US Treasury had access to private financial information
from all domestic and foreign banks, financial markets, and even social
networks, they might have been able to foresee the Great Recession of 2008. This
project uses the same principle but is focused on computational tools and
biomedical information with the potential to advance discovery across a range of
biomedical disciplines.

Specifically, this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will create a
biomedical knowledge engine by integrating information from multiple biomedical
databases. With the use of artificial intelligence, it will empower researchers
with the tools to accelerate basic biomedical research as well as drug discover,
and doctors with potentially unprecedented patient insights. The broader impact
and potential societal benefit of this program lies on its ability to facilitate
and democratize access to highly-specialized, yet publicly available information
of biomedical importance. Currently, the majority of biomedical data sources are
secluded within dedicated portals with minimal, if any, integration. This
convergent project integrates wide-ranging expertise, from genomics,
pharmacology and patient care, to computer science, deep data science, and
epistemology. This team comprises research groups from academic institutions
(University of California San Francisco), government (Lawrence Livermore
National Labs), non-profit (Institute for Systems Biology) and commercial
entities (Google), and during the project will engage with other organizations.
While these groups have been collaborating (mostly in a pair-wise fashion) in
projects with a smaller scope, this project intends to crystallize the team
around a larger, common objective. The deliverables specified in this Phase I
effort will contribute to the creation of a knowledge network (graph) composed
of billions of concepts connected by biologically meaningful relationships. The
graph will be open to the general public, accessible via manual or automated
searches, whose content can be updated or modified, much like the world wide web
is today.

Integrating vast amounts of information from multiple domains to an extensive
knowledge network opens for the first time the possibility to computationally
navigate the graph across disciplines that normally do not interact (like
internal medicine and molecular biology). Furthermore, because the knowledge
graph that will be developed contains domain-specific knowledge but not
individual patient data, it does not pose privacy concerns. The intellectual
merit of this project lies in the significant integration of domain expertise
across team members and the leveraging of data resources that have been created
by other publicly and privately funded efforts. The project lays the groundwork
for a resource that will potentially afford researchers and practitioners
immediate access to the totality of all relevant "biomedical facts" - in the
style of Google search, with the potential to change biomedical research, drug
development and even the way medicine is practiced across the nation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.