* 1937307
* Building Capacity for Educational Assessment Research in Geography
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Michael Solem, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 293,369.00

This project will allow a mid-career principal investigator to acquire education
research expertise needed to successfully conceive and execute fundamental
research with the potential to meaningfully advance knowledge about
psychometrics and large-scale data analysis as it relates to geography
assessment. The principal investigator's individual professional development
plan includes a mentor and advisory board members with expertise specific to
this topic who will provide guidance and feedback throughout the award period.
Specifically, the principal investigator will seek to increase capacity in the
following areas: (1) large scale data operation; (2) defining and measuring
geography constructs; (3) issues of sampling and population modeling; (4) item
response theory; (5) statistical methodologies for analyzing clustered
assessment datasets; (6) specialized software packages for analyzing data; (7)
hierarchical linear modeling; and (8) cognitive diagnostic modeling relative to
achievement testing. Activities in the professional development plan needed to
gain required expertise to complete the pilot study will be obtained through
subject-specific conferences, workshops, short courses, seminars, webinars,
mentoring and networking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by the psychometric
measurement theory, the principal investigator will analyze geography data
collected through the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) recent
administrations to explain patterns of geographic learning among youth in
diverse school communities. This analysis is important since NAEP data show that
students from minority populations continue to score at or below basic in
geography. Hence, the principal investigator will examine variability in
geography achievement for all grade levels on which data are available relative
to student background characteristics, school-level contextual attributes, and
classroom opportunity to learn. Survey data from teachers and school
administrators who participated in NAEP administrations will also be analyzed.
Through this project, the principal investigator will gain expertise needed to
plan, design, and conduct studies on educational assessment and measurement in
the context of geography education and set the stage for future interventions to
enable more minority students to achieve at higher levels in geography. The
project is supported through the EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research competition that is designed to build individuals' capacity
to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.