* 1937745
* Quantitative Research Methods for STEM Education Scholars Program
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Gregory Hancock, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 996,074.00

The project is supported through the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in
STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build
individual capacity to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education
research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM fields, and STEM workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
institute involves a year-long training of two cohorts of 20 Quantitative
Research Methods (QRM) Scholars via a one-week intensive institute on
fundamental issues in research design, analysis, measurement, followed by onsite
collaborative activities, and meetings with their assigned methods mentor and
graduate student facilitator. Year-long interactions include live-stream
workshops and a social network infrastructure to improve participant's skills in
design and execution of research in STEM Education, with feedback from their
methods mentor and a local content area mentor designated by the QRM Scholars as
part of their application. Each QRM Scholar will be expected to work on a
proposed study/activity during the year while they are being mentored, this may
be in collaboration with other Scholars. A key component of this year-long
experience will be a unique platform of electronic social infra-structure (e.g.
WhatsApp, Facebook Group). The year will culminate with a capstone conference,
wherein the Scholars present their work from the past year. Starting in year 2,
this conference will also serve as the convening of the next year's Scholars
(during which each new Scholar will be matched with a 'graduating' Scholar for
networking).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the persistent underrepresentation of
individuals from certain groups in STEM courses of study and careers, as well as
concerns about achievement gaps in math and sciences across educational levels,
this program will target early career scholars (within five years of their
doctoral degree) with research foci on issues of access and equity of
underrepresented populations in STEM within either K-12 or postsecondary
settings. The design and analysis approaches to address research questions
related to group comparisons, a key focus of studies to address equity, will
play a special role during the week-long institute and the year of interaction.
The STEM Education research of the 40 QRM Scholars over the two cohorts will be
made rigorous in terms of study design, methods of measurement, and data
analytical approaches. Each Scholar's work will make valuable and immediate
contributions to the literature around issues such as STEM Education access,
achievement gaps, and workforce diversity, but as part of the program, the QRM
Scholars will develop a viable and fundable agenda for the coming years to
ensure their continued high-level contributions to the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.