* 1937700
* Understanding the Development of Interest in Computer Science: An Experience Sampling Approach
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Joshua Rosenberg, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 348,679.00

This project explores STEM interest development at the undergraduate level in
computer science. It is a study of national importance that will focus on
substantial differences in who pursues an interest, a major, or an occupation in
computer science. The pilot study will look at what drives these differences at
a level where policymakers and educators seeking to support and sustain a more
representative population of computer science experts can most effectively act.
To address this problem, the project will conduct a pilot study that articulates
a fundamental research project appropriate for the ECR program using the
experience sampling method (ESM). In order to meet the ECR threshold for
research, the investigator will enlist mentors and advisory board members with
expertise using this methodology to help identify experiences, expertise, and
competencies the investigator will need to develop during the two-year project
period. Building on advice of these experts, the investigator will receive
assistance in study design, research methods, and data analysis. A deeper
understanding in these broad categories will help the investigator use a variety
of approaches and measures to examine students' individual characteristics,
construct surveys, study variation in students' experiences, and structure
timelines for the ESM study. Through the professional development plan, the
investigator will address these needs by participating in subject-specific
conferences, workshops, short courses, research groups, and mentoring activities
in both research methodology and computer science relative to STEM interest
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pilot study will be carried out in the
context of an introductory undergraduate computer science course using a pool of
200 students. It will be framed in terms of the interest development theory to
better understand how students' in-the-moment interest is sparked in specific
situations and then accumulates into more ongoing and sustained individual
interest. Specifically, ESM will allow the investigator to monitor a short-term
intervention to explore how situational interest may change over time into well-
developed individual interest. The pilot study will seek to determine if this
method is more suitable for understanding situational interest and if so, under
what conditions. Data will be collected through pre-post surveys, an experience
sampling survey, and short written reports. Data will be analyzed using
multivariate, mixed effects models that will consider the relationship between
situational and individual interest. Outcomes from this project will be two-
fold: an advancement in the investigator's methodological knowledge relative to
ESM; and a deeper understanding about how student's interest may develop in
computer science as well as what barriers might interfere with such development.
The project is supported through the EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research competition that is designed to build individuals' capacity
to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.