* 1937134
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Scalable Knowledge Network to Enable Intelligent Textbooks
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* H. Craig Heller, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Properly educating the
STEM leaders of tomorrow requires moving beyond knowledge being transmitted from
teacher to learner via paper textbooks and lectures. The broader impact and
potential social benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase 1 project is to
launch the Textbook Open Knowledge Network (TOKN). The TOKN project will be
executed by a multidisciplinary team of cognitive scientists, machine learning
and artificial intelligence engineers, and educators from Rice University's
OpenStax and Stanford University who are committed to creating a library of
intelligent textbooks, engaging more partners as the project progresses. To
begin, this project will build knowledge graphs that capture the complex
relationships between educational concepts. A knowledge graph enables artificial
intelligence algorithms to provide enhanced and personalized functionality to
intelligent textbooks. Consequently, the intelligent textbook can provide more
robust courseware functionality (text, videos, simulations, etc.), learning
analytics, and personalized tutoring, such as automatically generating summaries
of textbook content, generating useful practice exercises for students,
providing interactive dialogues with students to help them better understand and
master the underlying source material, and more. Integrating this intelligent
technology into the full OpenStax free and open library has the potential to
impact academic outcomes for millions of students in both secondary and higher
education, while significantly advancing the state of education worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intelligent textbooks provide an opportunity to facilitate
better learning for students. However, they require major investments of time,
money, and expertise. An appropriate knowledge graph is at the heart of an
intelligent textbook and is often the biggest challenge to intelligent textbook
creation due to the need for human subject experts to develop the semantic
connectivity of terms and ideas. TOKN aims to develop new, scalable processes
and supporting technologies for generating high-quality and extensible knowledge
graphs for intelligent textbooks. The proposed research aims to lower both the
cost and time required to produce high-quality knowledge graphs. In contrast to
using subject matter experts, this project proposes to use a combination of
machine learning algorithms and crowdsourcing of knowledge from students.
Crowdsourcing will not only provide data for knowledge graphs, but it will also
provide an opportunity to evaluate the pedagogical effectiveness of concept
mapping on student learning. Phase 1 of this project will include a proof of
concept to construct and validate a knowledge graph for one chapter of OpenStax
Biology, a free and open-source text used by more than 30% of students in
college biology programs. The overarching goal is to eventually apply this
approach at scale during Phase 2 to generate knowledge graphs for the entire
OpenStax library of 38 general educational textbooks, transforming them into
intelligent open textbooks for society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.