* 1937937
* Activation and Regulation of Bacterial Tyrosine Kinases
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Ranajeet Ghose, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,328,415.00

Title: Activation and Regulation of Bacterial Tyrosine
Kinases&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transfer of the terminal phosphate group from
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to specific tyrosine residues on defined protein
targets has profound regulatory effects on all the processes that sustain life
in higher eukaryotes. Indeed, there are nearly a hundred distinct human enzymes,
known as tyrosine kinases, that facilitate this transfer. Dysregulation of
tyrosine kinase activity has been implicated in a variety of human diseases
including several cancers making these enzymes ideal targets for therapeutic
intervention. Tyrosine phosphorylation driven signal transduction was considered
to be restricted to the eukaryotic domain of life and indeed the presence of
many distinct tyrosine kinases was believed to be the hallmark of
multicellularity. However, recent discoveries have provided clear evidence that
bacterial cells also encode numerous unique tyrosine kinases that play a
similarly important role in bacterial physiology. The largest family of these
bacterial tyrosine kinases, the BY-kinases, are conserved across the bacterial
kingdom, contain none of the sequence signatures characteristic of eukaryotic
tyrosine kinases, are structurally unique, and are activated and regulated
through distinct, yet incompletely understood, mechanisms. The research
proposed, using an integrated application of experimental and computational
tools will decipher in terms of structure and mechanism, the activation and
regulation of BY-kinase function. This research will provide multi-disciplinary
training to a broad range of scholars at various career stages ranging from
high-school students to postdoctoral trainees. The work will be facilitated by
the outstanding intellectual environment at the City College of New York enabled
by a student body that reflects the unique and diverse demographics of New York
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of the research is to understand
the activation, activity and regulation of BY-kinases in atomic detail. Towards
that goal, the mechanism/s employed by the catalytic subunit of BY-kinases in
achieving efficient auto-phosphorylation and the nature of their interaction
with counteracting PTPs to reverse this covalent modification, will be
determined. The proposed research will utilize solution-state nuclear magnetic
resonance and high-resolution mass-spectrometric techniques informed by all-atom
computational studies and validated by biochemical experiments in vitro and in
cell. The proposed studies will provide an expanded view of protein
phosphorylation in life’s kingdoms through detailed insight into a divergent
platform utilized by nature to perform this simple chemistry that has profound
biological consequences. The archetypal BY kinase, Escherichia coli Wzc, and its
cognate protein tyrosine phosphatase, Wzb will be utilized in these studies.
Deploying proteins from a non-pathogenic, genetically tractable organism will
allow the robust validation of the in vitro biophysical/biochemical insights
within the cellular context. This project is supported by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.