* 1937557
* I-Corps: Wearable vibro-tactile stimulation technology for the treatment of dystonia and stroke
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Juergen Konczak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to advance
and commercialize a platform technology that provides vibration therapy to
people with neurological movement disorders, especially those with altered
muscle tone. This technology will address an unmet medical need for patients
with dystonia, stroke or Parkinson's disease, who suffer from involuntary muscle
spasms, excessive muscle spasticity or rigidity. At present, there is no mature
competing technology on the market. A preliminary market analysis shows
commercial potential in the market for medical devices for the treatment of
dystonia and stroke. At the successful completion of the program, the project
will have explored enhanced understanding of the commercial ecosystem for the
innovation, ranging from validating patient need, regulatory hurdles and cost
constraints for the patients and the health care industry for each of the
technology applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps further develops a
platform technology utilizing superficial vibration to the skin above muscles
affected by neurological disease. The technology is embedded in wearable devices
that provide non-invasive neuromodulation for treating a range of neurological
movement disorders. The neurophysiological mechanism behind its effectiveness is
tactile vibration that stimulates mechanoreceptors in the skin and muscles
modulating the excitability of motor cortical circuits involved in motor
control. Proof-of-concept research on patients with laryngeal dystonia
documented the effectiveness of vibro-tactile stimulation for improving the
voice symptoms of this disorder. It was demonstrated that laryngeal vibro-
tactile stimulation reduces abnormal somatosensory-motor cortical activity and
improves speech quality in a sample of patients with spasmodic
dysphonia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.