* 1937512
* Development of Research to Inform the Design and Improvement of Mathematics Education for Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Julia St Goar, Merrimack College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 05/31/2024
* USD 205,180.00

This award will support the development of research to investigate key
developmental mathematics understandings of undergraduates who are intending to
become teachers. Many secondary teachers learned geometry through proving
theorems. Current secondary standards and guidelines favor a vastly different
approach that focuses on geometric transformations, such as reflection of a
shape against an axis. This difference in learning approaches provides an
important STEM education question: how do secondary teachers' understandings of
proof-based geometry relate to their understanding of geometrical
transformations? Work on this project will address this question by exploring
how teachers use a transformational perspective to conceptualize two key
concepts in geometry: congruence and similarity. This work will also produce a
rich dataset for future modeling of teachers' thinking about congruence and
similarity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on prior work led by the
investigator, which hypothesized the existence of key developmental
understandings for establishing congruence from a transformation perspective.
The project will conduct additional research related to this hypothesis. It will
also seek to develop hypotheses for similarity-proving activities through an
adapted teaching experiment. In these efforts, the investigator will be mentored
by Dr. Yvonne Lai. The specific aims of the research are to: (1) investigate
prospective teachers' understandings of congruence and similarity-proving
activities from a transformation perspective; and (2) increase the
investigator’s capacity to design and conduct STEM education research using both
qualitative and quantitative methods. Results of the research will inform the
design and improvement of the mathematics curricula for teachers, and support
teacher educators in designing and using formative assessments for understanding
geometry from a transformation perspective. The new research has the potential
to help more secondary mathematics teachers enter the classroom well-equipped to
teach geometry in alignment with current standards. Additionally, the
professional development activities will build capacity for the investigator to
conduct STEM education research that will enhance the connection between
research and practice at a primarily undergraduate institution. This work is
supported by the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research
Program, which supports projects that build individuals’ capacity to carry out
high quality STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.