* 1937833
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Prepare the US labor Force for Future Jobs in the Hotel and Restaurant Industry: A hybrid Framework and Multi-Stakeholder Approach
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Nan Hua, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2022
* USD 977,566.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will support future research and
knowledge growth on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and future jobs by developing
transdisciplinary methods. This project will demonstrate how to integrate
advances in data mining and analytics, qualitative analysis, survey research,
and visualization techniques in predicting and visualizing the impact of AI on
future jobs and proposing contextual reskill training strategies. This project
will provide critically needed data on the evolutionary paths of jobs, trends of
job tasks, required skills and tools, and workers' adaptation capabilities in
the hotel and restaurant industry, which are significantly under-represented in
the public labor databases. The research team will create an online, open-access
repository of the forecasting model's outputs, description of future job content
and required skills, and policy recommendations. All the findings and developed
training modules will be integrated into a web-based Expert Recommendation
System, which allows any user to access future job task descriptions, required
skills, and customized reskill training modules. The models developed in this
project can also be evaluated, scaled, and applied across different industries
in the future. The proposed methodology and research findings will be used to
enrich undergraduate and graduate courses in hospitality
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I project
contributes to the understanding of the intertwined relationships among AI,
jobs, and workers from a spectrum of angles. This project will combine the most
recent advances in deep learning, semi-structured interviews, surveys, and work-
life journal data analysis in building a hybrid framework to predict the multi-
dimensional impact of AI on future jobs in the HR industry. This project will
also contribute to identifying various social-economic factors, family
backgrounds, and personal experiences that may influence workers' adaptation
capabilities. This project bridges the gap between our understanding of the
workers' current conditions and customized reskilling strategies for meeting the
needs of future jobs. This project will result in: (1) more complete
documentation and analysis of the multi-faceted evolution of job contents
influenced by AI in the HR industry (hospitality management), (2) a more
complete understanding of the triangular relationships among technology, jobs,
and labor force (sociology), (3) advances in heterogeneous data mining methods
for human subject research (computer science and engineering), (4) an enhanced
understanding of how to design effective reskilling programs in a complex system
consisting of rapid technological advances, job task evolution, and individuals'
backgrounds and experiences (human resources
management).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.