* 1937684
* Measuring Mindset in Undergraduate STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Lisa Limeri, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2021
* USD 322,402.00

This project aims to develop a rigorous, evidence-based survey to measure the
"mindset" of undergraduate STEM students. Mindset is a psychological trait that
may influence student success and persistence. The mindset construct refers to
whether a student believes that intelligence is a trait that is innate and
unchangeable (called a fixed mindset) or malleable and improvable (called a
growth mindset). When students struggle academically, it has been shown that
those with a growth mindset are more likely to take action to improve their
performance, while those with a fixed mindset are more likely to give up or
accept low performance. Many student success initiatives have attempted to
leverage the effects of mindset to improve student success by conducting
interventions to encourage students to adopt a growth mindset. However, these
interventions have had varied success. One reason for this variable success may
be that the survey used to measure mindset does not work well with undergraduate
students. If so, survey results will have limited ability to measure the
effectiveness and outcomes of mindset interventions. Preliminary research by the
the principal investigator of this project supports the possibility that the
existing mindset survey may not work well with undergraduate students. It
suggests that the variability results because undergraduates interpret the
survey questions in multiple ways. The goal of this project is to develop and
validate a new survey to measure mindset in undergraduate STEM students.
Additionally, this project will provide support for the principal investigator,
a new STEM educational researcher, to learn about the psychometrics needed to
conduct this work. This professional development will include graduate classes
in statistics and collaboration/mentorship from experts in psychometrics and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop and
validate a new mindset scale for use with undergraduate STEM students in
accordance with established standards for psychological measurement. This work
will be conducted in three phases over two years. First, a large, diverse sample
of undergraduate STEM students will be interviewed about how they think about
intelligence, to refine the conceptual and operational definitions of mindset at
the undergraduate level. Based on these results, survey items will be drafted
and refined through cognitive interviews and sorting activities. The internal
structure of the measure will be tested by surveying a second, national sample
of undergraduate STEM students and conducting item response theory analyses on
their responses. Finally, the resulting nomological network (representation of
interrelationships between concepts and observations) will be tested by
administering the new mindset instrument along with measures of related and
unrelated constructs. Testing the nomological network for a construct of
interest means that it should be distinct from and related in expected ways to
other constructs. This new survey might be used by researchers to answer
important questions about mindset in undergraduate students. Alternatively,
instructors could use it to learn about the mindsets of undergraduates in their
classes and tailor their instruction accordingly. Finally, practitioners could
use it to develop and evaluate interventions that aim to increase student
success by encouraging students to shift towards a growth mindset.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported through the EHR Core Research:
Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is
designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high quality fundamental
STEM education research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.