* 1937921
* NSF ADVANCE Catalyst: A Catalyst to Increase the Representation and Advancement of Women and Underrepresented Minorities in Academic STEM Careers at Wichita State University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Rhonda Lewis, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,734.00

Wichita State University (WSU) will implement an ADVANCE Catalyst project to
undertake a comprehensive institutional-assessment and develop a five-year
strategic plan of action with proven strategies for increasing equity for STEM
faculty. WSU is a growing institution with a diverse student enrollment. The
assessment will analyze policies and the underlying systemic issues impacting
the participation, success, and retention of women and URM faculty. The Catalyst
project will create mechanisms to sustain the efforts after the project ends.
The long-term objective is to establish policies, procedures and a community for
the continuous promotion of equity and inclusion that will lead to greater
representation and advancement of the STEM academic workforce of women and
racial and ethnic minorities (underrepresented minorities (URM)) at Wichita
State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year project will prepare the
university for future data collection and data analyses of faculty equity which
can be used by institutional leadership to inform decision-making. The Catalyst
work will also prepare the institution to implement evidence-based strategies to
enhance the university climate for all faculty which will be outlined in a five-
year faculty equity strategic plan that will be produced as part of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at an academic, non-profit institution of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.