* 1937500
* RTML: Large: Efficient and Adaptive Real-Time Learning for Next Generation Wireless Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yanzhi Wang, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,199,000.00

Emerging wireless standards and the promise of 5G communication are driven by
the need to attain faster data rates and ultra-low latency. Many incredible
bleeding-edge applications, such as community/shared virtual reality experiences
and self-driving cars, crucially rely on the ubiquitous availability and real-
time reconfigurability of high-speed wireless links, which in turn strongly
relies on the ability of next-generation wireless devices to perform a broad
variety of inference tasks in real-time. The latency requirements associated
with these applications imply the need for improved and accelerated machine
learning through dedicated hardware. Moreover, due to the unpredictable nature
of the wireless channel, inference algorithms must be able to adapt and evolve
in the presence of an unfamiliar environment. This project seeks to solve this
foundational challenge, with successful outcomes being able to achieve
unprecedented efficiency improvements in next generation wireless systems. Ideas
and findings from the project are incorporated into a number of accessible
seminar talks geared at high-school and undergraduate students, to encourage
further interest in engineering and science, as well as through multi-
disciplinary tutorials aimed at both the wireless networking and machine
learning communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, executed by a
multidisciplinary team of machine learning, systems, and networking researchers,
advances the state of the art through novel deep learning architectures tailored
to inference tasks pertinent to next generation wireless devices. It also
incorporates novel model compression techniques, producing a hardware-friendly
structured pruning approach for fully-connected and convolutional layers of deep
neural networks, combined with a novel quantization scheme learned jointly
during training. The project's quantization scheme and its hyper-parameter
tuning is co-designed with an field programmable gate array (FPGA) hardware
implementation and determined via deep reinforcement learning. The adaptation of
parts of the network in the presence of new samples is enabled by blending
lifelong learning approaches like dynamic networks and complementary learning as
new objectives during training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.