* 1937423
* Collaborative Research: Bioavailability of mineral-associated molybdenum as a cofactor of Nif nitrogenase for N2 fixation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Hailiang Dong, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 361,904.00

Nitrogen (N) is essential for all life. However, most N on Earth is in the form
of atmospheric N2. To be biologically available for uptake, N2 needs to be
converted to ammonia (NH3). Biological conversion of N2 to NH3 is known as N2
fixation and is carried out by specific microbes. These microbes produce certain
proteins, called nitrogenase enzymes, to catalyze the N2 fixation reaction.
Functional nitrogenases however require the element molybdenum (Mo) in their
structures. On the ancient early Earth when the oceans lacked oxygen, Mo should
not have been available to microbes to make Mo-based nitrogenase, because Mo was
found only in solid minerals. However, geological and biological evidence
suggests that Mo-based nitrogenase was present. The goal of this project is to
resolve this paradox. The researchers hypothesize that when dissolved Mo is
limited, bacteria able to fix N2 developed biochemical strategies to release and
extract Mo directly from solid minerals. Experiments will be performed using
combinations of microbial cultures and Mo-bearing minerals under simulated
conditions of early Earth. Microbial strategies for acquiring solid-phase Mo
will be determined using advanced analytical techniques. Insights from this
project will reveal how microorganisms interact with minerals, with important
implications for nutrient cycling, energy flow, soil fertility, and water
quality. The outcome of this project may also shed light on: 1) mobility of
metals and rare earth elements (REEs) in the environment; 2) the formation of
metal and REE deposits; and 3) recovery of metals and REEs from mine
tailings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of the Mo-based nitrogenase before
the Great Oxidation Event when Mo-bearing minerals and rocks were highly
insoluble, raises an apparent paradox. The objective of this project is to
resolve this paradox by testing the following hypothesis: under limiting
concentrations of dissolved Mo, N2-fixing bacteria have developed strategies to
extract Mo directly from minerals and rocks to use in Mo-based nitrogenase.
Three sets of experiments will be designed to test this hypothesis. In the first
experiment, two N2-fixing bacteria, one aerobic, and one anaerobic, will be used
to assess extraction of Mo from Mo-bearing minerals via secretion of Mo binding
metabolites. N2-fixation rate will be measured to determine Mo bioavailability.
In the second experiment, two anaerobic cultures, one Fe(II) oxidizer and one
methanogen, will be incubated with the minerals to study the effects of mineral
dissolution on Mo release. In the third experiment, a simple microbial community
will be constructed to determine the importance of microbial interaction on Mo
bioavailability. Complementary analytical techniques will be used to measure
microbial metabolites, including ICP-MS, LC-MS, and LC-ICP-MS. N2 fixation rates
will be determined by the ARA assay, 15N labelling experiments, and nano-SIMS
imaging. RT-qPCR will be performed to correlate expression levels of specific
functional genes with N2 fixation rate. XRD, SEM, and TEM will be used to
characterize mineralogical changes. Biosignatures from microbial weathering of
Mo-bearing rocks will be determined by TOF-SIMS and
XPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.