* 1937049
* Student Support: 2020 Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference and 48th North American Manufacturing Research Conference; Cincinnati, Ohio; June 22-26, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Arif Malik, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,920.00

This award supports 78 graduate and undergraduate students studying at US
institutions to participate in the co-located conference event consisting of the
2020 International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference sponsored by
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the 48th Annual North American
Manufacturing Research Conference sponsored by the North American Manufacturing
Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers. These two
leading conferences in the Manufacturing Engineering field act as global bridges
between industries, government laboratories, and academic institutions. The
award provides student participants with opportunities to exchange ideas with
leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and governmental
facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic and
international engineering schools. In addition to nurturing a global
manufacturing vision, participants will learn the latest research areas and
results in manufacturing fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
support for conference registration and accommodation for student attendees. The
call for student support applications will be disseminated through postings on
main conference websites, promulgation through conference organizers, track
chairs, and symposium organizers, and direct communication with students
involved in poster session, student design competition and student author
research presentation competition. The submitted applications go through a
selection process by the conference committee. The eligibility criteria to
receive the funding include (1) students must be from US institutions and (2)
students must be actively participating in the conference through presenting a
paper or poster, or participating in a competition, with preference given to
students from underrepresented minorities. After the conference, the list of
student awardees will be announced on the main conference website, in the
Manufacturing Science and Engineering 2019 post-conference report in the
Manufacturing Engineering Division's Newsletter, and in the Award and
Recognition section on the North American Manufacturing Research Institution's
website. This award will enable these students to improve their knowledge of
manufacturing technologies, and help them to become engineers and researchers to
lead the next generation of US manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.