* 1937732
* EAGER: Combined Innovative Methods in Immersion Cooling for High Density Power Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Al-Thaddeus Avestruz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/29/2024
* USD 169,705.00

The miniaturization of power electronics is a key obstacle in the advancement
and proliferation of electric aircraft and vehicles. Electrification of
transportation helps safeguard the environment and mitigates climate change. The
power density and consequently the miniaturization of power electronics is
ultimately limited by the ability to remove heat. More effective and reliable
cooling mechanisms for heat sources with small surface area are needed. For
example, power semiconductor switches that have the highest power density are
directly connected without packaging offering the lowest cost, failure rate, and
thermal resistance. These advantages are often undone by inadequate thermal
transfer from the surface of the chip. Immersion cooling is known to provide the
most reliable and highest performance thermal interface for chip-scale devices;
however, conventionally, immersion cooling relies on gravity-dependent
(physical-orientation dependent) convection or physical pumping, which limits
its application and miniaturization in aviation and mobile applications.
Ultimately, the goal of this project is to create a high reliability sealed
cooling system with no moving parts. This project will help to support of
undergraduate research for women and underrepresented minorities and to uncover
new concepts for the classroom in the thermal management of power
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to investigate combined
methods and materials to greatly enhance the performance of immersion cooling
without boiling. This will involve: (1) investigating the combined cooling
mechanisms that involve different physics that have not been previously examined
and modeled; (2) using new combinations of measurement methods to quantitatively
determine the conditions under which the effective heat transfer coefficient is
improved; and (3) quantitatively determining the stability of new immersion
cooling materials under thermal and physical stress. New materials that undergo
phase change without boiling will be studied. Measurement methods will include
Schlieren imaging using markers for flow and temperature and direct measurement
of the channel temperature of gallium nitride semiconductor
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.