* 1937232
* Collaborative Research: RoL: Impacts of plants and communities on soil microbial composition and function across phylogenetic scales
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Wesley Swingley, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2024
* USD 488,040.00

Soils provide critical ecosystem services that support agriculture, determine
nutrient and carbon cycles, maintain clean air and water, and sustain
biodiversity. These services are controlled by microorganisms, including
bacteria and fungi. Plants can manipulate these microbial communities through
the chemicals they release—root exudates—with subsequent consequences for soil
functions. Characterizing root exudates and their relationships with other plant
traits will improve understanding of plant effects on microbial communities and
the ecosystem services that they provide. This project will use laboratory,
greenhouse, field, and computational approaches to evaluate the effects of plant
root exudates on soil microbial composition and function. The work will be
conducted in the context of restored tallgrass American prairies, an endangered
ecosystem, and deliver our results directly to land owners and natural resource
managers responsible for the creation and maintenance of this landscape.
Additionally, the project provides educational opportunities for members of the
public ranging from high school students to retired adults and will train early-
career scientists in cutting-edge techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a predictive, mechanistic framework to understand how phylogenetic
and functional characteristics of plants and plant communities influence soil
microbial communities and the ecosystem functions via root exudates. It will
combine exometabolomic plant measurements, sampling in a biodiversity
experiment, functional microbial characterizations, and machine learning
approaches to forecast microbial community structure and function in a field
setting. Exudate characterizations from a taxonomically and functionally diverse
pool of plants will greatly advance knowledge of plant biochemistry. The use of
exudates in mesocosm incubation and metabolic characterization experiments will
demonstrate their direct impacts on microbial community structure and function.
The project will also sample soil microbes in a biodiversity experiment and use
machine learning computational approaches to build predictive models of plant
community impacts on soil microbes. These models will be tested in a field
setting using large-scale tallgrass prairie restorations to produce
generalizable conclusions that span molecular- to landscape-
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.