* 1937826
* RAPID: Dissolved carbon transport and CO2 outgassing under an unprecedented long-lasting flood of the Mississippi-Atchafalaya River System
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* YiJun Xu, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 34,272.00

The Mississippi River is experiencing the longest, consecutive days of flooding.
During floods, large amounts of carbon can be transported in rivers. Carbon in
rivers can be in the form of particles or dissolved in the water. The carbon can
also be released to the atmosphere from the river. This project investigates how
much carbon is transported or released in the Mississippi River during prolonged
flooding. The carbon in rivers impacts aquatic species and water quality. The
results of this project increase the understanding of the impact of floods on
carbon dynamics in large rivers. Undergraduate and graduate students participate
in sampling the water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge of the effect of
climate change on river carbon transport and transformation is limited. This
project takes advantage of a unique and unanticipated opportunity to couple
prolonged flooding of the Mississippi River with measurements of carbon flux and
transport. The project intensively measures the partial pressure of dissolved
carbon dioxide, dissolved organic carbon, and dissolved inorganic carbon in the
surface water. These measurements are used to quantify the total dissolved
carbon and carbon dioxide flux from this large river during all flood stages.
The results are used to test hypotheses regarding how changes in river flow
regime may impact in-stream carbon dynamics. Undergraduate and graduate students
receive training in field sampling and data analysis during this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.