* 1937136
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Knowledge Open Network Queries for Research (KONQUER)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Peter Rose, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 999,898.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is
developing new tools to allow researchers to conduct more accurate, informed
research across multiple, disparate scientific domains. The initial efforts will
provide research tools that address national concerns such as health; re-use and
study of data that the public has already funded through federally awarded
grants; and improving training in science, technology, engineering, mathematics,
and medicine. The team includes partnerships with researchers from biomedical,
social, geo-science, and climate science fields and integrates extensive
expertise from data cyberinfrastructure efforts including: DataMed, a biomedical
discovery index previously funded by the National Institutes of Health Big Data
to Knowledge initiative; Data Discovery Studio, a geoscience discovery index
funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF); and Pangeo, a climate science
discovery and integration platform funded by NSF and NASA. During Phase I, the
project will develop a prototype search engine, called KONQUER (Knowledge Open
Network Queries for Research) that will connect these disparate data types and
facilitate queries across the integrated datasets. The initial focus of the
project is on biomedical, geological, and climate science fields; however, the
technology can be extended to cover other scientific disciplines in the
future.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technological advancements have generated a large
volume of data, but finding and analyzing those data in meaningful ways is often
challenging. Real-world scientific questions cross multiple fields. For example,
"Did the precipitation levels in California's Central Valley in 2016 cause an
increase in the number of Valley fever cases?" To answer this question, requires
data from health care, geolocation, and climate science. However, researchers
are traditionally trained in only one field and are not familiar with the data
resources of other disciplines, and even when they are aware of other data
sources, the data may be structured very differently, all of which slows the
process of discovery. KONQUER is envisioned to be a data discovery index capable
of integrating various scientific fields and will use natural language
processing tools (like a Google search) to decompose questions and retrieve
information from the relevant data sources. To achieve this goal the project
team will extend the DATS (DAta Tag Suite) metadata format so that geo/climate
and science/biomedical datasets can be indexed in compatible formats, develop a
pipeline for automated indexing, and develop a search engine that can query and
rank the indexed data. The resulting KONQUER tool will accelerate and transform
research and information retrieval so that new hypotheses and discoveries are
possible across disciplinary boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.