* 1937116
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Communication-network-free, Autonomous, Renewable Electric Power Systems (CARE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Qing-Chang Zhong, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,977.00

The vision for the proposed Engineering Research Center for Communication-
network-free,&lt;br/&gt;Autonomous, Renewable Electric Power Systems (CARE) is
to develop the foundational&lt;br/&gt;research in multiple technical areas,
versatile workforce, inclusive culture, and innovative ecosystems necessary to
achieve autonomous operation of future electric power systems with high
penetration of renewable and distributed energy resources without relying on
communication networks. The ERC will focus on making renewable and distributed
energy resources behave like conventional synchronous machines, bringing
backwards compatibility to power systems. This will ensure continuation of the
mechanism of synchronous machines, which has contributed to growth and stable
operation of power systems for over 100 years. This ERC will also promote
convergent collaborative research and education among engineering systems,
mathematical, social, and psychosocial sciences, and economics, which will
benefit the societies individually and collectively. The planning grant will
conduct three workshops to refine the goals of the proposed ERC, while building
the team and engaging a wide range of stakeholders to achieve these goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed concept of ERC is motivated by the need to
harmonize future power systems with high penetration of renewable and
distributed energy resources, achieve autonomous operation of power systems
without relying on expensive and complex communication networks, and avoid
potential malicious cyber-attacks that could be launched by anybody, at any
time, from anywhere. A divergent&lt;br/&gt;bottom-up approach will be taken to
brainstorm ideas and then a convergent top-down approach will be&lt;br/&gt;taken
to develop the strategic plans for the four foundational components of the ERC
in three themed one-day workshops. The outcomes of the themed workshops will
directly contribute to the preparation of the&lt;br/&gt;full CARE ERC proposal.
This planning grant will help the team to further advance the seed idea of the
proposed CARE ERC in terms of its four foundational components: Research,
Innovation Ecosystem, Engineering Workforce Development, and Diversity and
Culture of Inclusion, into a solid ERC proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.