* 1937070
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Built Infrastructure Geospatial Data Acquisition, Visualization, and Analysis (BIGDAVA)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Michael Bailey, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,999.00

Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Built Infrastructure Geospatial
Data Acquisition, Visualization, and Analysis (BIGDAVA)&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Critical infrastructure (buildings, roadways, water systems,
sewer systems, etc.) in both urban and rural settings in the U.S. continues to
degrade, receiving poor ratings by experts and causing significant economic and
societal stress. Important cultural monuments also continue to deteriorate with
limited resources available for maintenance. These vital infrastructure and
monuments are further threatened by a variety of hazards such as earthquakes,
landslides, tornadoes, hurricanes, and flooding. Simultaneously, leaps in
digital technology are moving us towards the promise of Smart Cities. The
Internet of Things (IoT), 5G networks, micro-satellites, crowd sharing, and
autonomous vehicles all offer or require a higher level of intelligent
interaction with our infrastructure. Advanced geospatial data (maps) are
available for the management, monitoring, and upgrading of our infrastructure
including technologies such as lidar (light detection and ranging) and unmanned
aircraft system (UAS or drone) imaging. Our economy is becoming increasingly
reliant on timely geospatial information in order to make more informed and
faster decisions. Nevertheless, requirements for the effective use of geospatial
technology are high and there is a growing workforce shortage with the
appropriate level of expertise. At the same time, there are limited offerings at
universities and technical schools of dedicated courses focused on geomatics and
geospatial technology fundamentals, particularly within civil engineering
programs, which produce the engineers who build and maintain infrastructure.
This planning grant is an important step to develop an Engineering Research
Center (ERC) that can provide vital resources enhancing accessibility to
geospatial data and expansion of opportunities for geospatial education across
the country. Increasingly large 3D geospatial data sets require high-end
workstations, skilled programmers, and expensive software to leverage advanced
visualization and analysis capabilities. Data processing often includes tedious
manual tasks, leading to subjectivity in processing and limiting the value of
rich, quantitative information. Despite these challenges, the return on
investment (ROI) from geospatial technologies can be tremendous, especially for
public entities who utilize these technologies in asset management. The vision
of the ERC BIGDAVA is to provide state-of-the-art solutions to address these
challenges using a convergent, interdisciplinary model that provides novel
research into geospatial data applications that enhance our built infrastructure
including 3D planning, design and construction processes, increased resilience
to natural hazards, and digital preservation of important cultural heritage -
both natural and anthropogenic. This planning grant will build the foundation
for the ERC through workshops for diverse stakeholders to identify key
bottlenecks as well as building a highly skilled team of academics and industry
experts who can develop and disseminate novel solutions.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
and implement this vision to provide these benefits, many technical challenges
need to be addressed through the research activities of the ERC. While a variety
of geospatial analysis algorithms and processing software exist, most available
solutions cannot scale to the sizes of datasets now being regularly collected
and will not be effective as the technology continues to advance. As a result,
people are forced to work with small subsets of the actual data. Smarter
algorithms, data models, and visualization techniques are needed to exploit the
full potential of these new datasets. Technological advances such as GPU
architecture, Deep Learning, and Artificial Intelligence are well-suited to the
creation of smarter algorithms, since they enable more efficient processing of
large datasets. The proposed ERC will explore new approaches that more
efficiently extract usable information from these extremely large and
incompatible datasets via visual interaction and exploitation of these new
technologies. With these new algorithms and integrated approach, new scientific
insights and discoveries will be possible. Today many scientists spend a
significant portion of their time managing data and multiple software programs
rather than exploring innovative, scientific hypotheses. A key goal of the
eventual ERC will be to develop innovative data processing solutions that enable
more widespread and effective use of these rich datasets, allowing downstream
users to focus less on managing data and more on how to leverage the information
to address the needs of a digital society. The planning grant activities will
support identifying and building the required diverse expertise in teams and
gather the multiple stakeholders necessary for advancing the research,
educational, inclusion, and innovation goals of the potential BIGDAVA
ERC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.