* 1937259
* MODULUS: Modulation of microbial community dynamics by spatial partitioning
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Lingchong You, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2023
* USD 824,903.00

Microbes are ubiquitous in nature. Existing in every imaginable habitat, they
form complex communities that carry out diverse functions enabling them to
modulate systems that impact a wide swath of biological domains ranging from
human health to environmental and biotechnological applications. Members of
microbial communities communicate and interact by producing and responding to
signaling molecules, exchanging genetic materials, and competing or
collaborating to gain resources or cope with stress. These myriad of
interactions raise several fundamental questions regarding the evolutionary and
ecological forces that shape the function and stability of microbial
communities. Leveraging the observation that a microbial community is often
partitioned into sub-communities that differ with respect to composition and
local interactions, investigators use a combination of mathematical modeling and
experimental analysis of engineered microbial consortia to explore the
fundamental mechanisms underlying spatial partitioning and maintenance of
biodiversity and function. Molecular to community scale mathematical models
developed as a result of the project will be used to discover generalizable
rules relating spatial partitioning and interactions of microbes to
microecological scale phenotypes and dynamics. Such insights can form the
foundation of design principles that govern the development and use of synthetic
microbial consortia. The project will also provide opportunities for
undergraduates and graduate students to participate in interdisciplinary
research through the "The Blue Devil Resistome Project", a hands on one-year
project that involves students in the collection, survey, and analysis of
environmental bacteria across the Duke University campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive progress has been made in elucidating the
function and dynamics of microbial communities, primarily relying on survey-
oriented approaches (e.g., sequencing analysis of natural communities). While
these studies have generated insight regarding the composition of microbial
communities and how composition correlates with environmental conditions, they
offer limited mechanistic insights into the maintenance and function of
microbial communities. To date, efforts to address this question have focused on
how microbes interact and how such interactions shape the dynamics and function
of the overall community. This project explores a global, yet underappreciated,
factor in microbiome organization and function, the partitioning of a microbial
community into isolated or semi-isolated local communities. Partitioning often
arises from spatial segregation in a given environment, such as spatial
partitioning of the gut or microecological niches in the soil microbiome
resulting from different soil particle sizes. Investigators use synthetic
biology and microfluidic methods to engineer cooperative or competitive
communities of varying spatial partitions, and employ systems and ecologically
driven mathematical modeling to explore how spatial partitioning differentially
impacts engineered synthetic consortia composed of competitive, cooperative, or
complex mixtures of cooperative and competitive species. As the field of
microbial ecology shifts from characterizing the structure of natural microbial
communities to determination of community function and maintenance, results from
this project will contribute to the discovery of fundamental principles that
govern biodiversity, the emergences of microecological niches in various
biological environments, and inform the development of design rules and
constraints for the development of synthetic microbial consortia. This award was
co-funded by Systems and Synthetic Biology in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and the Mathematical Biology Program of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.