* 1937043
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Product Design and Manufacturing Graph-As-A-Service
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Binil Starly, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 900,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
facilitate innovation by lowering the barriers for developers and designers to
engage in product design and manufacturing activities. This project will
initiate the development of a tool in which algorithmic design bots will assist
and collaboratively aid a novice user to design personalized consumer products.
The goal of this Phase-I Convergence Accelerator project is to bring together a
team of experts ranging from engineering, cognitive sciences, and computer
sciences, along with broader stakeholders including industry, non-profits, and
government scientists to build a technology roadmap for the design and
implementation of an Open Knowledge Network Graph in Product Design and
Manufacturing (called M-OKN). Project activities will be informed by input
provided by future users through a customer discovery process. The long-term
goal of this project is to lower the barriers for students, entrepreneurs, and
even experts to design new products without having to rely on significant
experience and subject matter expertise in manufacturing. The end goal is to
develop a tool that can help improve U.S. competitiveness in advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every object around us that has been
produced by humans required extensive design effort, whether it is an everyday
consumer product or a large and complex engineered system. Yet, much of the
knowledge required to design products and to manufacture them resides primarily
in human minds - developed over years of experience or published in the form of
books, articles, blogs, and online videos. Such knowledge can often only be
gained by intensive study in fields of product engineering or requires extensive
research and trial and error. The goal of this project is to make design and
product development more accessible by developing a product design and
manufacturing knowledge network that links 3-D product model information,
including the visual relationships between parts, with underlying meta-data that
includes detailed part information and data associated with the manufacturing of
the part. A large amount of unstructured, structured, and semi-categorized data
will be collected from the web and will be further processed and analyzed using
novel geometric deep learning and natural language processing algorithms. The
collected data and computational tools will be refined to create a knowledge
network that powers design bots that can answer queries and assist design.
Ultimately the research community, students, and the general public will obtain
access to this open-sourced knowledge network which can help accelerate
manufacturing innovation and entrepreneurship. In addition, the M-OKN project
will advance new convergence research at the interface of design and
manufacturing sciences with informatics and artificial
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.