* 1937129
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Digital Twins in Engineering and Medicine
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Adrian Lew, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Decisions are made every day about medical procedures such as surgeries or drug
treatments: they affect and condition the future of patients. They are based on
established best practices, but do not necessarily account for the individual
traits of a person. A similar decision-making process can be found in complex
engineering systems, or the maintenance schedule of an aircraft. During the last
decade however,it has been recognized that the transition to personalized
medicine will potentially enhance the life of patients and increase the quality
of clinical care, as well as potentially lower the overall healthcare costs. A
similar observation has been made regarding complex engineering systems, with a
call to develop cyber-physical systems and dynamic data processes that use
massive amounts of data to drive individual smart machines. The practical
realization of this transition requires 1) the development of a new technology
for extracting meaningful information from data and interpreting it correctly,
2) an accompanying plan for educating the future workforce in this global area,
and 3) the identification and resolution of the associated ethical and privacy
issues. This planning grant will develop the vision for the proposed Center to
influence this transformation during the next two decades by influencing the
health monitoring and decision-making processes of living and non-living
physical entities in these important areas using digital twins. These are
digital replicas of living and non-living physical entities. Their underlying
concept integrates artificial intelligence, machine learning, and software
analytics with physics-based modeling. Their main purpose is to act as living
digital simulation models that are continuously trained and updated to be able
to mirror the states and behaviors of their physical
counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will focus on planning the
development of a Center that will integrate research groups working on core
technologies for digital twins, such as algorithms, hardware, software,physics-
based machine learning, and mathematics and statistics, with counterparts
working on three significantly different application areas: aircraft health
monitoring; customized weight loss programs; and qualification of metal 3D
printed parts. This integration will define the common requirements for digital
twins, advance these application areas and explore their societal and ethical
implications. This will establish a multi-disciplinary dialog between
mathematicians, engineers, medical doctors, lawyers and philosophers, and a
convergent vision for how to shape the future of this technology. The grant will
enable an Exploratory Workshop that will serve to identify the broad stakeholder
community in academia and the corporate world and government, form the team and
management structure, and most importantly, define a multi-disciplinary,
convergent vision for a future Engineering Research Center in Digital Twins for
Engineering and Medicine. The dialog that this planning grant will foster on the
subjects of digital twins, engineering workforce development, diversity and
culture of inclusion, and innovation ecosystem will build new connections
between a diverse group of researchers and practitioners from different
institutions and disciplines and identify the potential members of the Center.
Additionally, explicit efforts are planned to engage partners from institutions
that serve primarily underrepresented minorities in the activities of this
planning grant. The impact of the newly formed connections with a shared
interest in digital twins, in line with the idea of fostering a convergent
research, has the potential to spring other areas of collaboration in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.