* 1937487
* RTML: Small: Achieving Real-Time and Energy-efficient Computing for 5G Networks (ARTEN): A Deep Reservoir Computing Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Yang Yi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Fueled by the popularity of smartphones as well as the upcoming deployment of
the fifth-generation (5G) mobile broadband wireless networks, mobile data
traffic is projected to have an explosive growth in the near future. In 5G
wireless networks, enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) and massive machine type
communications (mMTC) are regarded as two primary use cases for 5G radios where
eMBB supports stable connections with very high data rates for low-speed mobile
users as well as moderate data rates for high-speed mobile users, and eMTC
supports a massive number of Internet of Things (IoT) devices which are only
sporadically active to transmit small data payloads. In this project, novel
machine-learning-based hardware and customized efficient training algorithms
tailored towards 5G eMBB and mMTC will be introduced to achieve real-time and
energy-efficient computing for 5G wireless networks. The proposed research will
involve training of both graduate and undergraduate students in circuit design,
computing, communications, and networking. Through the development of
application-oriented projects and various outreach activities supported by
Virginia Tech's outreach programs, undergraduates including students from
underrepresented groups in STEM will have opportunities to develop creative and
independent problem-solving skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to develop a novel deep-learning-based hardware and software co-
design platform to achieve real-time and energy-efficient computing for 5G
wireless networks focusing on eMBB and mMTC. To be specific, 1) deep-learning-
based integrated circuits and architectures will be designed to achieve real-
time and energy-efficient learning; and 2) hardware-software-algorithm co-design
with customized low-complexity online training algorithms will be introduced to
realize high data rate symbol detection for eMBB as well as to realize
distributed contention-based random-access strategies for mMTC. Both software
and hardware testbeds will be developed to evaluate proposed hardware designs
and learning algorithms. The success of the project will potentially
revolutionize the telecommunication industry by incorporating machine learning
and deep learning to the future 5G wireless devices and
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.