* 1937879
* STTR Phase I:  The xAristotle Platform for Advanced X-ray Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Devon Mortensen, easyXAFS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2021
* USD 160,034.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project takes several forms. The basic product enables new hands-on
undergraduate instruction in advanced x-ray methods for use in development of
electrical energy storage and catalysis systems. Next, upgraded versions of this
product will open a new market for use of these x-ray methods in industrial
quality control and expand the market for the same methods in specialized
research in academia and national labs. Likely applications include quality
control for lithium-ion-battery components, research into catalysts and
electrocatalysts in the clean energy sector, and rapid screening of engineered
nanophases for many applications spanning from clean energy to consumer
products.

The proposed project addresses the core problem posed by the absence of entry-
level capability for the advanced x-ray method known as x-ray absorption fine
structure, or XAFS. Here, by entry level, we mean suitable in cost and
performance for use in undergraduate education in advanced instructional
laboratories in chemistry, physics, chemical engineering and materials science,
or similarly suitable for use in certain applications in industry and academia
where very high access but relatively low technical capability is required. We
will build on existing prototype capabilities to develop miniaturized benchtop
XAFS capability capable of attaching to an existing x-ray diffraction source.
Effort will include testing of different optical and detector components and
work to decrease background scattering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.