* 1937811
* Cell-Free Systems Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Michael Jewett, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 26,620.00

The Cell-Free Systems Conference will be held in Boston, Massachusetts on
December 4-6, 2019. This conference is the first one to be held in the United
States that addresses the achievements and challenges of cell-free platforms.
Organized under the auspices of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers
(AIChE), this international conference will bring together renowned experts,
established researchers, young investigators, private sector scientists and
engineers, and graduate students to assess the state of cell-free system
technologies and to identify the challenges of abandoning traditional metabolic
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological manufacturing is a common method
to produce a vast array of chemicals used in the fields of energy, agriculture,
and medicine. Historically, the pathways required to synthesize these chemicals
have been genetically engineered into living cells such as yeast and bacteria.
This approach is often hindered by other pathways already present in the cell,
leading to low production yield and/or cell mortality. A cell-free systems
approach aims to use synthetic biology to recreate the minimal transcriptional
and translational machinery requisite to synthesize a desired chemical outside
of a cell, therefore bypassing the regulatory feedback and suppression inherent
within a complex living cell. More specifically, this conference will address
important issues regarding the current state of cell-free systems in
manufacturing, small molecule and therapeutic protein discovery, prototyping,
diagnostics, and education. The proceedings of the conference will be peer-
reviewed and disseminated to the public on AIChE's
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.