* 1937899
* The Dynamics and Variability of the South American Low-Level Jet (SALLJ)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Leila Carvalho, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2024
* USD 486,848.00

The South American Low-level Jet (SALLJ) flows southward along the eastern
slopes of the Andes, with its maximum wind speed about a mile above the surface.
The jet is a key component of the climate of South America as it brings moisture
from the tropical Atlantic to inland regions of the continent. It also
contributes to the formation of mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) and the
extreme weather they produce. In many ways the SALLJ is analogous to the Great
Plains low-level jet (GPLLJ) that flows northward along the eastern side of the
Rockies and brings moisture from the Gulf of Mexico to the breadbasket of the
plains. But research on the GPLLJ dates back to at least the 1950s while the
SALLJ was not extensively documented until the 1980s. Also, most of the research
on the SALLJ is focused on the central Andes, from southern Peru to Paraguay (on
the east side), and the extension of the SALLJ into Columbia and Venezuela was
not documented until 2010. The distinction between the central and northern
Andes is significant, as the two regions differ in their climate, large-scale
circulation regimes, and connections to climate modes like El
Nino.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here the Principal Investigators (PIs) conduct a
comprehensive examination of the SALLJ, including both the northern and central
Andes. Preliminary work by the PIs shows a strong difference in seasonality
between the SALLJ between two regions, with relatively muted seasonality in the
central Andes but a distinct summer minimum in the north. This difference
prompts the PIs to hypothesize that different mechanisms could be involved in
the northern Andes, where factors such as the strength and position of the North
Atlantic Subtropical High could be relevant. A further issue is the impact of
variability in the northern branch on the central branch. These issues are
explored through examination of meteorological data and numerical simulations
using two climate models (CESM2 and ECHAM6).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
broader impacts due to the impact of SALLJ variability on water resources and
extreme weather over inland South America. The PIs work with partners at the
Brazilian National Center for Monitoring and Early Warning of Natural Disasters
to develop tools for monitoring and forecasting SALLJ activity and extreme
precipitation. The PIs also conduct local outreach through seminars on climate
variability, climate change, and their socioeconomic impacts, presented during
their department's Geography Awareness week. The project supports a PhD student
and a postdoctoral research associate, thereby providing support and training to
the next generation of researchers in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.