* 1937827
* Developing a Digital Sketching Application That Delivers Personalized Feedback to Improve Student Learning and Engagement in Micropaleontology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Tracy Hammond, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
geoscience education. It focuses on micropaleontology, which is the study of
microscopic fossils in rocks, sand, and other geological samples. Information
about the type and number of microfossils in a sample is useful for
understanding the history of the earth. It also has applications in oil,
engineering, mining, and other industries. This project will develop new
teaching materials and an interactive software application to help students to
learn how to identify microfossils. This application, called FossilSketch, will
help students make accurate digital sketches of microfossils on touch-screen
devices. Once a student has made an initial sketch of a microfossil using
FossilSketch, the software will use an artificial intelligence algorithm to
provide automated, instantaneous feedback on the sketch. By working to improve
the accuracy of their sketches, students will develop the knowledge and
observational skills needed to identify microfossils in real samples. This
mastery will not only help students learn micropaleontology, but also enhance
their ability to use micropaleontology in undergraduate research projects. Thus,
the project has the potential to enhance geosciences education without
increasing faculty workload. In addition, by supporting student success, it can
also broaden participation of students in geosciences majors and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FossilSketch will be the first teaching tool in
micropaleontology that combines pen-and-touch technology with principles of
sketch recognition to train undergraduate students. The application will focus
on Foraminifera and Ostracoda, the two taxonomic groups most actively used in
geological and environmental studies. This project aims to examine the impact of
this sketch-recognition based tutoring system on students' comprehension and
retention of micropaleontological concepts. It will also measure the impact of
the system on students' interest and self-efficacy in geosciences. The
FossilSketch system will be web-based and platform independent, so that it can
work on all devices and be accessible to a wide audience. Novel, microfossil-
specific sketch recognition algorithms will be developed to accommodate the
distinct morphological diversity of microfossils, support increased sketch-
recognition accuracy and speed, and provide improved feedback mechanisms for
students and instructors. The classroom use of FossilSketch will be assessed in
several geoscience courses at Texas A&amp;M University. Project outcomes and the
FossilSketch software will be shared through the project website, professional
development workshops, and publications. This project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources
Program, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.