* 1937107
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Health Care Transformation (ERC-HCT)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Melissa Moss, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2021
* USD 92,579.00

Significant issues in U.S. healthcare delivery persist despite advances in
medicine, technologies, health policies, regulations, and resources. U.S. has
the greatest medical science in the world, that is unable to provide consistent,
affordable care for all citizens. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) attributes
more than 100,000 deaths a year to preventable medical errors, resulting from
system lapses that fail to deliver well-established standards of practice.
Quality, safety, and coordination issues suggest that barriers to transforming
U.S. healthcare are complex system engineering problems. Efforts to share
information across healthcare systems has many unaddressed barriers. This
planning grant is driven by a vision of an Engineering Research Center for
Health Care Transformation (ERC-HCT) focused on reengineering delivery of
healthcare through a multi-pronged approach that integrates information
technology, systems engineering, social sciences, medical science, and health
informatics. The primary aim is to advance the science for reengineering U.S.
health care delivery from today's costly, inconsistent provider-centric system
to a better coordinated person-centered care system. This vision, guided by
medical professionals, industry partners, and behavioral scientists, will create
care improvements and sustainable, scalable integrated delivery models. The
Planning Grant will engage partners to develop a common, deeper understanding of
barriers and opportunities afforded by today's technologies as a basis for
clarifying strategies and shaping the management structure of the proposed
Engineering Research Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant brings
together a diverse team of researchers from the University of South Carolina,
Clemson University, Claflin, University of Kentucky College of Medicine, and the
PRISMA Health System, to develop a common, deeper understanding of barriers and
opportunities afforded by today?s technologies. ERC-HCT will bring together
expertise and research that generally functions in silos, eluding significant
progress in system-level transformation. While most funded healthcare
translational research supports evidence-based medicine, the proposed ERC-HCT
fills a gap by addressing healthcare delivery optimization at a system level, a
stubbornly intractable challenge. We will focus on advancing the fundamental
sciences essential to address four key research thrusts: care coordination,
clinical decision support, population health management, and personalized
health. Sciences to be addressed include artificial intelligence, data science,
biomedicine, health IT, complex system engineering, and human-computer
interaction. Research will inform healthcare practice, payment, public policy,
and provide a rich innovation ecosystem to prepare future leaders and attract
new innovative researchers to partner universities, contributing to
sustainability. As stakeholders work toward solutions, we anticipate that their
views will coalesce around realistic possibilities and pathways forward for
achieving the vision for a better engineered, patient-centered healthcare
delivery system. The planning grant activities will focus on engaging these
stakeholders to establish leadership, determine a governance structure for the
ERC, and develop detailed strategies and action plans to sustain convergence
across multiple ongoing research and testbed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.