* 1937201
* The Genetics and Neural Mechanisms of Preference Learning
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Erica Westerman, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 801,104.00

Picking a mate is one of the most important decisions an animal makes during its
lifetime, as mate selection has a large impact on the number of offspring,
offspring genotype, and offspring success. For these reasons the mate selection
process has featured prominently in scientific research, and has been used as a
scaffold for enhancing understanding of sensory processing, behavioral
plasticity, decision making, and reproductive isolation. Mate preferences
associated with the mate selection process can either be learned, or innate and
genetically determined. Learned preferences are prevalent in animal taxa yet
remain poorly understood: neither neurological mechanisms driving them nor genes
underlying these processes have been identified. However, recent description of
the genome of the butterfly Bicyclus anynana is facilitating the identification
of genes and neural mechanisms underlying preference learning. Using this
butterfly, the researcher has identified a suite of genes associated with
preference learning. The researcher will utilize genome editing to determine
which of these genes influence preference learning. They will then assess how
sensory processing influences preference learning, thus connecting genes, neural
processes, and mate selection behavior. To enhance public understanding of
visual communication while raising awareness of the local pollinator community,
the researcher will utilize the charismatic nature of butterflies to engage
hundreds of students of all ages in a Citizen Science Research project. This
project examines the seasonality and behavior of the butterfly community of
Northwest Arkansas in collaboration with a local non-profit botanical garden,
and will provide a baseline for future research on pollinator community health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the potential for high learning error
rates, learned mate preferences were historically thought to be substantially
less common than genetically determined mate preferences, particularly in
species without parental care, where young are not guaranteed regular contact
with conspecifics during development. However, recent research has shown that
learned preferences are far more common than previously thought. Genetically
determined learning biases would reduce learning error rates, and may help
explain the prevalence of mate preference learning in animals. However, this
hypothesis has yet to be tested, as genes for mate preference learning, and the
neurological mechanisms underlying mate preference learning, have yet to be
identified. In this project, the researcher will utilize an integrative approach
combining genome editing, transcriptomics, behavioral manipulation, and
electrophysiology to identify mate preference learning genes, describe the role
of these genes in the mate preference learning process, and identify the neural
pathways associated with positive and negative memory formation, using the
butterfly Bicyclus anynana. This research will fill gaps in knowledge of mate
preference development, and will facilitate future research on behavioral
plasticity, genetics of sensory biases, and evolutionary theory concerning the
role of learning in ornament diversity and speciation. Furthermore, the
researcher will collaborate with a local non-profit botanical garden to engage
the public in a field-based Citizen Science Research project examining the
seasonality of, and the effect of the sensory environment on, the local
butterfly community. This project will engage hundreds of community members in
the study of visual communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.