* 1937333
* NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NSE) 2019 Grantees Conference, To Be Held  At The Westin Alexandria, Alexandria, VA, December 9-10, 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Daniel Herr, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2020
* USD 99,999.00

The NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NSE) 2019 Grantees Conference is a
two-day annual event that brings together nanoscale educators, researchers, and
experimentalists from academia, government, and industry to highlight
information on the research and education activities funded by NSF NSE grants.
The primary goals are to promote dissemination of innovative research progress,
to facilitate research partnerships, and to identify future research directions.
Panel discussions will be moderated by NSF-funded researchers as well as NSF
Program Directors. The conference helps advance the goals of the NSF and the
U.S. National Nanotechnology Initiative. Conference materials are made available
to the wider audience following the event at the website: www.nseresearch.org,
along with archival information from previous events.

The NSE grantees conference will foster interaction among academic, government,
and industry researchers in nanotechnology fields. Keynote presentations and
interactive panel discussions on the grand challenges in and convergence of
nanotechnology generate opportunities for creative interdisciplinary
collaboration. Identification and exploration of future trends in nanotechnology
and cyberinfrastructure enable researchers and industry to prepare to fully
capitalize on next-generation capabilities. The first day of the conference will
focus on Progress in foundational nanotechnology and infrastructure: Nanoscale
processes in neural systems; AI confluence with nanoscale modeling, design and
systems; Quantum phenomena in nanobio and environmental systems, Cell
Nanocomponents and Synthetic Biology, Nanomachines; and Nano research centers,
NNCI and Nano-HUB. The second day will feature Grand opportunities and
convergence: Nanosustainability and Nanoplastics in Environment; Nano-
biosensing; Metamaterials; Nano-Geosciences and convergence; Convergence
approaches - accelerators; Convergence Learning challenges; and Societal and
environmental aspects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.