* 1937290
* Structural Health Monitoring of Biofilms for Sustainable Reactive Nitrogen Management
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Aaron Packman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 329,135.00

Nitrogen pollution in water causes numerous environmental and public health
problems. Among the most pressing include the contamination of drinking water
sources with nitrates and stimulation of harmful algal blooms. Although we have
known about the importance of controlling nitrogen nutrient release for decades,
new and more efficient technologies are needed to prevent nitrogen pollution. A
promising technology to remove nitrogen pollution from wastewater is the use of
membrane bioreactors. Membrane bioreactors use biofilms (naturally occurring
microbial communities attached to surfaces) to create the appropriate conditions
for efficient nitrogen removal. This project will develop new state-of-the-
science tools and advanced modeling approaches to address gaps in our
understanding of the mechanical and structural properties of biofilms. Doing so
will help improve the performance of bioreactors to efficiently clean water and
prevent nitrogen pollution. Biofilms are very common in nature, so results of
this research will benefit many other scientific areas, including the removal of
other pollutants from water and preventing the growth of harmful biofilms.
Additional benefits of this project include the training of underrepresented
students, thus increasing the diversity of the Nationâ€™s STEM workforce.
Educational outreach to grade-school students and community groups will increase
understanding of the importance of controlling nitrogen pollution and increase
the scientific literacy of the Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofilms -
microbial communities attached to surfaces - play critical roles in both
engineered bioreactors and natural environments. Despite the importance of
biofilm structure as an essential mediator of biofilm growth and activity,
relatively little is known about the relationship between biofilm structure and
mechanical properties that control retention of biomass in the biofilm. This
knowledge gap must be addressed if we are to understand how these properties can
be modulated to increase efficiency in biofilm reactors. To address this
knowledge gap, the PIs propose to employ a novel methodology, termed Optical
Coherence Elastography (OCE), to probe the relationship between mesoscale
biofilm viscoelastic mechanical properties, structure, and bulk nitrogen (N)
transformation rates. The project team will employ OCE to develop fundamental
understanding of biofilm properties in partial nitritation and combined
nitritation-anammox biofilm reactors. These two promising technologies for
energy-efficient wastewater treatment depend directly on precise control of the
retention and activity of key N-cycling microbial populations in biofilms.
Efforts will be organized around two specific objectives. Objective will be to
investigate how commonly used engineering controls (hydrodynamic regime, surface
loading rate, and feeding strategy) influence coupling between mesoscale
mechanical properties, mesoscale physical structure, and microscale composition
in partial nitritation biofilms. The second objective is to determine how
mesoscale biofilm properties control key functional outcomes (bulk N
transformation and biomass detachment rates) in partial nitritation and combined
nitritation-anammox biofilms. To integrate fundamental scientific advances with
engineering applications, the project team will link microscale-mesoscale-
macroscale biofilm phenomena observed in laboratory bioreactors to predictive
model development for full-scale biofilm-based wastewater treatment systems.
Improved understanding of mesoscale biofilm structure, biomechanics, and
emergent system function will provide a basis for effective monitoring,
modeling, and control of biofilm properties in engineered bioreactors, analogous
to structural health monitoring for civil infrastructure and mechanical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.