* 1937121
* PLANNING GRANT: Engineering Research Center for Empathetically Engineered Profitable Housing (CEEPH)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Patrick Phelan, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,935.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
human population continues to grow, the strain on our natural resources will
also increase. Basic human needs for water, food, and shelter cannot be met
without energy and resource consumption. In fact, approximately 40% of the
energy consumption is attributed to housing (i.e., heating and cooling, cooking,
waste disposal, entertainment, etc.). Our current practices for supplying these
needs with current singular-use technologies are not as efficient as they could
be in combination with other technologies. However, the adoption of more
efficient technologies is outside the affordability of most of the populations.
The primary goal of a planning grant for a Center for Empathetically Engineered
Profitable Housing (CEEPH) is to develop the science, engineering, financial,
policy-related, and social information required to create homely single-family
and multi-tenant housing that are also profitable for their owners. In other
words, these housings would generate revenues sufficient to pay the cost of
their financing and to provide the owners with an additional income while
meeting the design needs for residential use, and home-based businesses. A
secondary goal of the CEEPH is to include as diverse a perspective in the
research as possible, which will be accomplished through a diverse group of
researchers from the collaborating universities as well as stakeholders involved
in the planning grant. The planning grant will be crucial to bring together this
diverse (in terms of disciplines, gender, race, and backgrounds) group of
researchers and stakeholders to developing the ERC activities and management. We
envision dwellings that generate surplus electricity, require zero or near-zero
water input, supply the owners with food via hydroponics and additional income
streams, while ensuring satisfaction in home-ownership through empathetic and
collaborative design. CEEPH will also serve as a regional resource for workforce
development through training regional contractors, architects, house subsystem
service providers, city leaders, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An ERC in this area
has the potential to foster the interdisciplinary discovery of novel scientific
and engineering knowledge that could significantly improve all humans' impact on
our environment through the development of environmentally friendly and
sustainable technologies. The Center would be founded on the fundamentally
transformative principle that integrated residential power generation and
potable water production from human and household organic waste (among other
solutions) is a scientifically sound and socio-economically viable and
responsible approach. In addition, a potential Center's research outcomes would
have far more disruptive impacts on current housing designs as we propose an
active and living ecosystem that is self-sustained by internal symbiosis and
synergy. One of the important pillars of the planning grant for the proposed
CEEPH is the inclusion of all aspects of housing design with numerous
stakeholders' input. This planning grant will provide an opportunity for
potential ERC participants and stakeholders to participate in a two-day
intensive discussion at Mississippi State University to strengthen the
development of the goals for the proposed ERC, communication pathways, plans for
an inclusive environment, and identification of additional stakeholders. The
planning grant activities will focus on the development of diverse
interdisciplinary teams and address challenges related to team science by
establishing pathways to strong communication and collaboration between the
scientists, engineers, economists, policy researchers, architects, and
stakeholders. Since the proposed Center activities could have significant
impacts in developing countries, the planning grant will be used to identify
international partners that would benefit from these discoveries and give a
global prospective on the impacts of center's activities. Consequently, outcomes
of this planning grant activities help prepare for the anticipated center?s
research on empathetically designed housing models that will be self-sustainable
and profit-deriving sources for the homeowners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.