* 1937300
* CONFERENCE: Protein Folding on the Ribosome; December 14-16, 2019; Berlin, Germany
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Edward O'Brien, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The 2019 Annual Meeting on Protein Folding on the Ribosome will be held at the
Charite University of Berlin in Berlin, Germany on December 16-18, 2019.
Understanding nascent protein behavior in the cellular context presents a host
of challenges both theoretically and experimentally. This meeting will bring
together leading experts to present their latest research, identify crucial
questions and key challenges that could be addressed through a combined
theoretical and experimental effort. This international meeting will be attended
by faculty, postdocs and graduate students. It is expected that this meeting
will strengthen US science by bringing together US-based scientists at different
career stages to discuss cutting-edge results on an exciting area at the
intersection of genetics and molecular biophysics. Travel assistance to US
graduate students and postdocs to attend this international meeting will promote
the training of a global workforce and support their career development through
various networking opportunities with scientists around the world.

The past several years has seen high impact publications describing co-
translational protein folding and other co-translational processes have emerged.
Experiments utilizing single molecule techniques, cryo-EM, deep sequencing and a
variety of other methods have generated a wealth of data that can inform both
theory and simulation and thereby provide fundamental insights into the physical
principles of nascent protein folding. Concurrently, theory and simulation
methods are also being developed to model the length and time scales of such
large biological systems. At this crucial juncture, with advances being made on
many fronts, it is important to bring together theoreticians and
experimentalists to map out how these two communities can move the nascent
protein folding field forward together. The topics this conference will cover
include: mRNA sequence evolution under the constraints of co-translational
processes, co-translational protein quality control system, protein folding on
the ribosome probed experimentally and theoretically, the coupling of co-
translational processes to translation-elongation kinetics, nascent protein
maturation: chaperones, targeting and membrane translocation and downstream
processes influenced by what happens during protein biogenesis. This meeting is
supported by the Molecular Biophysics and the Genetic Mechanism Clusters of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.