* 1937347
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying crustal hydration effects in the Colorado Plateau from xenoliths
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Dennis Newell, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 171,072.00

The Colorado Plateau in the western United States incorporates spectacular
natural landscapes, such as Grand Canyon, Zion, and Arches National Parks. This
region was at sea level 100 million years ago and now sits at an elevation of
about 2 kilometers above sea level. However, the reasons why surface elevations
in this region increased are not well understood. This project will investigate
the viability of one of several proposed mechanisms that have generated
considerable debate over the last several decades. Specifically, this research
will address whether hydration of Earth’s crust by water derived from a
subducted fragment of the Pacific oceanic plate reduced its density and caused
the ground surface to rise. This is based on the same principles that govern how
high blocks of wood with different densities will float in water. The results of
this research could have far-reaching implications because causal mechanisms for
high elevations in the broader Rocky Mountain region and High Plains (including
Denver, the “Mile High City”) may be due to processes that also affect other
mountainous regions such as the Andes. Common educational themes among all of
the activities in this project include graduate and undergraduate education and
training, international collaborations with researchers in France, and
enhancement of underrepresented minority students in Earth
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the hypothesis that
hydrous alteration changed the mineralogical makeup and associated density
structure of the Colorado Plateau lower crust and contributed significantly to
its 2 kilometers surface uplift via isostatic adjustment. This research will
integrate new petrologic, geochronologic, and stable hydrogen isotopic studies
of a suite of crustal xenoliths from the approximately 25-million-year-old
Navajo Volcanic Field. A post-hydration (present-day) model of the central
Colorado Plateau crust will be developed that incorporates new observations from
xenoliths, and ensures compatibility with modern seismic and other geophysical
data. This will be evaluated along with a pre-hydration model for the crust that
is based on detailed xenolith analyses. Calculated differences in pre-and post-
hydration model densities will be used to constrain the potential isostatic
response to alteration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Tectonics program and the Petrology &amp; Geochemistry program in the
Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.