* 1937719
* Improving Evaluations of R&amp;D in STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Larry Hedges, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 822,720.00

The primary goal of this set of workshops is to provide STEM education
researchers with the framework, skills, and community they need to implement new
developments in causal inference methods into their research. These methods will
be immediately implementable in their current (or near future) studies and will
result in stronger causal findings, providing higher-quality evidence regarding
the potential of new innovations to improve STEM education broadly.
Additionally, a secondary goal is to provide the graduate assistants at the
workshop (students in statistics) with a strong foundation in the real-world
problems facing researchers in STEM education today. By being immersed in this
community, the goal is to improve their communication skills, while also
providing them with opportunities to develop new methods that address problems
facing the STEM education community today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM education
research and development studies often focus on the development and iterative
refinement of interventions meant to increase STEM participation and skills.
Since large-scale randomized experiments are not often possible, researchers
typically use correlational methods instead to explore the effects of
interventions. Over the past several years, however, statisticians have
developed a broad array of methods for understanding causality that do not
require these large-scale randomized trials. While these causal inference
methods are now common in fields like medicine and education policy, they are
much less commonly found in STEM education fields. The purpose of this set of
workshops is to introduce STEM education researchers to these methods and how
they relate to three research designs they already use: (1) matching on a single
variable (e.g., age, gender), (2) pre-test post-test comparisons, and (3) lab
experiments. In addition to introducing these new developments, broader
discussions of confounding, validity types and trade-offs, design sensitivity,
effect size reporting, and questionable research practices (e.g., p-hacking)
will also be included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
three EHR programs: the IUSE program (Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
program); the DRK-12 program (Discovery Research preK-12 program); and ECR
(Education Core Research program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.