* 1937010
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I(RAISE): Smart Platform of Personalized Learning, Assessment and Prediction for Future Career Training of Skilled Workers
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Xintao Wu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2022
* USD 999,938.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
address the critical needs for developing and sustaining skilled technical
workforce, which are a key component of the U.S. economy. This project proposes
to develop a smart training platform through digitalizing the training processes
and embedding advanced techniques of big data, (Artificial Intelligence) AI,
smart sensing, mixed reality, kinesiology and fire engineering. The results
could accelerate the changes of traditional training programs to new types of
training and certification related to the latest technology advances.
Specifically, this project will benefit firefighters with a new training
platform that reduces injuries, shortens training process, and prepares more
people as future firefighters with virtual training programs. This will save
lives and reduce costs of both property damage and human casualty in fires. With
the developed platform that will be made publicly available, firefighters will
learn STEM skills and achieve an easy transition into new positions that require
similar skills in later in their careers. The platform could be extended to a
variety of skilled worker occupations such as health care and smart
manufacturing. This project will also strengthen college and online programs of
fire safety and train minority students at two participating
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase I project
proposes to innovate the training of skilled workers through a smart,
personalized and augmented training platform that coordinates training across
organizations. The platform will integrate data-centric techniques to serve
multiple purposes of various participants and provide a comprehensive suite of
training functions. Specifically, this project will investigate several research
tasks: intelligent wireless sensing system for simultaneous user tracking,
action recognition, and user identification; smart and adaptive sensing for
comprehensive evaluation of user actions and impacts on environments; new data-
driven methods for injury assessment and prediction; deep learning based
recommendation models for personalized training activity and future jobs; and
collaborative augmenting methods for creating various training environments and
immersive analytics for analyzing large-scale data provenance. These methods
form a holistic environment for adaptive training of the future workforce. As a
special case, the investigators will evaluate and demonstrate the application of
the developed system on training of firefighters through close collaborations
among university fire engineering programs, fire departments and a training
academy, and a nationwide firefighter association.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.