* 1937026
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Upskilling for Future Jobs through NLx Talent Demand Data
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Matthew Gee, CENTER FOR EMPLOYMENT SECURITY EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2020
* USD 499,762.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will be
the creation of publicly available datasets based on aggregated job vacancy
information. Team members will converge across disciplines to include private
sector recruitment experts, staff of the public workforce development system,
labor economists, data scientists, and software developers. The project will
deliver actionable real-time labor market information (LMI) to an increasingly
dynamic, open, connected, and individual-centered workforce data ecosystem. The
resulting research and derived data products will contribute to the design of
career planning tools for job seekers, learners, transitioning service members
(veterans), and military spouses, as well as their career counselors in the
public workforce system. Employers may utilize the research insights and tools
to improve job matching through clearer job descriptions, thus increasing
skills-based hiring. Over time, equitable access to worker-centered tools for
career planning will enhance the employment resiliency of American
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Convergence Accelerator Phase I project will
establish infrastructure and partnerships to increase the quality, quantity, and
availability of real-time LMI for the nation. Automation and frequently shifting
skill requirements necessitate access to real-time information along every part
of the talent pipeline. However, production of the set of resources that
complements "traditional" LMI in the public workforce system - real-time
information on job vacancies - has been largely confined to the private sector
for over a decade. To enable an open and accessible workforce data ecosystem of
the future, the team will (1) create open code to collect, validate, clean, and
store data; (2) establish governance procedures to make raw data available to
researchers; (3) test the technical and statistical feasibility of incorporating
external data sets; (4) explore the development of predictive artificial
intelligence tools to extract skill and competency phrases from job
descriptions; and (5) explore the development of worker-centered resources for
the American public. By emphasizing transparency and open-source tools, the
project will promote innovation around skill frameworks and methods of
harmonizing labor market data sets in a constantly evolving
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.