* 1937593
* Developing Educational Measurement Competency to Support Investigations of Students' Scientific Conceptions Light
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Alena Moon, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,112.00

Robust understandings of light and how it interacts with matter are essential
across many science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. To
design more effective instruction about these concepts, we need to better
understand how students' ideas about light develop. Of notable importance is
helping students' move from an intuitive view of light based on everyday
experiences to a more scientific understanding of light and its interactions
with matter, including interactions at the smallest scales of subatomic
particles. This project will begin to systematically study the ways in which
undergraduate students' ideas about light develop over time. It will do so by
designing and testing an instrument to assess students' understanding of the
wave-particle duality of light. In the process of this work, the principal
investigator will also develop competencies in quantitative educational
measurement to complement her established expertise in qualitative research
methodologies. By participating in targeted professional development experiences
as she leads this project, the principal investigator will build her capacity to
conduct fundamental research on undergraduate students' understanding of key
chemistry concepts in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
integrate research and professional development objectives to support the
principal investigator in developing the educational measurement skills needed
to achieve her long-term research goals. The project will design, develop, and
evaluate an instrument to assess introductory chemistry students' understanding
of the wave-particle duality of light. The design of the instrument will be
guided by the Berkeley Evaluation and Assessment Research system. Results of
interviews with faculty and students will inform the development of construct
maps and ordered multiple-choice items with responses corresponding to student
levels of understanding. The team will use an iterative process of item
development, expert item checks and item refinement. The instrument will be
rigorously evaluated via beta-, pilot, and final testing with general chemistry
students at the University of Nebraska to establish validity and reliability.
Throughout the process of developing the instrument, the project team will be
mentored by Dr. Jack Barbera, an expert in educational measurement from Portland
State University. The project team will have frequent virtual and in-person
meetings with the mentor to discuss targeted readings as well as progress and
plans for the instrument development project. The PI will also complete two
short courses on the topics of psychometrics and latent class analysis. Project
outcomes will include the development of a high-quality assessment of students'
understanding of the wave-particle duality of light, as well as the development
of the project team's measurement skills, which will support future
investigations of undergraduate students' understandings of important STEM
concepts. The principal investigator will share what she has learned from her
research and professional development experiences via local and national
workshops, as well as quarterly blog posts for the Younger Chemistry Education
Scholars group of the American Chemical Society's Division of Chemical
Education. The mentor and a three-member advisory board of experts in
educational measurement and the development of learning progressions will assess
the success of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR BCSER)
program, which is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high
quality fundamental STEM education research in the core areas of STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.