* 1937357
* EAGER: SaTC: CORE: Small: Blockchain Architectures for Resource-Constrained Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 359,846.00

A blockchain is a massively distributed, immutable database containing
verifiable records of transactions. While the blockchain technology has emerged
as the foundational technology for cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and
Ethereum, it has far-reaching implications in numerous societal settings (such
as in healthcare, supply-chains, and the Internet-of-Things) due to its ability
to maintain authoritative records in a fully decentralized, secure, and
trustless manner. However, despite being such a promising technology, one of the
main roadblocks in the proliferation of blockchain applications is that current
blockchain designs are resource-intensive, in terms of storage, computation, and
communication. The goal of this project is to develop a novel framework and a
toolkit of protocols for enabling resource-constrained computers to play a vital
role in ensuring the security properties of the decentralized system. The
resource-constrained blockchain architectures developed over the course of this
research will enable innovative blockchain solutions for Internet-of-Things,
healthcare, supply-chains, and beyond, which will be of direct benefit to
society. The techniques developed in this research will have a significant
impact on how low-power mobile devices can participate in today's cryptocurrency
networks, which will facilitate the mass adoption of the technology. The
proposed work will be seamlessly integrated into education through course
development and mentoring and will be disseminated to industry and at academic
blockchain events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal takes a principled and
foundational approach to cutting down the resources consumed by large-scale
blockchain systems. This proposal will develop novel blockchain architectures by
taking a novel resource-centric approach and will combine cutting-edge
techniques from cryptocurrencies with innovative ideas from coding and
information theory and peer-to-peer networking to address several fundamental
challenges in reducing the resource consumption in large-scale blockchain
systems without compromising system security. In particular, the focus of the
research is on (i) developing coding-theoretic architectures that limit the
growth of storage space per node as a function of the size of the blockchain
without affecting the security of bootstrapping new nodes; (ii) designing
methodologies to empower computationally-constrained devices to 'collaboratively
validate' blocks in a secure manner with a sub-linear number of computations in
the size of a block; and (iii) developing a framework to analyze blockchain
networks as content distribution networks, and thereby, allow network-
constrained devices to optimize their network resources. The proposed
architectures will be evaluated by integrating them with real-world blockchain
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.