* 1937165
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Knowledge of Internet Structure: Measurement, Epistemology, and Technology (KISMET)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and
potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to
improve the security of the Internet infrastructure by creating a kind of map of
the Internet that includes information on structural dependencies, ownership,
and economic interrelationships. The first project goal is to build a system of
public data on Internet structure, as manifested in the naming, addressing, and
routing systems, which will address an increasing gap in science, security, and
public communications policy. The project's approach involves cutting edge
Internet measurement and analytic tools, crucial operational network engineering
expertise required for sound interpretations of the measurements, new
methodologies to synthesize different sources of data, and technology to
responsibly manage data integrity, availability, and privacy. The second project
goal is to establish and sustain an open knowledge network that will use this
system of internet structure data to analyze and report on the extent of
persistent Internet insecurities and progress in mitigating them, in a form that
is understandable by non-technical users, including policy-makers and a wide
range of public and private stakeholders. The knowledge network effort will
include producing tutorial material that provide insights into the current state
of the Internet, the underlying causes of persistent insecurity, and possible
paths to a more secure future. The initial list of collaborators spans a range
of disciplines that rely on Internet measurement -- from network science to
security to economics to law and public policy, and the team will develop more
partners during this phase I effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project lies in the development and use of new tools and methods
for the collection, curation, and analysis of massive datasets that capture the
current structure of the Internet. These datasets, which include data about
interconnection topology, ownership, and economic relationships between
networks, and the structure and dependencies of the Internet's Domain Name
System, are each complex and unwieldy datasets. The primary intellectual
contribution of this project is to encode and process these data such that non-
technical people can make useful queries about the datasets, and more technical
users can correlate and analyze the information across the datasets. This
project will require advances in data tagging, coding, and implementation of
cross-dataset queries with sufficient performance to enable interactive
investigation. In the past, many such datasets have been maintained on purpose-
built platforms, but a significant advance of this project will be an
exploration of the feasibility of moving various data items into cloud storage,
which will reduce development costs and reduce the complexity of sustaining the
effort over time. Therefore an additional outcome of this project will be
guidelines and operating practices for the use of cloud services for this type
of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.