* 1937068
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I (RAISE): Competency Catalyst
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Stephen Harmon, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 499,753.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/potential benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is the
ability to educate and reskill America's workforce as 5G, Artificial
Intelligence (AI), automation, big data, and cloud technology are replacing
existing jobs with ones requiring new skills ranging from soft skills to rapidly
evolving STEM specialties. The project will leverage infrastructure from
national competency-based credentialing, education, training, and workforce
development initiatives to develop an AI-based tool that will permit schools,
employers, and training programs to deploy competency-based approaches with
relative ease and without sacrificing local context and vocabulary. The project
team includes educators, data scientists, software developers, workforce
specialists, policy makers, and data professionals. The open source / open data
tools developed will digitally connect educational programs to job market
demands in ways that allow students and educators to adjust their programs to
current and future needs in real time and allow local employers to align their
needs with national demands and to influence the supply side of the talent
pipeline. These tools will be used to improve education, counseling, reskilling,
and hiring in a cross-sector multidisciplinary network, starting with dozens of
educational institutions and hundreds of employers in the financial/tech market
in the state of Georgia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator
Phase I project advances the state-of-the-art in applying AI, open data, and
analytics to competency-based education and workforce development. It
contributes to the fields of computational linguistics, open data, and
competency management while facilitating new methods for analyzing and aligning
the job market with formal and informal training and education. AI algorithms
will be developed for extracting demand-side skills and competencies from job
descriptions, documents, and published competency models and for interpreting
them in local educational or workforce contexts. Techniques include an array of
semantic and text analysis methods; the use of domain-specific ontologies; and
combining concept, entity, and relation detection algorithms (e.g., variants on
bidirectional Convolutional Neural Networks with Long Short-Term Memory) with
word and concept embedding layers to classify skills. All data will be exposed
as linked open data with associated concept schema for further contextualization
and with data governance that meets employer, educator and user requirements.
The project will engage employer/education partnerships to design end-user
dashboards that produce competency-based views of local and national job
markets, of education and training experiences, and to pilot methods for
improving the responsiveness and effectiveness of educational programs to job
market needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.