* 1937611
* The 2021 International Conference on Language Documentation &amp; Conservation: Identifying and Fostering Relationships to Overcome Critical Challenges
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Bradley McDonnell, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2022
* USD 59,986.00

This project will bring together leading scholars from across the world to
explore how developing new strategic partnerships (and fostering ongoing ones)
can help overcome critical challenges in documentary linguistics and language
revitalization research as part of the 2021 International Conference on Language
Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC). With more than half of the world's 7000
languages currently at risk of disappearing--at least 170 of them in the United
States alone--there is an urgent need both to create an enduring documentary
record of endangered languages and to support teaching and learning of those
languages. Given the magnitude of this endangered language crisis, linguists and
language communities must seek out strategic partnerships to overcome the most
critical challenges, including among others the enormous task of producing (at
least some) documentation for the vast number of endangered signed and spoken
languages that have little to no documentation, the massive gap between the
amount of audiovisual documentation collected, and the amount of transcriptions
of these data that are available (i.e., the so-called "transcription
bottleneck"). Despite these large-scale challenges, there are still relatively
few partnerships that aim to address them. Thus, this project will open a
dialogue between linguists, language community members, and scholars from other
disciplines to forge robust and reliable solutions for addressing critical
challenges in language documentation and conservation. NSF support will enable a
series of targeted workshops and roundtable discussions devoted to bringing
stakeholders together around various aspects of initiating and fostering
strategic partnerships. The conference will also feature a special interactive
plenary event with the express purpose of bringing together participants to
create a dialogue about how a renewed focus on identifying and fostering
strategic partnerships can be leveraged to meet critical
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its inception in 2009, ICLDC has become
the flagship venue driving scholarship in the documentation, maintenance and
revitalization of endangered languages. Participants include undergraduate
students, graduate students and faculty from linguistics, anthropology, biology,
computer science, and other academic disciplines. ICLDC has also included a
large number of citizen scientists from historically underrepresented groups in
the sciences, such as Native Americans, Native Alaskans, Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders, offering opportunities for broadening participation in
the language sciences as one of the broader impacts of this conference. ICLDC
offers its highly-diverse audience opportunities for informal science education
and training that includes new methodologies and best practices in cutting-edge
language documentation and that crosses traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
addition, this conference serves as one of the foremost venues for the
dissemination of research findings in language documentation and conservation
and related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.