* 1938199
* Trans-US Government expert meeting to examine synthetic biology roadmap; October 16-18, 2019; Bethesda, MD
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Douglas Friedman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 122,883.00

This workshop brings together a group of approximately 40 experts from academia
and industry, and an additional 60 experts, policy makers, and funders across US
Government for a two-day workshop. The workshop is then be followed by a half
day meeting of US Government experts, policy makers and funders. The anticipated
end-result of the workshop is the refinement and eventual adoption of a
synthetic biology roadmap for the United States government along with
recommendations for future coordination. The workshop discussions contribute
significantly to a broader comprehensive strategy that would establish the
United States as a leader in the area of synthetic biology as well as promote
the enhancement and improvement of scientific, engineering and educational
activities by bringing together a leading group of experts from several
scientific domains. The meeting establishes the foundation for increased
collaboration and coordination among United States Government Agencies. The
workshop includes attendees from underrepresented groups in Science and
Technology and attendees who are at all stages of their
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic Biology activities across all agencies in
the United States Federal Government span from basic research into the biology
of genetic mechanisms and cellular function; to evolution of synthetic organisms
and their impact on the environment; to development of foundational tools that
enable cell manipulation, design and control; to development of applications in
health and disease treatment, remote manufacturing, bio-renewable fuels and
chemicals, and adaptive living materials; to the robust and reproducible
manufacture of products of synthetic biology in a commercial setting. This
workshop brings together key stakeholders from academia, industry and funding
agencies to help improve coordination in ways that will advance the field of
synthetic biology. The workshop builds on the publication of the Engineering
Biology Research Consortium roadmap, released in June 2019, and would identify
opportunities for future collaboration and coordination in ways that will
advance the field. This workshop represents the first examination of a United
States technology-based roadmap, and as such, the workshop provides an
opportunity for the US policy makers and researchers to strategically plan for
the future of the field of synthetic biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.