* 1938079
* SBIR Phase I:  Very-Low Emissions Heating, Cooling and Hot Water System
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Jane Melia, HARVEST THERMAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2021
* USD 224,738.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the reduction in home energy costs, electric
grid system costs, and environmental impacts from electricity generation. The
proposed research project will advance the state of the art in residential
combined heating and hot water technology. The research project will resolve the
technical risks associated with operating a high-efficiency CO2 heat pump in
combined heating and hot water applications, and with implementing efficient
load shifting in these applications. The project has the potential to reduce
user energy costs, grid system costs, and environmental impacts by: shifting
electrical load from peak demand times to off-peak demand times, reducing the
need for costly and highly polluting peak power generation resources, and
integrating variable renewable energy resources, such as wind and solar at times
of low demand. This will put downward pressure on electric rates, as well as
provide immediate user bill savings through lower demand and by shifting
electricity demand to the cheapest times. The proposed system has the potential
for large-scale commercial deployment due to its significantly lower operating
costs and lowered initial fixed investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to resolve technical
challenges associated with the commercial deployment of high-efficiency CO2 heat
pumps in combined heating and hot water applications. CO2 heat pumps have
demonstrated high efficiency in hot water applications with coefficients of
performance up to 5. However, they typically operate much less efficiently in
combined systems due to a lack of advanced controls. The research will develop a
thermal stratification model of a hot water tank based on customer use and
charging conditions, a predictive thermal demand model, and a simulation model
of the whole system integrating heat pump performance, tank stratification, and
predictive customer demand. The project will then develop new controls (hardware
and software) to optimize for user and grid costs and emissions and validate the
effectiveness of the resulting control system by integrating it into the
existing prototype. This assessment will demonstrate the commercial viability of
CO2-based combined heat and hot water systems with load
shifting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.