* 1938902
* 25th Anniversary GLOBE Annual Meeting:  Reflecting on the Past, Looking to the Future, 2019-0479
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Anthony Murphy, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2021
* USD 394,624.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;At its 2020 annual meeting, the GLOBE national and global
education community will share current practices, research, and strategies for
bringing Earth system education to more schools and citizen scientists around
the world. This includes both data collection with popular GLOBE science
protocols and protocols of interest to the community and best practices for
integrating GLOBE into classrooms, informal education programs, with
undergraduate students, with interested citizens and with the research community
more broadly. Additionally, through a retrospective look at GLOBE over the 25
years of the program, participants will have the opportunity to learn about
long-term involvement with GLOBE and how GLOBE has changed over the years.
Through the work with the Diversity and Inclusion Task Force and its
recommendations, participants will have the potential to reach even more people
in their own communities. Additionally, students attending the meeting will
obtain experience discussing their research with peers and scientists from
around the world as well as tools on how to discuss Earth system science with
their families and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;At the
Annual Meeting, the theme of Reflecting on the Past, Looking to the Future will
be explored further in multiple strands. These strands are: 1) A Welcoming
GLOBE; 2) Collaborations Around the World; 3) 25 Years of GLOBE; and 4) The Next
25 Years. Additionally, trainers and mentor trainers will train participants in
the top five GLOBE protocols and the top five requested protocols at the
meeting. The GLOBE participants will learn about the GLOBE Diversity and
Inclusion Task Force recommendations for making more GLOBE more welcoming and
inclusive. GLOBE students will learn about science storytelling and how to share
their knowledge with their schools, communities, and families. GLOBE teachers
from non-traditional schools (e.g., schools focused on learners with
disabilities, talented and gifted, etc.) will be invited to participate and
share at the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.