* 1938600
* Workshop: Applications to Interviews (A2I) - Preparing for the Faculty Job Market
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Kristen Parrish, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 09/30/2020
* USD 47,355.00

Construction engineering and management faculty nationwide lack diversity, which
reflects the construction industry. Research documents that students are more
likely to pursue careers where they have visible role models. Beyond the lack of
visible role models of the same race and/or gender, however, research also
documents that females and other underrepresented minorities tend to have fewer
and shorter meetings with their PhD advisors. Therefore, these students may not
receive the same support as they prepare application materials for faculty
positions. By extension, these same students may be under-prepared for the
interview process. A preliminary review of recent construction engineering and
management faculty searches at one university reveals that while women and
underrepresented minorities might be short-listed for phone interviews, they do
not receive invitations for campus interviews at the same rate as their majority
male colleagues. The Applications to Interviews (A2I) workshop intends to
address the interview preparation gap for women and underrepresented PhD
students considering faculty careers in construction engineering and management.
The workshop provides a unique and interactive forum for sharing and discussing
motivations for pursuing faculty positions, as well as strategies to
successfully prepare to apply and interview for such positions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The A2I workshop will be held at Arizona State University
in conjunction with the Construction Research Congress (CRC) 2020 Conference.
Participants include Ph.D. students as well as junior and senior faculty in
construction engineering programs from a variety of institution types ranging
from two-year colleges and research extensive universities to Historically Black
Colleges and Universities and Tribal Colleges and Universities. A focus will be
to recruit participants from historically underrepresented groups in
construction engineering and management. Small group activities and panel
discussions will be used to facilitate professional development related to
applying and interviewing for faculty positions. Near-peer mentoring between
junior faculty and PhD students will catalyze the interest in, and pursuit of,
faculty positions as well as the formation of professional networks. Engaging a
more diverse faculty is a critical step to attract underrepresented
undergraduate and graduate students to construction engineering and management
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.