* 1938772
* The First Conference on Machine Learning in Heliophysics; Amsterdam, Netherlands; September 16-20, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Farzad Kamalabadi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 01/31/2023
* USD 41,395.00

This 1-year project is to enable the participation of graduate students and
early-career researchers at the first conference on Machine Learning in
Heliophysics, which will be held in Amsterdam, Netherlands, during September
16-20, 2019. This international conference is entirely focused on the use of
machine learning and information processing tools and techniques in
heliophysics, thus encompassing the fields of solar physics, Sun-Earth
relationships, magnetospheric and ionospheric physics. The goal of this first-
of-its-kind conference is to improve present understanding of heliophysics
phenomena and their dynamics, as well as our ability to predict space weather
events by leveraging advancements happening at a fast pace in the machine
learning and related communities. The practical objective of the conference is
two-fold: (i) inform the international community on recent advancements in the
use of machine learning and related tools and techniques in heliophysics; and,
(ii) connect the physics and the computer science communities on the overlapping
and multi-disciplinary topic of machine learning. The research and EPO agenda of
this 1-year project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.