* 1938726
* STTR Phase I:  Single molecule sequencing of phosphorylated proteins for next-generation protein analyses and diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Tal Somekh, ERISYON INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2023
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to develop a highly sensitive assay that
characterizes protein modifications for life science research applications.
Proteins are life's nanomachines and serve as the targets for almost all drugs
and the vast majority of diagnostic tests. One type of Modifications to
proteins, such as addition of phosphate molecules (termed phosphorylation), are
key triggers that alter protein activity. Subsequently, this can radically
change cellular behaviour, such as affecting embryonic growth or development of
tumors. The market for technologies studying proteins and their modifications
range from clinical applications to fundamental research and is estimated at $17
B, and detecting these modifications is the fastest-growing application growing
at an estimated 18% annually. The proposed protein-sequencing assay can
characterize these protein modifications with 4-6 orders of magnitude greater
sensitivity than current technologies. This sensitivity enables new classes of
experiments in which only small samples are available (e.g. biopsies from living
patients) or the target protein/modification is rare, and translates to
substantial materials savings in all cases. The highly-sensitive
characterization of proteins and their modifications will provide a new type of
valuable quantitative data for scientists in industry and academic labs alike.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will be to develop the single-molecule protein sequencing assay
(fluorosequencing) for use by proteomics scientists to precisely quantify
multiple phosphorylated sites on protein molecules. The best analytical
technology today, mass-spectrometers, has an inherent limitation in identifying
multiple (&gt;2) closely spaced protein modifications and cannot produce
accurate quantitative data if fewer than 10% of the proteins are modified at the
particular amino acid. Better characterization and quantification of
phosphorylation is recognized as a need by proteomics researchers. The project
will explore the competitive ability of fluorosequencing to distinguish and
quantify closely spaced modifications in multiple proteins. The project will
also provide evidence for the capability of the technology to detect and
quantify a single phosphorylated protein amongst 100 total
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.