* 1938472
* SBIR Phase I:  Hardware and Software Development for Noninvasive, Wireless Flow Sensors for Patients with Hydrocephalus
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2020
* Anna Somera, RHAEOS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I project outlines a
development plan for a wireless, wearable sensor for noninvasive measurements in
shunts in patients with hydrocephalus. Hydrocephalus is a common and costly
condition caused by the accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid in the ventricles of
the brain. It affects &gt;1 million people in the US and is nearly always
treated with the surgical implantation of a shunt to drain this excess fluid
away from the brain. Unfortunately, shunts have extremely high failure rates
(98% over ten years) and diagnosing shunt malfunction is confounded by its
vague, nonspecific symptoms such as headaches and nausea. Additionally, there
exists no direct way to measure flow through shunts. The proposed project would
save the US healthcare system &gt;$200 million annually in diagnostic costs and
unnecessary hospital admissions. Moreover, it could be used to monitor shunt
function at home, providing patients and their caregivers peace of mind. The
materials science and mechanical engineering advances required to advance the
project will fundamentally advance the development of wearable electronics for
digital health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project relies on a set of
concepts in materials science, mechanical engineering and fundamental studies of
thermal transport phenomena to yield a soft, wireless, wearable device the
thermal characterization of skin and soft tissue. Specifically, the integration
of controlled, low-power thermal actuators and precise temperature sensors on a
flexible circuit on the surface of the skin allows for the mapping of
temperature and direction heat flow through near-surface epidermal layers. The
flow of heat can be quantitatively correlated to both the presence and magnitude
of underlying flow in a range of biological conduits, ranging from shunts to
blood vessels. Moreover, the soft, silicone construction of the device presents
a nonirritating, compliant interface to the surface of the skin. Quantitative
measurements of thermal transport, in comparison to benchtop models and
calculations will yield real-time flow rates, while a customized software
application on a smartphone, communicating with a Bluetooth system-on-chip
located on the device will collect store and analyze data in real-time, proving
real-time feedback to physicians, patients and their
caregivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.