* 1938459
* SBIR Phase I:  Preventing Pneumothorax During Lung Biopsy Using Novel Hydrogel
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Andrew Eisenthal, PNEUMONIX MEDICAL INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I project addresses the
important unmet clinical need of enabling interventional radiologists to prevent
pneumothorax (collapsed lung) during transthoracic lung biopsies. Annually, over
1.2 million transthoracic lung biopsies are performed worldwide for lung cancer
diagnosis (400,000 in the US). Pneumothorax (PTX), a collapsed lung, is the most
common complication of this procedure, occurring in 20-40% of all transthoracic
lung biopsies. More than half of PTX turn symptomatic and require an invasive
chest tube insertion, the definitive treatment for PTX. This complication costs,
on an average, $15,000 per chest tube insertion and $1.3 billion worldwide to
treat. This turns a same-day diagnostic procedure into a costly multi-day
hospitalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of the proposed
project are to evaluate and demonstrate the feasibility of using a biopolymer
sealant and novel access/delivery device to seal needle tracts to prevent PTX
during transthoracic lung biopsies. Further, in-vitro and in-vivo preliminary
biocompatibility of the material as well as efficacy of the delivery device as
compared to the current standard of care will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.