* 1938838
* Direct Chemical Kinetics Studies of Elusive Intermediates in Combustion: Ketohydroperoxides
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Eric Ferreira, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 03/31/2024
* USD 391,466.00

The development of sustainable energy technologies for transportation remains a
significant scientific challenge and a high priority for the United States and
rest of the world. Given the current and projected reliance on combustion-
derived energy for decades to come, a key challenge is increasing the efficiency
of next-generation combustion systems. Improvements in efficiency relies on
better understanding of chemical reactions that control ignition and heat-
release processes in engines. Both are important in optimizing predictive models
used to simulate combustion chemistry. Importantly, the efficacy of such models
hinges on validation against detailed experimental data. Therefore, the primary
activity of the research herein is the study of elementary chemical reactions
from a previously unstudied set of molecules, ketohydroperoxides, which are
elusive intermediates and central to understanding ignition process. The primary
benefit of the present research is the development of new fundamental
understanding of chemical reaction pathways and rates relevant to combustion as
well as new modeling capabilities to improve the robustness of existing computer
simulation models. In addition, the research project encompasses scientific
training of Ph.D. students and undergraduate Student Veterans, as well as
augmentation of local high school-level educational materials related to
sustainable transportation energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research herein
addresses the knowledge gap on the connection between the molecular structure of
intermediate species ketohydroperoxides and products formation during
combustion. To achieve this objective, an interdisciplinary team with expertise
in chemical synthesis of ketohydroperoxides, derived from cyclohexane
combustion, and physical chemistry is formed. Reactions of the three isomer
species are studied using two different experiments: multiplexed photoionization
mass spectrometry at the Advanced Light Source synchrotron, and speciation from
a high-pressure jet-stirred reactor at the University of Georgia. In parallel to
experiments, Reaction Mechanism Generator software package is used to generate a
new sub-mechanisms for cyclohexane combustion chemistry. The impetus for the
present modelling work is that unimolecular decomposition reactions are the only
consumption pathways of ketohydroperoxide species in current combustion models.
However, other reaction pathways common to alkylperoxy radicals are possible,
including reaction with hydroxyl radicals and with oxygen. With complete
characterization of reaction pathways, the existing uncertainties of chemical
kinetics models can be minimized with accurate predictions of combustion
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.