* 1938323
* SBIR Phase I:  Illuminating dark web electronic commerce
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Jeremy Thomas, HIKARI LABS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 11/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to combat online trade in counterfeit
and illicit goods. The project will integrate the results of a decade of
academic research on anonymous online ("dark net") marketplaces and modeling of
counterfeit pharmaceutical online sales with novel monitoring solutions for
traditional e-commerce marketplaces. It will allow for the development and
validation through pilot customer tests of an integrated platform for automated
continuous data collection and analysis of the major players in the counterfeit
and illicit goods online business. Through automation, the proposed technology
should considerably reduce costs to brand protection managers (and law
enforcement), allowing them to use their limited resources more effectively.
This work should also help address some pressing economic and public health
issues linked to the proliferation of counterfeits, such as counterfeit
drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will demonstrate automation of many manual online counterfeiting
monitoring activities. The project will also show that intuitive visual
interfaces can help customers (law enforcement agencies, brand protection
managers) have immediate access to higher-level objects more useful for
investigative purposes. These higher-level objects include metrics on the amount
of sales conducted by a specific entity, deduplication between vendors, or
inventory clustering. To do so, the project will further develop automated
classification and analysis using techniques that were prototyped in the
research lab, scale these techniques up to a production environment to further
minimize human intervention, and combine these techniques with novel algorithms
developed for slightly different application cases (traditional e-commerce
marketplaces).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.