* 1938039
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost needle guidance system for bedside lumbar puncture
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,07/31/2020
* Cassidy Wang, ETHOS MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve the quality and efficiency of spinal access procedures by
developing a needle guidance system that attaches to ultrasound machines. Lumbar
punctures (LPs) are procedures used to diagnose and treat neurological
conditions such as meningitis, multiple sclerosis and others. Without prompt
intervention, meningitis infections can be fatal within days. During an LP,
fluid must be collected from the center of the spine for diagnosis. The
procedure can be challenging, costly, and time-consuming and is subject to
practitioner experience and patient body type. Practitioners must manually feel
for spinal landmarks at the skin surface to position the needle, then blindly
insert into the spine. Up to 42% of procedures fail to access the target. In
these cases, patients are referred to the Radiology department for an x-ray
guided LP, which increases the cost of care, lengthens patient stay, and exposes
the patient to radiation. The proposed research aims to develop a needle
guidance system that enables spinal access procedures to be performed under
real-time ultrasound imaging. By allowing providers to continuously monitor the
needle’s trajectory, the proposed system can significantly improve first-attempt
success rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to demonstrate the
feasibility of a low-cost needle guidance system that interfaces with ultrasound
equipment in bedside environments. Problems associated with LPs can be
attributed to two primary causes: (1) the practitioner often cannot be certain
of the target’s location and the needle’s trajectory; and (2) effective use of
ultrasound imaging equipment as an alternative to the traditional blind
technique relies on practitioner expertise in interpreting spinal ultrasound,
which is rare in bedside settings. To remedy the first deficiency, the proposed
system will consist of a needle-guiding attachment for an ultrasound probe and a
software overlay that displays the needle’s trajectory on top of the ultrasound
image. To address the barrier of ultrasound expertise, the software will also
incorporate an anatomy recognition algorithm, displaying interpretable spine
renderings corresponding to the imaged region. The proposed research will
evaluate the needle trajectory prediction accuracy of the system in bench,
cadaver, and live tissue models, ensuring minimal prediction error so the needle
can consistently be guided to the target. Anatomy recognition software will be
developed using images captured from the tissue models with the aim of correctly
identifying important anatomical landmarks in at least 93% of
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.