* 1938744
* Collaborative EAGER: Novel Ethnographic Investigations of Engineering Workplaces to Advance Theory and Research Methods for Preparing the Future Workforce
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Stephen Brozina, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2023
* USD 65,930.00

The competitive strength of the nation in the technological arena depends on the
success of the engineering workforce. It is therefore crucial that we develop
better scientific understanding of how engineers work, as well as how their work
is changing. Without well-researched and trustworthy representations of
professional practice, it is questionable whether educators can adequately
prepare future engineers for their careers. Yet there remains a persistent lack
of research on what engineers do in the workplace. This exploratory project will
help bridge these gaps by testing new research approaches to generate new
knowledge about what engineers do at work. Traditionally, such research has been
conducted through direct observations in a physical workplace. This approach
needs to be modified since open workspaces, geographically distributed teams,
and new digital tools make it increasingly infeasible to perform on-site
research for long periods of time, both for researchers, funders, and study
sites. Other approaches like surveys and interviews are often easier to carry
out, but are limited in what kinds of insights they can provide. The novelty and
exploratory aspect of the proposed study comes from taking new and different
empirical approaches to study engineering workplace practices. Findings and
resources developed through this project will support ongoing efforts to improve
how current and future engineers are trained to succeed and excel in their job
roles and careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this exploratory project we will
undertake innovative approaches to collecting, analyzing, and archiving
empirical data related to engineering practice. This project will involve
ethnographic research at multiple field sites representing multiple industry
sectors using novel methods such as agile ethnography, trace ethnography, and
network ethnography. These methods are new and evolving, and thus have scarcely
been used to study engineering practice. Yet they appear highly promising for
many reasons, including their potential to generate research findings more
rapidly and with a greater focus on specific problems and questions. Such
methods have started to gain traction in industry precisely due to such
advantages, especially in software engineering and related fields where work is
already very digital and distributed in character. The field studies proposed
for this project are especially concerned with how work is coordinated and
aligned within and across teams, including through the use of digital data and
tools. This project will also investigate and respond to three specific research
challenges: 1) aligning new data collection and analysis approaches with
emerging research topics and site access constraints, 2) managing, archiving,
and sharing multi-modal ethnographic data sets, and 3) exploring alternative
approaches to communicating research findings, including formats and styles that
are more accessible and appealing to different
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.