* 1938706
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Political Incivility, Social Identity and American Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2021
* James Druckman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jan Leighley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 14,852.00

Popular and scholarly arguments state that uncivil discourse is bad for
democracy because it hampers political trust and potentially sharpens
polarization. Thus, uncivil political discourse is seen as contrary to a good
democratic society. These arguments could be overstated for two reasons: (1)
there may be no common understanding of what constitutes uncivil discourse; (2)
incivility can prompt increased political participation among some groups.
Drawing on two survey experiments, this project examines influences on
individualsâ€™ perceptions of incivility and whether exposure to incivility
encourages individuals to participate. Investigating these phenomena will reveal
to what extent the negative outcomes of incivility are overstated, and to what
extent there are positive outcomes of incivility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study of political incivility advances research in political communication,
political psychology, and public opinion. Existing scholarship tends to treat
political incivility as some objective phenomena that is responded to in similar
manners across different contexts. Using survey experiments, this project tests
instead whether people form their own assessments of what is uncivil, depending
on the context and according to their own political and social biases and
whether different social groups respond to incivility in positive ways. Overall,
this project is the first empirical study that demonstrates the relevance of
social identity to the study of political incivility and whether incivility has
the potential to produce some desirable outcomes in democratic
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.