* 1938982
* AAAS Science &amp; Technology Policy Fellowships 2019-2022
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Jennifer Pearl, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 12/31/2022
* USD 11,883,932.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the National
Science Foundation (NSF) will continue its collaboration in providing to early-
and mid-career scientists and engineers experiential professional development
and public service fellowships via the AAAS Science and Technology Fellowship
(STPF) Program. The STPF program objectives are to: a) educate scientists and
engineers on the intricacies of federal policy making; b) provide information
and analyses that support decision makers confronting challenges that involve
scientific and technological issues; c) empower civic engagement and leadership
by scientists and engineers by enhancing their skills to assess, communicate and
apply science and technology in policy contexts; and d) increase the involvement
and visibility of scientists and engineers in the policy realm and foster
positive exchange between scientific professionals, policymakers and regulators.
In the long-term, the STPF program seeks build science and engineering
leadership capacity to support evidence-based policy and practice by developing
policy-savvy scientists and engineers who understand government and policy
making well-trained to develop solutions to the nation's challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fellows are selected by the AAAS annually through a
highly-competitive process and placed for one-year fellowships in offices
throughout the NSF. Under the guidance of mentors, Fellows work on projects of
mutual interest to the Fellow and the host office. Fellowship activities allow
the Fellows to gain insight into how national science and technology policy
goals are translated into programs at NSF that reflect the agency's mission. The
AAAS provides an orientation on executive branch and congressional operations,
as well as knowledge- and skill-building professional development seminars
throughout the year. The AAAS also conducts extensive outreach for recruitment,
including scientists and engineers from traditionally underrepresented
populations; administers a rigorous merit review process to identify finalists;
matches fellows with host offices; and provides support for the fellows
throughout their fellowships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.