* 1938063
* NCSE 2020: Science in Environmental Decision-Making Fostering Transdisciplinary Science and Transformational Change
* GEO,RISE
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Pam Mendelson, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 10/31/2020
* USD 59,980.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The National Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE)
Annual Conference affords an opportunity to convene scholars from diverse
disciplines and backgrounds to help engineer outcomes that advance the pace and
scale of solutions to serve society. NCSE's Annual Conference provides ideal
conditions to serve as a "convergence accelerator," actively bringing together
scientists with those who make decisions. Through innovative conference design
that brings together scientists and decision-makers (e.g. leaders from local
governments in NCSE's Applied Solutions network of local governments), NCSE will
expand active networks through new relationships for collaboration on areas of
mutual subject matter interest (e.g. water, energy, etc). Through broader
programmatic work post-conference, NCSE is laying the foundation for sustained
and enduring collaboration between science and decision-making communities,
outlining a path for further solutions-oriented
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will allow The
National Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE) to add a third day to
the Annual Conference. This third day will be organized and facilitated to
create enabling conditions for future convergence research, along with specific
opportunities and outcomes. Areas of focus will include: 1) innovative
governance for science and decision-making from local to international scales;
2) connecting social and natural science research for sustainability solutions;
3) convening diverse communities through facilitated interactions between
scientists and decision-makers that focus on knowledge co-creation and reframing
critical questions. The conditions NCSE will create will lay foundations for
true knowledge co-production, where scientists advance their ability to frame
future research questions that are informed directly by questions that decision-
makers are asking (Sarewitz and Pielke 2007). The result will be ideas and plans
for solution-driven research, guided by the real-world grounding of problems
that decision makers are working to solve on the
ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.