* 1938348
* Digging into Data Round Four Conference
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Jeff Mielke, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 04/30/2020
* USD 64,572.00

How can computers be used to answer big questions in the humanities and social
sciences? Since its inception in 2009, the Digging into Data Challenge program
has helped to spark exciting new research avenues for the humanities and social
sciences utilizing computational techniques. Digging into Data projects span
continents and traditional disciplinary boundaries. They bring together social
scientists and humanists with computational and digital scholars, and they bring
together researchers from different global perspectives and traditions. In this
way, the Digging into Data initiative has wide impacts across academia and into
industry. This conference will contribute importantly to shaping the future of
the Trans-Atlantic Platform and of the Digging into Data Challenge initiative.
The conference will be centered around participants from the Digging into Data
funded projects and representatives from the funding agencies, but the
conference will be publicized and open to the public.

This conference brings together research teams from eleven countries to present
their work applying large-scale computational techniques to research questions
in the humanities and social sciences. The presenters will be current or past
recipients of grants from The Digging into Data Challenge, a program of the
Trans-Atlantic Platform for the Social Sciences and Humanities. Participating
nations and funding organizations include: Argentina (MINCyT); Brazil (FAPESP);
Canada (SSHRC, NSERC, FRQ); Finland (AKA); France (ANR); Germany (DFG); Mexico
(CONACYT); Netherlands (NWO); Portugal (FCT); United Kingdom (AHRC, ESRC), and
United States (NEH, NSF, IMLS). Researchers are working on projects in areas
such as musicology, economics, linguistics, political science, and history. They
will share the results of their research projects and participate in a larger
discussion about the sustainability of Digging into Data and the projects that
have been funded. This conference will take a longitudinal perspective on the
initiative after four funding cycles, to help participating funding agencies
make informed decisions about the future of this initiative.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.