* 1938167
* EAGER: Toward Interpretation of Pairwise Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Aidong Zhang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

To exhibit machine intelligence, it is critical for the system to not only make
intelligent decisions, but also be able to explain how it arrives at those
decisions. Explainable machine learning is an emerging research area aiming to
develop new or modified machine learning techniques that will produce more
explainable models. This project will develop novel methods to interpret the
predictions of a class of learning models known as "pairwise learning models,"
which predicts relationships between instances rather than specific properties
of an individual instance. For example, a consumer might want to know why the
system recommends product A as similar to product B. The results of this
research may benefit many real-world applications that are involved in pairwise
learning, such as face recognition, visual tracking, information retrieval and
bioinformatics. The development of the proposed approaches will contribute to
the exploration of explainable machine learning as well as machine learning in
general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two exploratory research tasks are carried out to
generate explanations on both individual predictions (local interpretations) and
the entire model behaviors (global interpretation). The proposed local
interpretation method adapts the concept of Shapley-value to explain prediction
decisions about an arbitrary pair of input instances. The proposed global
explanation method is a Bayesian non-parametric pairwise interpretation method
with the elastic nets, which will explain feature importance across a
population. Such global interpretability can facilitate the understanding of the
sensitivity levels of a target pairwise learning model to specific input
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.