* 1938109
* Collaborative Research: Uncovering the Biophysical Mechanisms of Single-cell Wound-healing
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Sindy KY Tang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 568,724.00

Creating systems that confer life-like properties has been a major endeavor in
both science and engineering. Recent years have witnessed an explosion in
research on building synthetic cells, not only as a way to study the origins and
the rules of life, but also as a new approach to biochemical engineering to
increase the yield in making molecules. Nevertheless, current synthetic cell
research has neglected one of the most fundamental properties of living matter –
the ability to self-repair following damage. Living cells are generally soft and
easily damaged, yet a number of them can repair themselves after being
mechanically punctured, torn, or even ripped in half. If one could construct
such self-repairing capability in synthetic cells, it should be possible to gain
insights into one of the defining features of cells. At the same time, it could
open new realms of biochemical engineering by allowing the synthetic cell
systems to operate robustly under the potentially harsh environment of
industrial processes. One approach to attaining self-repairing synthetic cells
is to adapt self-repair mechanisms from a living system which already
demonstrates robust capacity to heal from large mechanical wounds within a
single cell, and build analogs of these mechanisms inside synthetic cells. One
such system is Stentor coeruleus, a single-celled free-living ciliate, which
possess a more robust wound healing capacity than most other cells. However, the
self-repair mechanisms of Stentor are largely unknown. The overall goal of this
proposal, therefore, is to understand the mechanisms by which Stentor cells can
heal robustly from large mechanical wounds. The results of this work will lead
to fundamental insights into wound healing, one of the defining features of
life. It will also lay the foundation for constructing self-repairing synthetic
cells. The collaboration between the researchers will provide a unique
opportunity for training and workforce development at the interface of cell
biology and engineering. A website on “superhero cells and bugs” will be created
to raise public interest in non-model organisms possessing “superpowers” such as
self-healing and survival in space. The researchers will continue their efforts
to recruit underrepresented minorities to science and engineering via social
media, outreach activities targeted to K-12 students, and their active
participation in the Bay Area Science Festival and the Maker
Faire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to understand
at a physical and molecular level how Stentor coeruleus cells can heal robustly
from large mechanical wounds that cause an opening in the plasma membrane. The
key biological questions probed include: What sets the limit of the biggest
wound the cell can recover from? Does the large size of the cell facilitate its
wound healing, or has wound healing evolved to be particularly rapid in this
cell? The rationale to focus on Stentor are: 1) its wound healing capacity is
more robust than most other cells, capable of recovering from drastic wounds and
regenerating from cell fragments as small as 1/27th of original cell size in 24
hours. 2) The ability to perform high-throughput gene knockdown and wounding
experiments. The research objectives are to: 1) Develop a minimalistic whole-
cell mathematical model of single-cell wound healing. 2) Test predictions of the
model by measuring the kinetics of healing in cells as a function of wound size
and cell size. 3) Identify contributions to the healing process from membrane
patching, purse-string constriction, or other mechanisms as identified by
phosphoproteomics. The intellectual merit of this research lies in the
identification of the principles for repairing large mechanical wounds in a
single cell, and the conditions at which the healing process will succeed or
fail. Fundamentally, the ability to heal is one of the key features that
distinguish living matter from non-living matter. This study will shed light
into the problem of how some biological systems can heal more robustly than
others. Practically, the work will lay the foundation for engineering a new
function—self-repair—in synthetic cells, and will make the technology more
robust for potential scale-up for practical industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Cellular
Dynamics and Function and Systems and Synthetic Biology clusters of the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.