* 1938303
* EAGER: (ST1) Dissipative Self-Assembly of Metabolic Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Kyle Bishop, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Abstract"&lt;br/&gt;Humans can survive in hostile environments by
building compartments (e.g., houses) and creating favorable conditions within
their interiors (e.g., by heating or cooling). Similarly, living cells use
material compartments and biochemical reactions to enable their proper function
in diverse environments. These functions -such as the ability to move, adapt,
heal, and communicate- derive from the close integration of material structures
and chemical processes. The ability to synthesize "metabolic materials" with
similar functionality remains extremely limited. It is known how to make
material structures and how to control systems of chemical reactions. However,
it is not known how to couple the two together to animate matter with flows of
energy and information as living organisms do. To address this challenge, this
project will create relatively simple material systems in which molecular
compartments are coupled to chemical reactions by engineered feedback loops. It
will demonstrate how such chemically-fueled metabolic materials can enable new
functions such as the ability to assemble in hostile environments, to control
size and morphology, to regulate fuel consumption, and to degrade on demand. The
basic principles identified will guide the future realization of other
chemically-fueled material systems inspired by living
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes
to create "metabolic soft matter" based on self-assembled polymeric compartments
with primitive metabolic activity that modify their local environment to
stabilize (or destabilize) the assembled structures. Metabolic activity is
introduced by the co-assembly of supercharged enzymes into coacervate droplets
formed by liquid-liquid phase separation of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes
in water. In the presence of chemical "fuel", these enzymes catalyze reactions
that alter the local conditions (e.g., pH) and thereby droplet stability.
Importantly, the processes of self-assembly and metabolism are mutually
dependent and allow for engineering both positive and negative feedback loops.
Self-assembly enhances metabolic activity by concentrating enzymes within small
volumes, thereby increasing the local concentration of metabolic product(s).
Reaction-induced concentration changes serve to enhance or inhibit self-assembly
depending on the choice of materials and reactions. Building on designed
metabolic materials based on supercharged catalase that respond to pH changes
driven by the decomposition of H2O2 fuel - this proposed work aims (1) to
engineer the pH-dependent phase behavior of coacervate drops enriched with
supercharged enzymes; (2) to quantify metabolic activity and its influence in
modifying the drop environment; and (3) to couple metabolism and self-assembly
using positive and negative feedback to enable dynamic
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.