* 1938625
* SBIR Phase I:  An Ingestible Intraluminal Bioelectronic Capsule (IBC) for Closed-Loop Diagnosis and Treatment of Gastrointestinal Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2020
* Yi-Kai Lo, Niche Biomedical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project focuses on multi-modal gastrointestinal measurements for rapid detection
and treatment of post-surgical complications. Over 300,000 patients in the US
undergo abdominal resection surgery each year. These patients often experience
serious complications, such as post-operative ileus, gastrointestinal
hemorrhage, and anastomotic leakage, that significantly impact quality of life.
Treating complications extends hospitalization time at a rate of $2,000 per day;
for post-operative ileus alone, additional costs due to prolonged
hospitalization time exceed $1.5 billion annually. Rapid detection and treatment
of these complications could accelerate recovery, enable closed-loop therapies,
and increase quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop new sensing modalities
for detecting post-surgical complications, combining them into a single
miniaturized capsule which can be used for in vivo scientific research studies,
and testing this device using a porcine model. This project focuses on
developing multi-modal sensing technologies to non-invasively diagnose these
complications. Completion of the aims of this project will pave the way towards
telemetric, closed-loop therapies for post-operative gastrointestinal
complications. In addition, data gathered and tools developed during this effort
will inform future studies using a porcine model of gastrointestinal
perturbation and recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.