* 1938526
* SBIR Phase I:  A New Class of High-conductivity Solid-state Composite Electrolytes for Next-generation Lithium Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Jatinkumar Rana, NextGen Battery Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable high-performance, safe, lithium-based
batteries; a $40B market today and growing rapidly driven by the needs of
electric vehicles and grid-based storage. This project will develop a safe (non-
flammable) electrolyte that can operate at both high voltages (for increased
battery capacity) and high temperature (for rapid charging). The proposed
electrolyte is a drop-in replacement in today’s manufacturing infrastructure.
Key experiments will allow the team to develop a fundamental understanding of
the materials properties and allow it to circumvent crucial performance
limiters. As an enabler for an all solid-state battery, the innovation will
improve performance of electric vehicle batteries at reduced costs, accelerating
the rate of penetration of US-made electric vehicles and power trains in world
markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop, test, scale-up, and begin commercialization of a
next-generation solid-state composite electrolyte for inherently safe, high-
performance lithium-/lithium-ion batteries. The electrolyte should have high
electrochemical stability, high ionic conductivity, high thermal stability, a
high lithium transference number, low interfacial resistance, and will be
inherently non-flammable. Full cells &gt;200 mAh will be constructed and
performance tested. During the Phase I effort, NextGen will demonstrate that its
new electrolyte will meet the conductivity, temperature, safety, etc. goals for
advanced electrolytes required by early market adopters. The project has four
key tasks: (1) ceramic materials synthesis and characterization, (2) blending
with a polymer to form a thin, pinhole-free composite solid-state electrolyte
system to achieve simultaneously a high ionic conductivity and a low resistance
interface with the cathode/anode materials, (3) electrochemical and thermal
characterization of the composite electrolyte system, and (4) assembly and test
of full cells to demonstrate that the electrolyte meets the system performance
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.