* 1938809
* I-Corps: Detecting Cancer in Single Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Anna Yaroslavsky, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
quantitative tool to detect cancer in single cells for a wide range of clinical
and research applications. Currently, there is no technology available for
detecting cancer in single cells. Exogenous fluorescence polarization technology
comprises of the device and method(s) that can be implemented in clinical
practice, translational and cancer biology research. In a clinical setting, it
has significant potential to enable early stage cancer detection before
diagnosis is possible by other current means, as well as accurate intraoperative
inspection for excision margins. In cancer biology research, this technology
will facilitate investigation of the early stages of cancer progression in
animal models. In translational research, it will be useful for evaluation of
the efficacy of novel cancer drugs and treatment protocols. Because of low cost,
robustness and simplicity, exogenous fluorescence polarization technology can
potentially be rapidly implemented, commercialized and adopted by both clinical
practitioners and translational researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will explore the commercial potential of utilizing fluorescence
polarization of methylene blue for detecting cancer in single cells. Exogenous
fluorescence polarization is a real time, quantitative and sensitive technology
that can be realized in vivo and ex vivo. It is an intrinsically ratiometric
technique that does not rely on absolute measurements of fluorescence intensity
and, depending on the customer requirements, can be implemented in a
spectroscopic and imaging modes. It has been demonstrated that higher
fluorescence polarization of methylene blue occurs due to its increased
accumulation in mitochondria of cancer cells, as well as shorter fluorescence
lifetime in cancer relative to normal cells. The results obtained at both
macroscopic level in tissues and microscopic level in cells for breast, brain,
skin and kidney cancers indicate that the technology successfully discriminates
cancer with high statistical significance. Therefore, methylene blue
fluorescence polarization imaging / spectroscopy holds the potential to provide
an accurate quantitative marker of cancer at the cellular and tissue
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.