* 1938995
* Design and Fabrication of a Device for Non-Invasive Transdermal Opioid Biomarker Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Makarand Paranjape, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 11/30/2022
* USD 124,691.00

This project will design and develop innovative medical products to address the
opioid crisis in the U.S. Although blood is the body fluid which provides the
most accurate quantitative data on biomolecular concentration when compared with
other traditional sample matrices, blood-draws are extremely invasive,
uncomfortable and, in the context of persons either denying or dealing with
opioid addiction, are met with resistance and trepidation. An expanding pathway
for biomolecular detection is through interstitial fluid&lt;br/&gt;(ISF), which
surrounds cells in all living tissue and organs, and contains constituents of
blood. By passively harvesting this fluid from just beneath the skin surface in
a non-invasive, non-inflammatory manner, blood-borne biomarkers for illicit
opioid use can be detected in the ISF using traditional clinical tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important advantage of harvesting ISF using a non-
invasive dermal patch, or Band-Aid-like devices, is that the fluid is pre-
filtered by the capillary system so that large biomolecules do not exist in the
sample. Specifically, the device will sample ISF via noninvasive micro-pore
generation using highly-controlled micro-heater ablation of the uppermost (dead)
skin layer. The microliter quantity of ISF exuded from the skin can be
transported via microfluidics to a reservoir for subsequent external pipetting.
Using the laboratory facilities at the FDA-CDRH the detection of standard
biomarkers of opioid abuse will be undertaken using the sampled ISF biomarker
(meconin, and other standard opioid abuse biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.