* 1938128
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Advancing access to diatom slide collection at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University by whole-slide imaging and virtual microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Marina Potapova, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 507,256.00

Diatoms are microscopic algae essential for the functioning of aquatic
ecosystems and commonly used to reconstruct past and monitor current
environmental changes in lakes, wetlands, rivers and marine basins. The goal of
this project is to develop a novel research tool for scientists studying diatoms
and to facilitate access to the holdings of the Diatom Herbarium at the Academy
of Natural Sciences of Drexel University (ANS). Traditionally, diatom
researchers have been observing and identifying diatoms by manually placing
permanent diatom slides under a light microscope and viewing, measuring and
photographing individual specimens to document their appearance. In this project
the modern slide-scanning technology will be used to create high-resolution
images of diatom slides that could be viewed and studied online using a ‘virtual
microscopy’ application. This approach will automate data collection, create
unique opportunities for data sharing and collaboration and democratize research
by providing an open access to the collection and saving the costs of travel,
shipping, and microscopy. It will also open new perspectives for the development
of image analysis tools as well as for educating the public about microbial
diversity and the role of microorganisms in the
biosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A customized automated microscope slide-scanning
system will be employed for digitizing 6,000 microscope slides at high
resolution with oil immersion and differential contrast optics. These slides
represent various geographic areas, waterbody types and research themes. A web-
based virtual microscopy application adapted for the needs of diatom researchers
and educators and simulating the use of a real microscope will be developed for
viewing these virtual slides. Digital images of the slides, containing millions
of individual diatom specimens and representing snapshots of entire diatom
assemblages, will be made freely available online to support and catalyze
research programs focused on environmental change and its effects on aquatic
biota, as well as on diatom systematics, ecology, and biogeography. Access to
the virtual slides will be provided via the ANS collection website, the national
resource for Advancing Digitization of Biodiversity Collections
(http://www.idigbio.com) and other online biodiversity portals. A cohort of
students will be involved in slide scanning and developing of the ‘virtual
microscope’ web platform, getting experience in working in a multidisciplinary
team and using technology to address environmental
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.