* 1938154
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Protests and Concessions
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Pauline Jones, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2021
* USD 18,720.00

This project addresses why autocratic regimes, which rely on coercion to retain
power, promise concessions to protesters, and the contexts in which those
promises affect policies. When an autocrat responds to a protest today with the
promise of a policy change tomorrow, that promised concession is not fully
credible: if protest ends before policy change is complete, the autocrat may
renege, or deliberately fail to implement a promised concession. The autocrat
can therefore exploit concessions to demobilize protest and ensure office
retention, without real reform. The prospect of reneging directly affects the
behavior of protesters, depending on their level of political knowledge, and
their individual cost of protesting. Variation in these factors among protesters
can make mobilization impossible to sustain once concessions are promised. This
project provides expectations for when concessions are promised to citizens, as
well as for conditions in which protest needs to be sustained after that promise
to realize a benefit. The findings are relevant for citizens in autocracies and
local and international organizations that support them, including the U.S.
government. Improved understanding of the strategic purpose of concessions will
provide policymakers better expectations over when an autocrat submits to
protesters' demands out of weakness, and when they do so to enhance regime
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three sets of questions:
(1) Under what conditions do autocratic governments concede to protesters’
demands?; (2) Under what conditions does reneging, or the deliberate failure to
deliver promised concessions, occur?; and (3) How do protesters strategically
anticipate receipt of concessions? The project includes a formal model, two
original datasets on protest and concessions, and interviews with activists in
Moscow. Overall, this work provides a much-needed full theorization of
concessions as a response to protest, including reneging. It generates novel
insight into how protesters’ perception of the promise of concessions and the
risk of reneging affects the ability to sustain mobilization. Finally, it
contributes to scholarship on authoritarian resilience and
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.