* 1938495
* MPWR 2016 and beyond: Fostering sustainable networks for women in RUME
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Megan Wawro, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2022
* USD 77,437.00

Women in RUME are mathematicians whose research expertise is in undergraduate
education rather than one of the more traditional areas of mathematics. In
general, these women tend to hold academic positions in departments of
mathematical sciences, where they can face some systemic barriers and
professional challenges that can make them feel marginalized. Toward addressing
this issue, this project will build on an infrastructure initiated and
cultivated in prior work: a face-to-face mentoring and partnership system that
targets participation amongst women researchers within undergraduate mathematics
education. This infrastructure has become known as MPWR: Mentoring and
Partnerships for Women in RUME. The project will include support for this
infrastructure for an additional three years. What's more, after the previous
two annual iterations, the MPWR infrastructure is sufficiently established to be
studied as a model to support women in undergraduate STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The positioning of women in RUME in mathematics
departments compounds multiple known issues -- such as women in academia, women
in mathematics, education researchers in mathematics departments, more
specifically, RUME experts in mathematics departments -- exacerbating the
potential for marginalization. Studying this situation in order to advance
understanding, the project will pursue the following research questions: (1)
What are the issues that women in RUME struggle with related to career success,
and more specifically, what impedes women in RUME from social and academic
integration into their research community? (2) How do these issues compare to
(a) men in RUME, (b) women in mathematics research, (c) women in other areas of
mathematics education research, and (d) women in educational research in
general? (3) In what ways do the MPWR seminar impact the RUME community,
specifically focusing on three groups: women in RUME, including (a) those who
have participated in MPWR and (b) women who have not participated in MPWR, and
(c) men in RUME? (4) In what ways does the MPWR seminar support the social and
academic integration of women in RUME?