* 1938608
* SBIR Phase I:  High Surface Area (HSA) Intraluminal Cryoablation for the Treatment of High-risk Patients with Gallstone Disease
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Matthew Nojoomi, ICTERO MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2021
* USD 223,729.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop a safer alternative to gallbladder surgery for elderly
patients at higher risks of complications due to the effects of general
anesthesia. Approximately 200,000 Medicare patients undergo surgery to remove
their gallbladders every year. Unfortunately, 24% of these patients will
experience a perioperative complication due to the effects of general
anesthesia, totaling $500 M in cost annually to the US healthcare system. As the
population ages and management of chronic disease improves, the need for
alternatives to gallbladder surgery increases. This project will develop a
process to affect the entire surface of the gallbladder ("ablation"), inducing a
healing response that will defunctionalize the gallbladder and obviate the need
to remove it. This is the first technology designed to conduct this process
within a tube via a minimally invasive approach. Ultimately, this technology
could be adapted to create more effective devices for other high surface area
tissue targets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is a significant
improvement over current state-of-practice ablation devices due to its ability
to deliver high-surface area ablation within a closed lumen or organ, such as
the gallbladder. Existing conductive devices are designed for targeted ablation
of discrete lesions rather than therapeutic delivery to large tissue targets,
such as the gallbladder. The aim of this project is to develop a new process
using open lumen instillation of cryogen to achieve high surface area
cryoablation of tissues. This raises several unique engineering challenges,
including the design of a delivery mechanism for the uniform distribution of
cryogen across a closed lumen and development of a pressure management system to
properly evacuate the cryogen gas and prevent an increase in intraluminal
pressure. Initial optimization of the cryogen distribution and pressure
management system will be conducted using a benchtop thermal load model of the
gallbladder to approximate the in vivo thermodynamics. Optimized designs will
then be tested in acute and chronic animal models to demonstrate the safety and
efficacy of open lumen instillation of cryogen for high surface area
intraluminal cryoablation of the gallbladder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.