* 1938550
* SBIR Phase I:  Lightweight Self-sensing Robotic End Effectors
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2021
* Mark Gummin, Miga Motor Company
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2021
* USD 224,665.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop silent assistive robotic arms and
end-tools for new robotic applications. The lightweight and dexterous tools – on
the end of an agile robotic arm – will be able to perform intricate tasks such
as cutting, pinching, and grasping for uses as diverse as panning/tilting
cameras, to assembly tasks, to picking soft fruits and berries. Beyond improved
cost and energy efficiency, these new devices will enable new personal robot
applications. In addition, due to their simplicity and significantly lower
weight and size, the proposed products will consume fewer natural resources than
their current counterparts and can be more easily recycled due to the smaller
number of components, ultimately enabling greater use of assistive robotic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will explore the potential of using using Shape Memory (SM) and
Superelastic (SE) nitinol wires instead of motors. SM/SE wires are alloys of
Nickel and Titanium that contract aggressively when heated with electrical
current, producing large forces and modest stroke; they can enable lighter, more
efficient robotic joints and tools to perform a variety of human tasks. The
technical objectives are to design a lightweight, agile, and silent robotic arm
and end effectors utilizing SM and SE nitinol wires to both drive and sense
position and forces. The end effectors will be a pincher/gripper and a cutter.
The arm and end tools will be designed for tasks and loads typically performed
by human hands, creating new tools for applications and loads between delicate
surgeries and larger-scale industrial usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.