* 1938569
* SBIR Phase I:  Broad Spectrum biorational bio- and synthetic insecticides and mosquito repellents
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Nadia Adam, Biomineral Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2021
* USD 224,982.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR project proposing a novel
broad spectrum insecticide safe for humans, expected to be safer than synthetic
insecticides. It will be used in conventional and organic farming, as well as
personal protection/mosquito repellent products, costing significantly less than
the products currently on the market. Crop losses due to insect pests cost
billions of dollars and the limited classes of insecticides are vulnerable to
the constant threat of resistance. In addition, the lack of specificity creates
broad risks due to pesticide residues polluting food and water and causing
environmental damage. In particular, organic farming needs effective
bioinsecticides for economically sustainable yields. The proposed product will
have applications to other mosquito-borne diseases without adverse effects on
human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to combine
an effective insect protein target with a new class of molecules. In particular,
a single molecule and its analogs derived from easily produced and cheaply
priced natural products create new options for cost-effective and scalable de-
novo synthesis for mass production. A few separate molecules from this general
class have been shown to possess the right mechanism of insecticidal activity
specific to insects (not humans). The specific protein target has a well
conserved active site across arthropods (insects). Preliminary technical
feasibility has been established and the Phase I work plan will validate proof-
of-concept for the proposed solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.