* 1938412
* FSML: Enhancing research support infrastructure at the University of Kansas Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* James Bever, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 685,649.00

The University of Kansas Field Station (KUFS) has a rich history of field-based
research, and provides a growing variety of opportunities for novel research,
teaching, and outreach within the ecotone between the eastern deciduous forest
and tallgrass prairie regions of North America. A new Research Support Facility
(RSF) will be developed to accommodate rapidly growing, field-based
environmental research and education at KUFS. The RSF will allow replacement of
over-crowded and ageing workshop facilities, provide adequate space and
equipment to accommodate growing sample processing and storage needs, and
provide project staging areas for resident and visiting scientists. The RSF will
also provide new capacity with a soil processing and soil sterilization facility
to support a growing cadre of collaborative researchers from KU and elsewhere
focused on soil biology and soil microbe-plant interactions. Integration of the
RSF with other existing KUFS facilities will allow centralization of operations
and increase efficiency for internal and external users. These enhancements will
build upon the strong, externally-funded research programs underway at KUFS,
support new research initiatives, facilitate educational offerings, and enhance
safety for KUFS research and education participants. Construction of the
proposed RSF is one feature of a larger vision of the KUFS to attract a greater
diversity of students and researchers from around the globe to utilize our
world-class platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new Research Support Facility (RSF)
will accommodate rapidly expanding field-based research and education activity
at the University of Kansas Field Station (KUFS: https://biosurvey.ku.edu/field-
station ). Development of the RSF will include construction of a new research
support building, renovation and repurposing of an antiquated workshop building,
acquisition of general use equipment, and installation of features that
integrate the two buildings with the rest of the field station facilities, and
enhance safety. The new building will include: a new workshop and fabrication
space; project staging areas; soil sterilization and preparation area; "rough"
sample processing areas; "clean instrumentation room", and flexible spaces for
research projects and field-based classes. The renovated structure will
accommodate seasonal demands for sample processing including sample drying and
refrigeration, storage, and multi-purpose space. Storm shelters, a fire hydrant,
and other elements to enhance safety for site users will be installed. These
enhancements to KUFS facilities will accommodate growing demands by resident and
visiting scholars at KUFS for field-based research and education
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.