* 1938811
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: When Does Interparty Conversation Harm or Heal Affective Polarization
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Jacob Montgomery, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2021
* USD 23,298.00

Americans increasingly dislike, distrust, and even discriminate against members
of the opposite political party. Yet, Americans interact with opposing party
members in their everyday lives. Conversations—whether touching on politics or
not—occur at work, online, or when ordering a morning coffee. How do these
everyday conversations across party lines affect the animosity Americans hold
for opposing party members? When might everyday conversations reinforce, and
when might they mitigate, this animosity? Because engaging in disagreeable
political conversation is important for the healthy functioning of a democracy,
this research analyzes the role political conversations play in shaping
attitudes toward opposing party members. By identifying the conditions under
which conversations tend to heal, and when might they worsen, America's partisan
animosity, this research brings evidence to bear on how Americans' everyday
interactions impact the broader political climate.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Americans' increasing animosity for members of the opposing party is
well-documented. However, it remains unclear how everyday interactions amongst
opposing party members affect this trend. On the one hand, many Americans
strongly identify as members of a political party. Research shows that
partisanship, as a group-based identity, negatively colors our perceptions of
outparty members. It follows that interparty conversation could go awry and
further harm negative attitudes toward outparty members. One the other hand,
theories of intergroup relations suggest that contact with outparty members can
heal outparty animosity. This project addresses these conflicting expectations
by theorizing about how interparty conversations unfold, what effect interparty
conversations have on outparty attitudes, and how this may differ for political
and non-political conversations. This project also develops two novel
methodological approaches to facilitate an experimental test of its hypotheses.
First, this project develops an experimental design suited for experiments
involving social interaction, which is common in studies of deliberation and
political discussion. Second, this project develops a chat software so
participants can engage in real-time, written, online conversations, without the
need for an academic laboratory or existing participant pool. Taken together,
the experimental design and chat software overcome a set of methodological and
practical concerns to improve the experimental study of social
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.