* 1938806
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of Place: How Southern Identity Shapes American Political Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Princess Williams, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 05/31/2022
* USD 23,400.00

________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to understand the relationship between
Americans' identification with the American South (e.g., Southern identity) and
their beliefs about politics. Using residency in the South to measure Southern
identification, existing political science studies that produce mixed evidence
on whether Southern identity is associated with a distinct set of political
beliefs for White Americans face both theoretical and empirical limitations.
These limitations include using Southern residence to measure Southern identity
and understudying the relationship between Southern identity and the political
beliefs of Black, White, and Latino Americans. Based on content analyses of
magazines and newspapers in Southern states, contemporary social media analyses,
and qualitative interviews with Southern residents, the PI constructs a multi-
dimensional cross-racial measure of Southern identity and illustrates how
Southern identity influences Americans to adopt similar political beliefs across
race. This research demonstrates how powerful sub-national identities can be in
shaping elite behavior and mass opinion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses the following questions: (1) is Southern identity a politically potent
social identity for Americans across racial groups and (2) why does Southern
identity have a conservatizing impact on American public opinion? This research
builds on existing political psychology and race and ethnic politics literature
but takes a novel approach that focuses on the role of sub-national identities
in shaping political attitudes and policy preferences across racial groups. The
project relies on a mixed-methods approach consisting of survey data, historical
analysis of South-located newspaper and magazine articles, and textual analysis
of social media data. The PI constructs a new multidimensional and dynamic
measurement of Southern identity and uses the measure to test a set of public
opinion-related hypotheses. Empirically, the PI demonstrates how sub-national
identities can also foster intra-racial group
differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.