* 1938253
* SBIR Phase I:  AI Robotics-driven Material Discovery Platform
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2021
* Xuejun Wang, AUTOMAT SOLUTIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2021
* USD 224,355.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to accelerate the development of new high-
performance battery materials with an Artificial Intelligence (AI) robotics-
driven material development platform. The platform uses machine learning and
robotic high-throughput automation to accelerate effective experiment planning
and minimize errors. It will potentially have a substantial positive impact on
the commercialization of superior battery materials (projected to be a $14 B
market by 2025), to support growth of electric vehicles and other sustainable
transportation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project aims to build a material development platform featuring a
closed-loop machine learning and robotic high-throughput automation, and to
develop a high-performance polymer electrolyte product for lithium batteries.
The platform can potentially change how material innovation is performed and
enable accelerated discovery of electrolytes and other battery materials. The
platformâ€™s workflow iterates the following: (1) initial electrolyte knowledge
base collection; (2) machine-learning model training using the knowledge base;
(3) new electrolyte prescription by the model; (4) parallelized experimental
validation via high-throughput equipment; and (5) knowledge base updates. Phase
I will help to (1) build key electrochemical and mechanical modules on the
robotic system for electrolyte development, (2) improve machine learning models
in terms of feasibility, flexibility, and the capability of optimizing multiple
objective functions, and (3) develop the polymer electrolyte formulation in
order to improve its three primary properties, including ionic conductivity,
voltage stability, and mechanical modulus. It is anticipated that the platform
will achieve high productivity and effectiveness, significantly improve
electrolyte properties, and identify an electrolyte that meets commercialization
system requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.