* 1938999
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the ACM Conference on Information-Centric Networking 2019 (ACM ICN 2019)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Karen Sollins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2021
* USD 10,000.00

This travel grant helps fund US-based 8 students to attend the annual ACM
Conference in Information-Centric Networking, September 24-26, 2019 at City
University of Hong Kong, Kowloon (Hong Kong), China. This conference is the
leading venue for research on the relatively new concept of Information Centric
networking that gained credence as a result of the NSF's Future Internet
Architecture program. Students given the opportunity to attend and participate
in the conference will be exposed to and interact with the leaders in this field
of research, a full program of peer-reviewed papers, poster and demonstration
sessions, and social events. Exposing graduate students to the research venues
and participants in the research field of their choice is a critical part of
their education. These travel grants will allow them to attend.

The best research occurs when researchers are able to interact directly,
discussing and questioning each others' research. This is very effectively
achieved at research conferences. Enabling students to participate fully is key
to building the next generation of top-notch researchers. The more frequently
they are included in the research community and able to participate in such
conferences, the better prepared they will be to become full-fledged
researchers. This award supports US students generally, but specifically targets
women, underrepresented minorities, and students with disabilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.