* 1938518
* SBIR Phase I:  A Universal Flight Management Unit for Unmanned Aircraft Systems
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Sasi Prabhakaran, AKROBOTIX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2021
* USD 224,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable safe and reliable autonomous unmanned
flight operations. Unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) are used in a growing number
of applications requiring increased vehicle autonomy, such as indoor operations,
civilian infrastructure inspection, precision agriculture and aquaculture,
remote sensing, wildlife tracking and conservation, and package/medicine
delivery. As the diversity and number of applications of autonomous UAS keep
growing, platform-independent solutions to onboard autonomy become increasingly
important. Potential market segments for the proposed technology are focused on
the most challenging use cases such as last-mile delivery, urban infrastructure
inspection, and passenger air vehicles (air ambulance, air taxi, air shuttle).
Therefore, technological advances in platform-independent onboard autonomy,
particularly for small unmanned aircraft systems (sUAS), can have a large
positive societal impact by enabling safety and reliability of UAS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project investigates a universal flight management unit (FMU) for nonlinearly
stable and robust autonomy of UAS, in a platform-independent manner. At present,
there is a dearth of nonlinearly stable and robust flight stacks that are
platform/model-independent and real-time implementable on existing hardware,
particularly for sUAS. Two critical challenges to be overcome for reliable
platform-independent autonomy of UAS are: (A) dynamic stability in the presence
of constraints on onboard processors, sensors and actuators; and (B) robustness
to dynamic external uncertainties (e.g., wind, weather) and internal causes
(e.g., changing payloads, onboard faults). The scientific objectives of this
Phase 1 research are: (1) onboard trajectory planning, control and navigation
for autonomous operations of UAS to provide dynamic stability and robustness to
disturbances and sensor noise; (2) embedded software-hardware integration of
guidance, navigation and control algorithms with commercially available hardware
to build a FMU for onboard autonomy; and (3) experimental verification and
validation of this FMU on different quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle platforms,
including a flying-wing platform. The underlying framework behind this platform-
independent FMU will be nonlinearly stable and robust model-free control and
estimation techniques that ensure safe and reliable autonomous
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.