* 1938748
* I-Corps: Remote Health Monitoring from Wearable Antenna Measurements
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* John Fitch, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is significant
as the proposed antenna measurement system and deep learning classification
algorithms can be integrated with 5G mobile devices and provide real-time,
continuous tracking and analysis of a wide range of potential activities. The
technology will potentially benefit a diverse population including, but not
limited to, tracking elderly people at home or in assisted living facilities,
soldiers in the battlefield, and athletes in training or competition. The number
of connected wearable devices worldwide is expected to surpass 1.1 billion by
the year of 2022 and become a $27 billion market. The proposed approach is
adaptive and scalable as more and more wearable devices are being deployed in
the era of internet of things (IoT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
aims to enable dual-use of antennas embedded inside wearable devices for both
wireless communication and motion sensing purposes. Recent research findings
demonstrate that the input reflection coefficient from an on-body antenna
exhibits unique patterns for different motions and can be used for high fidelity
human activity classification as an integrated measurement system. It does not
require integration of specialized motion sensors into wearable devices, which
can reduce the complexity of the system design, the overall power consumption,
and the cost. It can monitor both large-scale activities such as walking and
small-scale activities such as finger movements, and can operate in both indoor
and outdoor environments. The measurement data can be trained and tested by a
customized deep convolutional neural network application to provide high-
fidelity human activity classification results, realizing the goal of
continuously, remote, user-dependent health
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.