* 1938709
* ABR: CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: FTFS: A Read/Write Optimized Fractal Tree File System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Michael Bender, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 896,665.00

Computer applications rely on file systems to read, write, and access user data
safely and efficiently. Unfortunately, conventional file system designs make
some applications fast at the expense of others; similarly, most file systems
are designed to perform well on one particular type of storage device, such as a
hard disk drive (HDD) or flash-based solid-state drive (SSD). Currently, a wide
variety of end-users do not realize the full performance potential of their
storage hardware, unless they are able to select a file system that is well-
matched to their specific workload and hardware. Prior work on the BetrFS file
system prototype demonstrated that, with better on-disk data structures, it is
possible to build a single file system that roughly matches or exceeds the
performance of the best file system for any workload on an HDD. This project
will extend these performance gains, which are enabled by a tight, cross-
disciplinary collaboration between systems and theory researchers, to a wider
range of storage hardware, ranging from complex, archival devices (such as
shingled magnetic recording drives), to very fast flash devices (such as non-
volatile memory express devices). This project will also investigate a more
efficient approach to directory-level cloning, a useful building block for both
server workloads and personal computing systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By
making a large swath of applications run faster across a range of storage
hardware, this project can have significant real-world benefits. Storage
hardware is becoming increasingly varied, and this project can help future-proof
the performance of any application, from commerce to health-care to scientific
computing to education. This project involves an important component to
transition these ideas from research to practice, including maturing the open-
source BetrFS prototype, as well as continuing outreach and tutorials for
practitioners. This project will continue training both undergraduate and
graduate students to design, analyze, build, and measure algorithmically sound
computer systems that are unlike anything they have seen
previously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.