* 1938583
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a novel indigo dye process using biosynthesized molecules
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Tammy Hsu, HUUE, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,944.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project focus on improving the indigo dyeing process.
Indigo, a dye integral to denim production, is produced on an industrial scale
of 65,000+ tons annually by chemical synthesis, and the molecule must be
solubilized with a reducing agent before dyeing. Both processes involve
hazardous chemicals like formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide that are damaging to
dye workers, production facilities, and the surrounding environment. Aniline,
the petroleum byproduct required to create indigo, is toxic when ingested,
inhaled, or in contact with skin and may be carcinogenic. Reducing agents are
deadly for aquatic life when dumped as wastewater in the dyeing process or
costly to clean up as part of wastewater treatment dyeing. Today the indigo
market is approximately $500 M, with indigo selling just under $10/kg. The
proposed project will develop a novel biological method to synthesize the
reduced form of indigo directly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will create a method to use
Escherichia coli to biosynthesize an indigo precursor called indican, a stable,
water-soluble molecule. With the introduction of a b-glucosidase, the indican is
hydrolyzed and is converted to the water-soluble reduced indigo form, thus
circumventing both the indigo chemical synthesis as well as the harmful reducing
agent step. This indican method has been shown to work as an effective indigo
dye on cotton fabric and yarns. To improve the process, the indican titer must
be improved from the host strain. Two parallel strategies are proposed in this
Phase I project: the indican pathway enzymes will be improved by directed
evolution, and the fermentation process will be elongated by feeding key
nutrients that the cell depletes, thus prolonging the productive lifespan of the
fermentation. Currently the cells are fed tryptophan as a pathway precursor;
this Phase I project also proposes engineering the cell to produce its own
tryptophan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.