* 1938527
* STTR Phase I:  Three-Dimensional Printing of Micro-Capillary Needle via Direct Laser Writing
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Kinneret Rand, SEETRUE TECHNOLOGY, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2023
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I project leverages recent
advances in additive manufacturing to solve key technical hurdles and design
deficits of current industry standard microcapillary needles. Microinjection is
a well-established engineering technique and widely used in research and medical
applications such as drug discovery and development, fertility treatments, and
genetics research. The proposed technology will use additive (3D) manufacturing
techniques for a new microcapillary needle to improve the quality,
reproducibility, rigor, and efficacy of this method for a market estimated at
$290 M. This technology will positively impact life sciences research and
medical applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will utilize
state-of-the-art submicron-scale additive manufacturing technologies to
revolutionize microinjection efficacy via substantive versatility in the design
and fabrication of the needle-tip. In particular, two-photon direct laser
writing (DLW) – wherein a focused laser is precisely positioned within a
biocompatible photo material to produce 3D structures comprising cured material
– provides an unparalleled level of geometric control with feature resolutions
on the order of 100 nm. These capabilities enable new flexibility in re-
architecting of the microneedle tip. In addition, due to recent enhancements in
printing speed, DLW-based applications can now shift from niche demonstrations
in the laboratory to fully functional commercial products that support rapid
operation at scale. The project proposes multiple configurations for each
proposed design change with respect to key performance metrics: the anti-
clogging efficacy and fabrication repeatability. This project will: establish
and characterize novel manufacturing protocols, simulate expected
characteristics, experimentally assess (both in the lab and in vitro using the
zebrafish embryo) the quantitative efficacy of these distinct and novel
architectures, and qualitatively evaluate the user's
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.