* 1938172
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Terahertz Image Processing Systems
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Alexander Sappok, RAYSECUR INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will enhance both public safety and public health by addressing two
problems: 1) Approximately 3,500 letters containing white powders and over 5,500
explosive threats are received by private and public offices each year; these
may be hoaxes that result in temporary shut-down and lost productivity; or more
critically, they may contain anthrax, ricin, fentanyl, or an explosive device.
2) The opioid epidemic is fueled by international delivery of powders contained
in small packets, pills, or liquid formulations; all require to non-invasive
detection. This project will develop novel image processing techniques utilizing
terahertz imaging to detect harmful items concealed within letters and packages.
If successful, terahertz scanners powered by these image analysis algorithms may
become as ubiquitous as copiers, printers, and document scanners in any
corporate office, addressing critical public health and safety
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop image
processing and computer vision techniques to capitalize on the multidimensional,
dynamic 3-D terahertz imaging dataset captured via desktop-based terahertz
scanners. No commercially-viable approaches exist, capable of automatically
detecting threats in real-time from terahertz imaging data streams for security
applications. This project aims to develop robust techniques to both enhance the
capabilities of a human operator and automatically detect specific threats. One
non-trivial challenge is the detection of liquid/particle motion within the
context of a moving reference frame - such as the motion of liquid within a
small pouch, itself concealed within a moving package. The terahertz imaging
system is capable of detecting single drops of liquid (50 mg) and imaging the
movement of powders within explosives in real-time. Another focus area for the
project will be the integration of the 3-D terahertz data set together with
contextual information gleaned from other sensor inputs, as well as external
sources due to the connected nature of the device (internet of things). The
fusion of this information with the terahertz data will provide unparalleled
detection capabilities and have far reaching impacts in the field of dynamic,
3-D imaging, well beyond threat detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.