* 1938745
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at 2019 Conference on Computers and Accessibility
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Amanda Lazar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 15
promising graduate students (up to 10 from the United States, who will be funded
by this award), along with about 5 distinguished research faculty. The event
will take place on October 26-27, immediately preceding and in conjunction with
the 21st International Association for Computing Machinery Special Interest
Group on Accessible Computing Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS
2019), to be held October 28-30, 2019, in Pittsburgh, PA. The ASSETS conferences
are the premier forum for presenting innovative research on the design and use
of both mainstream and specialized assistive technologies in support of the
needs associated with speech, motor, hearing, and vision impairments, cognitive
limitations, emotional and learning disabilities, and aging, as well as the
professionals who work with these populations. Researchers and developers from
around the world, in both academia and industry, will meet at ASSETS 2019 to
exchange ideas and present their latest work. For the first time this year,
ASSETS is expanding its scope to include original high-quality research on
topics related to education in computing accessibility. A key component of
building any community is through its youth. The Doctoral Consortium will help
expand the participation of young researchers pursuing graduate studies in this
field, by providing them an opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community
for their innovative work and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior
researchers and peers. It will foster a sense of community among these young
researchers by allowing them to create a social network at a critical stage in
their professional development. Because the students and faculty constitute a
diverse group across a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and
scientific discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future
benefit of the field. The organizers will take steps to promote participation
from institutions with relatively large numbers of students from under-
represented groups. To further increase diversity, the organizers will aim for
institutional diversity, gender diversity, and participation from members of
minority groups underrepresented in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASSETS 2019 Doctoral Consortium will be a
research-focused meeting of an international group of selected Ph.D. candidates
and an international panel of distinguished research faculty. The event will be
composed of two parts: (1) informal introductions and conversation (October 26);
and (2) a more formal all-day workshop, which will include a mixture of student
presentations, feedback, and small group discussions (October 27). Doctoral
Consortium participants will also present their work in a poster session during
the conference itself. The workshop will provide an opportunity for graduate
students from diverse backgrounds (computing, engineering, psychology,
architecture, etc.) to come together and explore their research interests in an
interdisciplinary workshop, under the guidance of the principal investigator and
a panel of experts, so that they can appreciate the broader spectrum of research
and development approaches to assistive technologies and universal usability,
and also experience the community in which they can pursue their endeavors.
Student participants will make formal presentations of their work during the
workshop and will receive constructive feedback from the faculty panel. The
feedback is designed to help students understand and articulate how their work
is positioned relative to related research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
Thus, the consortium will help shape ongoing and future research projects aimed
at assistive technologies and universal access, will promote scholarship and
networking among new researchers in these interdisciplinary fields, and will
also expose the young researchers to a larger community. In addition, the
faculty will give a presentation on job opportunities for researchers both in
academia and in industry, to better inform the students when considering career
options. An evaluation of the consortium will be carried out and the results
made available to the organizers of future such
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.