* 1938734
* Collaborative Research: SSMCDAT2020: Solid-State and Materials Chemistry Data Science Hackathon
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Taylor Sparks, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 62,639.00

This award, with support from the Division of Materials Research, the Division
of Mathematical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities,
sponsors the organization of a "data science hackathon" for researchers in the
fields of solid-state materials chemistry and data science. This event,
SSMCDAT2020, bring together members from these fields to further science through
data-intensive research in order to make advances toward solving challenging
problems relevant to solid-state materials chemistry. Teams work together for a
three-day event, working both as teams and as a large cohort on a set of
research projects. The hackathon lays a foundation for long-lasting
collaborations between materials and data scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) was introduced in 2011 with the goal of
developing and deploying new materials at twice the speed and a fraction of the
cost. Key tenets of the initiative are the ideas that (a) materials "genes"
exist and skilled manipulation of the materials "genome" will lead to rapid
discovery and deployment of advanced materials, and (b) experimental materials
research has been far too costly and slow to be the primary vehicle for
exploration and discovery. For these reasons, the MGI proposes that
investigations should be minimized by judicious use of computational materials
science. The development of such computational techniques has transformed the
field, but unlocking the materials genome still faces major challenges. To
address these challenges, this solid-state materials chemistry-focused
"hackathon" is designed to broaden the approach laid out in the MGI to encompass
the rapidly evolving field of data science. Indeed, early adopters of this
approach have amassed numerous impressive proofs of concept. With strong
partnerships between solid-state materials chemistry and data science
researchers, significant advances toward accomplishing the goals of the MGI can
be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This "data science hackathon" is a
fundamentally interdisciplinary endeavor. Solid-state materials chemistry
researchers are trained in the application of data science tools, becoming
informed of the advantages and limitations of various approaches. Data
scientists are exposed to the breadth of materials data available, as well as
the most pressing solid-state materials research challenges. Special attention
is paid to have participation from promising graduate students and postdocs, as
well as under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.