* 1938985
* CYBER-INSIGHT: Evaluating Cyberinfrastructure Total Cost of Ownership
* CSE,OAC
* 04/09/2019,07/31/2021
* Daniel Reed, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2021
* USD 246,761.00

Academic research computing technologies is rapidly changing. In addition, new
methods in gleaning insight from the deluge of data that is becoming available
in science and society are fueling demand for computing infrastructure, and
motivating commercial companies to provision infrastructure similar to those
found at academic environments. These factors, as well as others, are putting
pressure on academic institutions to find cost-effective approaches to providing
computing infrastructure to maximize scientific benefit while minimizing cost.
This project seeks to understand the cost-effectiveness of different methods of
delivering High Performance Computing capabilities to the academic research
community. Specifically, the project proposes to build, publish, and regularly
update comparisons of the evolving total cost of ownership (TCO) of on premise
HPC clusters and data storage systems relative to NSF-supported facilities and
commercial cloud services such as Amazon AWS, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud
Platform. The results of the project will have broad applicability to the
national research community, institutional resource providers, and funding
agencies. In addition, the project is collaborating with many organizations to
promote long-term maintenance and data sharing of the project outcomes, with the
goal of creating a sustainable infrastructure for long-term
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concretely, the team proposes to build and host a
Jupyter notebook that will enable the cyberinfrastructure (CI) community to add,
modify, and explore total cost of ownership (TOC) models based on a variety of
usage patterns and performance expectations. This will allow the project to
explore questions such as when is it cost-effective to use commercial clouds
compared to university clusters to service researcher needs? How do staff costs,
hardware utilization, capital depreciation, replacement costs, the value of
money, return on investment, power and cooling costs, and bandwidth charges
affect TCO? As science gateways hide resources behind web interfaces, when and
where should such queries execute? In addition to investigating these important
questions, the project is also expected to facilitate community building, shared
experimentation and comparisons. The ultimate goal of the project is to develop
comparative models that allow funding agencies, institutional resource
providers, and individual users to evaluate the costs and benefits of specific
choices and subsidies. Finally, the project will collaborate with the Coalition
for Academic Scientific Computation (CASC), the Association of American
Universities (AAU) and the Association of Public and Land Grant Universities
(APLU) senior research officers (SROs) and CIOs to promote long-term maintenance
and data sharing of the project outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.