* 1938365
* SBIR Phase I:  Visitor Demographic Analysis in Shopping Malls using Computer Vision
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Zohar Kapach, OPSUS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2021
* USD 244,927.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from building a computer vision
platform that will help make communities more useful and appealing to their
occupants regardless of demographic data, with shopping malls as the pilot
application. Shopping malls of the future will blur the lines between community
center and retail space as malls become mixed-use spaces where people will not
only shop, but will also live, work, and play. To make this transition, shopping
mall companies need detailed demographic information regarding mall visitors.
The companyâ€™s technology will enable improved state-of-the-art pedestrian
movement and demographic classification, without collecting any personally
identifiable information. This will enable shopping mall operators to understand
and improve their tenant mix, and thereby better foster communities nationwide.
The data generated could also benefit other industries by revolutionizing
property analysis: governments can use demographic data to analyze changing
populations and urban planners can use foot-traffic information to make cities
cleaner and more efficient. The technology will enable a more detailed
understanding of changing communities and how to help them thrive, without the
privacy compromises that usually accompany video-based technologies. The company
intends to remain at the forefront of privacy-preserving practices with regard
to data collection and management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will solve three crucial problems in
video analytics for obtaining demographic information, while avoiding the need
to collect personally identifiable information, namely: (1) classification of
pedestrian demographics in a public setting, (2) accurate group detection and
path (motion) analysis, and (3) stable path analysis using network camera
imagery. There are currently no large-scale systems capable of accurately
extracting both demographic and path information from network camera imagery.
The proposed technology will analyze video data from a network of cameras placed
throughout a shopping mall, extract demographic foot-traffic patterns to
generate demographic and path data, and then permanently delete the video.
Developing technology that effectively recovers from occlusions that arise in
dense environments is crucial to the commercial adoption of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.