* 1938082
* SBIR Phase I:  Estimating, Learning, and Optimizing Real-Time Carbon Emissions for Energy and Sustainability Management
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Wenbo Shi, SINGULARITY ENERGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research project is that it will advance the area of energy sustainability with
proactive monitoring and management of carbon emissions in real time. The
knowledge of real-time grid carbon data will provide a new perspective for
various applications ranging from smart grid controls to future electricity
market design. More broadly, the demonstration of achieving near-optimal carbon
emissions reduction without sacrificing economics will provide a commercially
viable, scalable path to proactively manage carbon emissions under existing
market mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will: 1) estimate real-time carbon emissions and analyze
grid carbon intensity models from historical data using statistical (offline)
learning approaches, 2) design real-time/online optimization and control
approaches to reduce carbon emissions while maximizing economic benefits under
uncertainties, and 3) develop a proof-of-concept software platform, implement
the models and strategies, integrate with hardware, and validate the methods
through a pilot. A major theme is to integrate real-time carbon emissions with
energy and sustainability management to estimate real-time carbon emissions,
develop grid carbon intensity models, leverage real-time data to improve
sustainability, and make real-time control decisions under uncertainties of the
ambient environment and customer behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.