* 1938248
* SBIR Phase I:  High Energy-Density Hydrogen-Halogen Flow Batteries for Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Brennan Gantner, SKIP TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2020
* USD 224,863.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of a high energy density, low-cost
energy storage technology. Affordable long duration energy storage is critical
to the wide adoption of renewable power. This is a growing market segment which
is underserved by current (e.g., lithium-ion battery) storage technologies.
Energy storage can be of importance in rural communities where the impacts of
power disruption are severe. This project seeks to develop energy storage that,
when paired with solar or wind renewable power, is cheaper than fossil fuel-
based generation. Such a development would accelerate the transition to a modern
clean energy economy, would reduce the environmental impacts of power
generation, and would increase the economic resilience of rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project proposes to develop an electrochemical energy storage device.
Flow batteries are a compelling option for long-duration energy storage, as the
energy storage (chemicals in tanks) is decoupled from the power delivery (in an
electrochemical cell). A major hurdle for flow batteries has been the high cost
of the chemicals used for storage (e.g., vanadium). This Phase I project
develops a flow battery that makes use of commonly available and high energy
density hydrogen and halogen chemical compounds. The project extends this flow
battery technology into new concentration and fluid dynamical regimes that will
enable commercial scaling of the technology. This project also tests novel
bipolar plates made from modern composite materials, examining their suitability
as low-cost, long lifespan cell components in commercial production. Laboratory
efforts are complemented by the development of validated numerical models which
will be used to optimize cell design. These laboratory experiments and validated
numerical models in the high halogen concentration regime will open new windows
for electrochemical energy storage at community and grid
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.