* 1938268
* Workshop/Collaborative Research: NSF Proposal Writing Workshop at 47th SME NAMRC and ASME MSEC; Erie, Pennsylvania; June 10, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Tony Schmitz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/29/2020
* USD 6,596.00

This award provides support for planning, organization and execution of a
proposal-writing workshop to assist young faculty attending joint 47th Society
of Manufacturing Engineers North American Manufacturing Research Conference
(NAMRC) and the ASME Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (MSEC
2019). The attendees will learn how to better frame their research objectives
and write competitive proposals to the National Science Foundation. The workshop
is designed to engage the NSF academic research community, specifically, young
faculty and graduate students aspiring an academic career. Quality proposals
result in quality research, knowledgeable faculty and a well-trained workforce.
This activity contributes to advanced manufacturing, which is an important
sector in the nation's economy. An outcome of the workshop is to identify
approaches for successful research and education in support of addressing
technological and scientific challenges facing the advanced manufacturing field.
The workshop encourages participation of graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, early career faculty, and women and under-represented minorities. It
stimulates ideas for future directions in research and career paths.

The workshop's overarching objective is to help potential principal
investigators write and submit quality proposals to NSF. Participants learn
guidelines for writing competitive proposals by communicating clear research
objectives. The workshop also fosters partnerships and stimulates meaningful
research collaborations among young and established faculty and graduate
students. This activity positively impacts the attendees academic career and
helps develop the nation's human resources. Well-written proposals result in
informed reviews, which are essential to the development of a successful
research project. The main activities of the workshop involve presentations by
NSF program directors, breakout sessions to discuss example research objectives,
a group question/answer period, and a conclusions session. Faculty and graduate
students from across the US are invited to participate in the workshop.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.