* 1938939
* STTR Phase I:  Minimally Invasive, High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound Device for Ablation of Brain Tumors
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Nao Gamo, NEUROSONICS MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2022
* USD 224,997.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I project is to start
validating a novel high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) device for minimally
invasive treatment of brain tumors. The current standard of care is a highly
invasive cranial flap resection, which not only risks infection, uncontrolled
bleeding, and damage to healthy tissue, but also has prolonged post-operative
recovery. Although minimally invasive laser ablation tools have been developed,
they require the probe to be inserted directly into the target, which still
risks bleeding and damaging tissue. Furthermore, while minimally invasive HIFU
tools are available for other conditions, new technologies are needed to address
more distant focal points and account for tissue-specific effects in the brain.
This device is designed to: 1) reduce risks of infection, bleeding, and
incidental damage to tissue; 2) reduce operating (and hence anesthesia) time;
and 3) improve quality of life for patients by promoting faster recovery and
improved aesthetics. The target addressable market is estimated to be nearly $1
B, with an additional $283 M per year for disposable kits and
maintenance/upgrades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project is
developing a novel high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) device offering a
minimally invasive alternative to cranial flap resections to remove brain
tumors. The key differentiating advantage of this technology is in the
combination of: 1) a probe that is inserted through a minimally invasive burr
hole in the skull, allowing a much smaller incision size compared to a cranial
flap surgery; and 2) the use of HIFU, which can be focused at a distance from
the tip of the transducer (without inserting the tip directly into the target).
The main technical hurdles to be addressed are to 1) design a miniaturized
therapeutic ultrasound transducer to allow safe insertion into the brain while
maintaining similar acoustic properties to a larger transducer; and 2) include
capabilities to steer the focus of HIFU to ablate larger targets of complex
geometry. To achieve these goals, the project will: 1) create a digital model to
miniaturize an existing prototype that maintains acoustic performance and
integrates HIFU steering capabilities; 2) fabricate a physical prototype
matching the predicted acoustic power capabilities; and 3) show proof-of-concept
functionality of the prototype in a phantom material and human cadaver brain. If
successful, the final deliverable will be a prototype ready for preclinical
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.