* 1938552
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a novel, highly efficient Descemet's Membrane Endothelial Keratoplasty preparation device expands the donor pool
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Katherine Solley, EYEDEA MEDICAL, INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I project will study and
improve the process of corneal graft preparation in eye banks for use in vision-
restoring transplant procedures to treat corneal diseases, affect more than over
4 million people in the United States. Descemets membrane endothelial
keratoplasty (DMEK) is an advanced procedure involving transplantation of a thin
layer of the cornea with outstanding clinical outcomes. However, this places a
significant burden on eye banks as they use a difficult, time- and cost-
intensive process to isolate the thin layer of the donor cornea (DMEK graft),
subsequently provided to a surgeon for transplantation. The proposed research
will enable development and evaluation of a novel to decrease the difficulty of
DMEK graft preparation, reduce the time required, and expand the eligible donor
pool. Improving the graft preparation process will result in increased economic
efficiency within eye banks, and help enable greater access to vision-restoring
DMEK procedures to individuals in the United States.

This project seeks to develop and evaluate a novel, first-in-class graft
preparation device that standardizes, de-skills, and improves the viability of
the liquid bubble technique (LBT) for DMEK graft preparation. The proposed
device overcomes the major barriers to LBT adoption: (1) consistent needle
insertion into the correct tissue plane and (2) endothelial cell loss (ECL) due
to high pressure in the cornea. It does so via a stabilizing corneal base in
conjunction with a needle insertion system to allow for simple, standardized
DMEK preparation in under 5 minutes with less than 5% failure rates at
appropriate graft viability, even in diabetic and obese donor corneas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.