* 1938976
* Collaborative Research: Ice Melting Induced by Flows in an Adjacent Immiscible Liquid Layer
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Seong-kyun Im, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2023
* USD 238,133.00

The deterioration of ice by spill contamination is a complex process that is not
well understood. This research project will study the effects of convective flow
and melt layer film on the melting dynamics of an ice wall in contact with a
heated oil. Such situations would be encountered during an oil spill event in
the Arctic regions when the oil layer absorbs heat from the Sun or from flames
if the oil is burning. The heat absorption will cause different melt patterns
and carve out lateral cavities inside the ice wall. At a large scale, this
process can cause a shift in the structure and geology of floating ice blocks
and thereby impact the Arctic ecosystem in unanticipated ways. This research
project will address this knowledge gap through a series of experiments that use
imaging and tracking methods to analyze the ice melting process. The project
researchers will also create project-based learning opportunities for juniors
and seniors at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute and a new graduate-level
course at the University of Notre Dame.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
project investigates the fundamental science underlying the interaction of an
immiscible liquid with ice. Previous studies on the melting of sea ice have
considered parameters such as salinity and natural convection in the water to
understand the fluid dynamics and heat transfer aspects of melting. However, ice
melting by an oil layer is significantly different because of the
characteristics of oil that influence the heat transfer pathways substantially.
For example, the immiscibility of oil layer with water and presence of the gas-
phase brings about interfacial forces that change the fluid flow and heat
transfer dynamics. The induced convective patterns in the liquid layer by
addition of interfacial forces to the existing buoyancy flows will cause unique
flow patterns that impact the ice melting. Therefore, the scientific
understanding of fluid flow and heat transfer pathways in the oil layer is
required to predict oil-ice interaction and melting rates. Identification of the
controlling mechanisms governing the convective flows will be achieved through
the novel use of luminescence imaging techniques combined with particle tracking
velocimetry. These experimental approaches will give spatiotemporal information
on fluid transport and temperature. The knowledge obtained from this study will
be pivotal in developing numerical models that address melting
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.