* 1938531
* The Interplay Between Notch Ligands is Critical for Epidermal Sensory Neuronal Specification and Spatial Patterning in the Ascidian Embryo
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Robert Zeller, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 654,780.00

During the process of embryonic development, a fertilized egg develops into an
organism composed of many different types of cells such as muscle and nerve. A
particularly common mechanism that instructs cells what type to become involves
communication via proteins on their surface. The Zeller laboratory studies this
process in a simple animal model called an ascidian that allows them to observe
individual cells and manipulate the functions of their proteins. This project
will utilize an approach called optogenetics, in which a specific color of light
manipulates the function of these cell surface proteins to alter how cells
communicate with one another. By illuminating the ascidian embryo at different
times, they can manipulate the process of cell communication precisely to learn
how this mechanism operates. This will be one of the first applications of
optogenetics in ascidians and they will provide the broader scientific community
with the set of tools that they develop. In addition, they will develop learning
modules for both undergraduate and graduate-level courses to provide students
with an opportunity to use optogenetics. Lastly, they will share this work with
the public by developing an activity that demonstrates the principles of
optogenetics to children that will be incorporated into our lab’s annual open
house presentation at the San Diego State University Marine
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ascidian larval peripheral nervous system
(PNS) is composed of a series of ciliated sensory neurons that are patterned, in
part, by Notch-mediated lateral inhibition. The sensory neurons express two
Notch ligands, Delta and Jagged, at different times and in different spatial
domains suggesting that more complex Notch signaling, including lateral
induction, may play a role in spatial patterning. To investigate this, the
Zeller laboratory will utilize an ontogenetically-regulated transcription
factor, coupled with tissue-specifically expressed CRISPR reagents to manipulate
Notch ligand function with precise spatiotemporal control. By manipulating the
function of both Notch ligands individually and simultaneously at different
times during PNS development they will tease apart patterning contributions from
lateral inhibition and induction. This will be one of the first uses of
optogenetics in ascidians and they will provide reagents to the broader
scientific community. Using optogenetics-based approaches in other experimental
systems will provide a level of precise spatiotemporal regulation that is
currently difficult to achieve. They will develop an optogenetics module that
will be introduced into one or more advanced undergraduate laboratory courses at
San Diego State University and introduce graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows to optogenetics by developing a laboratory module in the ascidian
section of the Embryology Course at the Marine Biology Laboratory in Woods Hole.
Finally, to expose the general public to optogenetics, they will develop an
interactive presentation for children that will explain optogenetics principles
that will be incorporated into our lab’s annual open house presentation at the
SDSU Marine Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.