* 1938077
* PhD Student Travel Funds for INFORMS Transportation Science and Logistics Society 2020 Conference; Arlington, Virginia; May 27-29, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Barrett Thomas, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This grants supports the next generation of researchers in transportation
science and logistics by providing funding for graduate students to travel to
the INFORMS Transportation Science and Logistics Society Conference being held
in May 2020. The grant contributes to the prosperity and welfare of the nation,
since the participating students will be the next generation researchers who
solve the future's transportation and logistics challenges. The field of
transportation and logistics is constantly changing. Efforts by retailors
Amazon, Walmart, and Target, and meal delivery services such as GrubHub and
UberEats, have dramatically increased home deliveries and along with it
increased urban congestion and pollution. Further, a rapidly aging population
will require new transportation practices, while changes in long term
environmental conditions may require redesigned traffic flows and
infrastructure. At the same time, new technologies, such as autonomous vehicles
and drones, offer innovative opportunities to solving these challenges.
Attending this conference will give students the chance to both develop their
own research through feedback from other academics and to also learn about the
cutting edge work being done by others. Removing barriers to attendance by
providing funds for travel means that a broad and diverse group of students will
be able to attend, thus in turn developing a diverse set of future
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The INFORMS Transportation Science and
Logistics Society's Triennial Conference seeks to be the premier North American
conference for academics and practitioners who are addressing the challenges and
opportunities in transportation and logistics. Specifically, the conference
focuses on the application of optimization methods to transportation and
logistics problems. In addition, the purpose of the conference is to "provide a
regular, high-quality, and reasonably affordable conference in an easily
accessible location in North America that serves the broad research interests of
the transportation science and logistics community with an emphasis on promoting
new and impactful areas of research." As participants, the graduate students
will have a chance to present their work and see the presentations of other
scholars. In addition, the students will have a chance to build their network of
scholars in similar research areas, helping to increase the quality of their
work. The application and selection process will seek applicants capable of high
quality research who might not otherwise be able to attend the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.