* 1938833
* GOALI: Electrochemical Sodiation of Selenium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* William McKenna, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 520,520.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project will bring high-energy sodium metal
batteries (NMBs) much closer to commercialization, potentially transforming the
entire secondary battery field including automotive and stationary storage,
accelerating the transition away from CO2 emitting fuels. The project's outcomes
will help to mitigate a major crisis that is imminent if lithium ion batteries
(LIBs) displace the fossil fuels in automotive and stationary energy storage
applications. Mined supplies of the lithium carbonate precursor are limited in
availability, so large-scale deployment of LIBs in electric vehicles and
electric grids may lead to major lithium shortages. Akin to the well-known "Oil
Shocks" of the past, a precursor shortage could lead to a series of lithium
price shocks, threatening to derail the entire electric vehicle movement. Unlike
lithium, sodium is both easy to find and is inexpensive, with wide supplies of
precursors available on land and from salt water through desalination.
Importantly, this GOALI research project will result in new engineering and
scientific knowledge essential to Graphenix Development Inc.'s efforts to pursue
their "next-generation" battery development strategy. Such effort will help
U.S.-based company (headquarters in Buffalo NY, manufacturing in Rochester NY)
towards becoming a global green energy storage leader. The graduate students
supported through this project should find post-graduate work in a number of
emerging U.S. renewable energy industries, such as in electric vehicles. This
research is providing opportunities for U.S. Military Veterans and local high-
school students to engage in both academic and industrial learning activities.
Also, this project involves direct interactions with staff at Brookhaven
National Laboratory (BNL) and at Sandia National Laboratory (SNL).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This combined experimental-modeling
effort addresses the core of the structure-properties relationships in energy
storing materials. The project will elucidate the fundamental questions
regarding how sodium is stored and transported at various states of charge in
"beyond lithium" systems, such as in selenium - carbon nanocomposite battery
cathodes. Many of the existing "lithium-inherited" paradigms will be done away
with, leading to the transformative, new understanding of sodiation
electrochemical reactions. This study provides an opportunity to broaden
understanding of the rich array of possible complex solid-state phenomena in
energy storage materials. The effort combines electroanalytical and structural
characterization methods with atomic level simulation. Advanced techniques are
being employed, including site-specific transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
and surface spectroscopy of the electrodes at various voltages, cycle numbers,
and states of degradation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.