* 1938168
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Metal Anode with Artificial Solid Electrolyte Interphase (SEI) for Rechargeable Lithium Metal Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,08/31/2021
* Wentao Li, LiBAMA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop an advanced metal anode (AMA) material for
rechargeable lithium metal battery focused on meeting the needs of a high energy
density, low-cost energy storage system for applications in consumer
electronics, electric vehicles, electric planes and renewable energy storage.
The project is designed for the growing global lithium battery market,
developing the AMA material as a drop-in replacement for the $10 B anode market.
These batteries would enable broader adoption of electric vehicles and renewable
energy sources. This SBIR Phase I project proposes to prepare an anode material
utilizing an artificially generated solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). Use of
lithium metal as the anode can double the energy density of current lithium
batteries; however, state-of-the-art lithium metal thin film anodes have the
tendency to form dendritic structures near the interface with repeated cycling,
causing performance and safety issues. Based on a new SEI model, the proposed
copper-based anode material will have an SEI guiding the deposition of lithium
away from the interface with its designed pore structure. Phase I research
efforts will focus on: 1) preparing the AMA material with perfectly covered SEI;
2) demonstrating lithium plating and de-plating capabilities of the AMA material
with coin half-cell and full-cell cycling tests. In conjunction with appropriate
electrolytes and electrodes, the AMA-based coin half-cells will finish 300
cycles at 1 mA/cm2 and 1 mAh/cm2; and the AMA-based coin full-cells will have
100 cycles at no less than 0.2 C rate with 80% capacity retention.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.