* 1938317
* STTR Phase I:  Scalable CO2 electrolyzers for the production of ethylene glycol and chlorine
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Anders Laursen, RENEWCO2 LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR project is the technical
and economic demonstration of a device for the the polymer chemical industry.
Ethylene glycol is primarily used in the production of plastics for textiles and
food packaging. Chlorine is a major industrial chemical used in water
purification and fabrication of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) fabrication. This
proposed electrochemical process utilizes waste carbon dioxide and renewable
electricity, resulting in net carbon-negative emissions, unlike petrochemical
sourcing. Combining ethylene glycol and the co-production of chlorine will make
the overall process cost-competitive with production from fossil feedstocks,
while supporting environmental sustainability. This platform technology holds
promise for an extension to other parts of the chemical industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to address the
sustainable co-production of three major chemicals by one unitized device:
Chlorine (Cl2), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), and ethylene glycol from renewable
electricity, brine, and carbon dioxide. Current carbon dioxide reduction (CO2RR)
suffers from three major constraints: 1) high electricity costs, 2) low relative
price of bulk chemicals, and 3) low energy efficiency of CO2 reduction. This
project will address these constraints by using recently developed energy
efficient CO2RR to ethylene glycol catalysts and co-producing Cl2 and NaOH to
offset the electricity cost and low ethylene glycol price. Three technical
barriers that result from combing Cl2, NaOH, and CO2RR will be addressed: A)
Producing Cl2 and NaOH, which requires strict product separation (leading to
less valuable hypochlorite and impure NaOH); B) Maintaining three different pH
conditions in the cell (acidic for chlorine, basic for alkali, and neutral for
CO2RR); and C) Providing fundamental insights into the membrane, electrode, and
electrolyzer designs for complex multiproduct processes. These will be addressed
by combined experiments and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.