* 1938293
* SBIR Phase I:  Design of custom ultrasonic lens for uniform sonication of biological samples in microplates
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Sandeep Kasoji, Triangle Biotechnology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a high-throughput, low-
cost solution to alleviate a major bottleneck in genomics and cancer research.
Special next-generation sequencing (NGS) workflows have become one of the most
important tools for personalized medicine, helping scientists discover new ways
to diagnose cancer and other diseases, ultimately improving patient outcomes.
While sequencing platforms continue to advance technologically, less attention
has been given to improving the necessary and difficult step of fragmenting or
shearing genomic DNA (gDNA) to prepare samples for NGS. An estimated 75-80% of
work activity in a modern-day analytical lab is spent on processing and
preparing samples. The current industry standard for gDNA shearing requires
expensive instrumentation (&gt;$150,000), and can require more than 2 hours to
serially process 96-samples. Less expensive alternative solutions perform
inconsistently, and are not amenable for high-throughput applications. A
critical need exists for a high-throughput, low-cost solution for parts of this
process. The proposed project is focused on developing a targeted lens
technology for a high-throughput, low-cost sonication device. The ultimate goal
of this project is to make sample processing for NGS applications inexpensive,
consistent, fast, and widely available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a transformative
solution to inconsistent, costly, and cumbersome sample processing for NGS. The
Targeted Multifocal Lens (TML) technology will enable consistent, parallel gDNA
shearing of 96 samples in a standard PCR microplate, improving by an order of
magnitude both throughput speed and reduced capital costs. The TML technology
employs kinoform theory to enable focused sonication of multiple samples using
just a single acoustic source, thus eliminating the need for robotic scanning
systems. In Phase I, we will design and prototype a novel bath-type sonicator
that integrates with the TML technology. We will perform theoretical and
experimental modeling and characterization to demonstrate feasibility of TML for
consistent sonication of a 96-well microplate. We will finally validate the
performance of the prototype sonicator by shearing 96 samples of gDNA in
parallel, in under 15 minutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.