* 1938895
* Probabilistic Modeling and Stochastic Optimization for Effective Demand Response Decision Management under Uncertainties in Emerging Smart Energy Markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Wei-Jen Lee, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2024
* USD 482,068.00

With rapid expansion of renewable energy resources and residential smart home
networks, power distributors in the future must respond to an extremely dynamic
and complex supply-demand balancing problem, which will lead to a dramatically
different energy market. To address such market transformation, the concept of
demand response (DR) has been proposed to achieve dynamic supply-demand balance
through customer side response of load and generation regulated by dynamic
market electricity prices. Although there have been many encouraging advances in
DR research, the current data analytics and optimization models are still
limited in capability and scalability to achieve effective DR decision-making
under various system and market uncertainties. The primary target of this
project is to bridge this knowledge gap and provide new predictive modeling and
optimization methods enabling effective DR decision management for load service
entities (LSEs) to deploy practical and sustainable DR programs in the energy
markets. The methodological breakthroughs in this project have broad societal
impact on facilitating smart grid transformation in the upcoming years for
large-scale integration of renewable energy resources and residential smart home
networks. This project will organize outreach and educational activities to
broaden a diverse student participation, particularly underrepresented
minorities, in highly impactful research areas that integrate data science,
statistics, machine learning, and optimization for complex system decision-
making in the big data era. Results of this research will be disseminated
through a series of workshops and seminars on decision analytics, probabilistic
machine learning, and smart energy technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address the challenges of deploying practical and sustainable demand response
(DR) programs in a stochastic smart grid market, this research will establish
new mathematical modeling and stochastic optimization methods via three
integrated research tasks: 1) develop a new probabilistic deep learning method
to investigate complex spatial-temporal variable interactions and make
sequential forecasts with uncertainty quantification; and accordingly develop
new forecasting models for key market variables, such as electricity price, load
and renewable generation, etc.; 2) develop a multi-agent adaptive dynamic
programming (ADP) approach for a comprehensive DR planning and operational
optimization framework to achieve real-time optimal intra-day DR operations; 3)
develop a two-stage optimization framework to optimize energy transactions and
DR decisions in the day-ahead energy markets. The probabilistic deep learning
method combines Bayesian nonparametric methods with deep learning structures to
solve complex multivariate sequence-to-sequence forecasting problems. It is
critical to quantify forecasting errors precisely to mitigate risks of decision
making in uncertain markets. Both the multi-agent ADP and two-stage optimization
problems will use a design and analysis of computer experiments approach that
will enable effective real-time and day-ahead decision-making processes for an
LSE to interact with dynamic customer agents and stochastic smart energy
markets. The outcomes of this research will construct a solid methodological
foundation to develop effective and sustainable DR management programs for the
emerging smart energy markets. This project will advance the frontiers of
knowledge in probabilistic deep learning and stochastic optimization research to
solve many challenging real-world decision-making problems in highly stochastic
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.