* 1938142
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Social Input to Scarce Resource Distribution
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Jason Yaeger, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2021
* USD 25,191.00

Dr. Jason Yaeger and Mr. Sebastian Salgado-Flores, of The University of Texas at
San Antonio (UTSA), will examine the impact of social practices and ritual
behavior on Postclassic Maya harvesting and management of firewood. Because wood
was the primary fuel for cooking food in pre-historic Mesoamerican societies,
firewood harvesting put significant strain on the forests around ancient
settlements. The absence of beasts of burden limited harvesting to relatively
short distances, and the preferred fuelwood trees grow slowly and were likely
unable to meet the needs of a growing population. Thus, this research studies
the wood charcoal from Postclassic Maya sites to determine whether their access
to higher quality firewood declined over time, or whether the sites' inhabitants
were able to overcome the challenges mentioned above and sustainably harvest
preferred woods. The research will compare the taxa of firewood used in high-
status residences, low-status residences, and public feasting events, in order
to understand whether the strategies employed by elites to improve or maintain
their social position included greater consumption of higher-quality wood fuels.
This project will involve collaboration with archaeologists at several
universities in the United States and Mexico, the Comision Nacional de areas
Naturales Protegidas in Mexico, and the Kleberg Advanced Microscopy Center at
the University of Texas at San Antonio. This research will also refine
archaeometric methods for estimating the diameter of a tree or branch from a
charcoal fragment and will contribute to the training of a minority doctoral
student in archaeobotanical methods and the use of a scanning election
microscope.

Over the last several decades, research in anthracology (the study of charcoal
recovered from archaeological sites) has become increasingly relevant to
understanding of human-environment dynamics and how societies succeed or fail to
achieve long-term resource security. The field's understanding of human fuelwood
collection is currently based on a model guided by the "Principle of Least
Effort," which expects wood gatherers to optimize the amount of energy gained in
each harvest. Since the difference in heat release between higher and lower
quality fuelwoods is marginal compared to the heavy labor cost of harvesting and
transporting wood, this model assumes that ancient harvesters prioritized
convenience and were relatively indiscriminating about which species they
harvested. While this model appears to adequately explain species distribution
of charcoal assemblages in some archaeological cases, it does not fully explain
assemblages that are dominated by a few types of wood or differences in the
species composition of assemblages deposited contemporaneously at the same
archaeological site. It also assumes that politics and social organization
played little role in the way that cultures manage and consume fuelwood. Thus,
this research will test the Principle of Least Effort model alongside an
alternative model of firewood procurement grounded in Political Ecology and the
social dynamics in Postclassic Maya communities. This latter model hypothesizes
that social elites in those communities found ways to preserve their access to
preferred wood types. This model predicts that the charcoal assemblages produced
by elite activity (particularly those produced by public events like feasting)
will be more likely to contain preferred species than assemblages produced by
non-elite households.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.