* 1938015
* 2019 Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience (CRCNS) Annual Principal Investigators Meeting
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Alexander Huk, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

Computational and quantitative approaches to the study of the brain and nervous
system have been a part of neuroscience since its beginnings as a field.
However, recent advances in the ability to collect large data sets, to create
and run very large simulations, and in the development of new data analysis
approaches may soon lead to an even more central role for computational thinking
in this field. The goal of this meeting is to promote discussions and
collaboration between experimental and computational neuroscientists. The
meeting will highlight strategies for increasing the participation of
historically under-represented groups in computational
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators and Co-Principal
Investigators of grants supported through the NSF-NIH-ANR-BMBF-BSF-NICT-AEI-
ISCIII Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience (CRCNS) program meet
annually to report on projects; to discuss scientific, educational, and program-
related issues; and to develop a cohesive investigator community representing
many different approaches to computational neuroscience. This 15th meeting of
CRCNS investigators brings together a broad spectrum of computational
neuroscience researchers supported by the program, and includes plenary
lectures, oral and poster presentations, and panel discussions. The meeting is
scheduled for September 2-4, 2019 and is hosted by the University of Texas,
Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.