* 1938766
* Workplace Safety for Ocean Sciences: A workshop toward coordination of policies and best practices to address sexual harassment in ocean science field research; Washington DC 2020
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Kristen Yarincik, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2022
* USD 45,464.00

Field research is a central component to the advancement of ocean science
research, and most members of the future academic ocean science workforce are
trained in field settings. Therefore, field safety is an important topic for the
ocean science community. A recent study (Clancy et al. 2014) found that women
students and postdocs were often targets of sexual harassment in field
locations, and the offenders were predominantly their superiors within the
research team. A consensus study report by the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM 2018) identified sexual harassment as a major
factor in creating hostile work environments that reduced the participation of
women in the academic workforce. To address the issues of harassment and
workplace safety effectively, the ocean science community needs a coordinated
effort to identify best practices and to ensure that these policies and
practices are implemented appropriately in all settings, but particularly in
remote settings such as marine labs and aboard ships. The proposed workshop will
be an important step in identifying best practices, developing a community
consensus on how to implement these practices, and disseminating information
about the effort to the ocean sciences community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Consortium on Ocean Leadership (COL) will organize and convene a two-day
workshop for about thirty partcipants to focus specifically on the ocean science
field research environments and ocean science community. It is informed by prior
research on this topic and will take the next step toward addressing the problem
of sexual harassment of women within the ocean sciences community by building
consensus toward a set of policies and best practices and developing a roadmap
for consistent implementation of them across the ocean sciences. The workshop
will: communicate best practice recommendations of prior research to the ocean
science community; discuss which recommendations are most relevant and feasible
for oceanographic vessels, marine laboratories, and other coastal and
oceanographic field settings; and draft a roadmap for more consistent and
coordinated implementation of those recommendations and policies. COL will
convene representatives from the oceanographic community who set and enforce
policies at coastal field stations, marine labs, and research vessels, including
the National Association of Marine Laboratories (NAML) and UNOLS, as well as
representatives who are impacted by these policies. The effort will advance
consistent policy and practice changes to improve prevention of sexual
harassment and to improve workplace safety. This effort will be an important
contribution to the continued success of oceanographic research in the U.S. and
will support the goals of the Division of Ocean sciences to develop a diverse
workforce and to ensure safe working environments for all researchers, students
and staff who participate in NSF-funded research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.