* 1938438
* SBIR Phase I:  Natural Language Processing for Enhanced Sales Communication
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Spencer Vagg, INITIUM AI INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2021
* USD 224,847.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from revolutionizing the way
businesses approach sales, by directly and positively impacting sales
communication. This, in turn, will lead to increased sales efficiency and
increased customer satisfaction, while facilitating the acquisition of new
customers and the retention of existing ones. These aspects will directly impact
a company's bottom line and improve profitability. While the focus of this
project is to build AI technology that can assist sales representatives in their
communication, the lessons learnt here and the methods developed will be
applicable to other areas where communication is essential, including the
medical domain, counseling, or interviews. Furthermore, the goal of this project
is to maintain significant involvement of women and under-represented minorities
in this woman-owned company. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on building an intelligent
sales platform expected to positively transform the sales process in business-
to-business interactions. This will be achieved by creating technology that
assists sales agents by increasing the effectiveness of their communication.
Building on recent advances in Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning,
novel methods and tools will be developed to measure and ensure sales agent
responsiveness, accuracy, professionalism, and empathy in relation to customer
communication. This project will leverage a proprietary large-scale dataset of
sales emails and associated outcomes as a basis for the machine learning
process. By the end of the Phase I project, this research will enable a direct
and data-driven understanding of outcome-oriented sales communication and a
quantified assessment of potential leads. This will be paramount to the future
development of the project and to its impact and success in the
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.