* 1938260
* SBIR Phase I:Ground-Loop Heat Exchanger Solution for Low Cost Ground-Source Heat Pumps
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Stewart Bible, ITERATIVE METHODS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,807.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is that it will significantly lower the initial cost of
residential and commercial ground-source heat pump (GSHP) systems, while
expanding the existing market through broadening GSHP applicability. This
project will demonstrate the feasibility and performance under real-world
conditions of a novel in-ground heat exchanger that is both inexpensive and easy
to install, even on space-constrained lots, with little landscape disruption.
The technology will lead to increased adoption of energy-efficient
heating/ventilation/air conditioning (HVAC) technology, increasing the
“electrification” of the energy economy and reducing air polluting emissions.
These GSHP systems will impact the national market of heating and cooling
systems, with potential annual energy savings of over 6.4 quadrillion BTUs, end-
user savings of $77. B in annual energy costs, and reduced peak electricity
demand by 144 GW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
further develop a technology addressing the applicability, desirability and
cost-competitiveness of GSHP systems. The chief technical objective of the
project is to optimize system components and architectures by increasing
fundamental understanding of in-ground heat exchanger performance and
installation methods through digital and physical prototyping across a range of
real-world conditions. A second technical objective is to improve fundamental
understanding of the energy storage capability of the technology and how it can
be leveraged through operational cycling to further increase the performance-
cost ratio. Studies of physical prototyping, installation and thermal properties
will be conducted, in addition to computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations.
The primary goals are to demonstrate significant benefits in installed
performance-to-cost and an installation time of under 8 hours for a typical
residential 3-ton system, compared to the current state-of-the-art of 16
hours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.