* 1938086
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Evolution of genetic networks in grass abscission zones
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Elizabeth Kellogg, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 666,382.00

Agriculture depends on plants that hold on to their seeds until harvest, yet
wild plants need to drop their seeds, in a process known as shattering or
abscission. Therefore, domestication in cereal crops such as wheat, rice, and
corn was the result of human selection for spontaneous mutant plants that did
not shatter. In a world facing rapid population growth and changing climates, it
is crucial to understand the mechanism of shattering to be able to domesticate
and improve new wild or less domesticated cereal crops, thereby diversifying
food choices and improving agriculture in marginal environments. This project
will examine the shattering process, which is controlled by a specialized set of
cells known as an abscission zone (AZ). Cell development of the AZ will be
compared in different cereal crops and their wild relatives, including pearl
millet and sorghum, two economically valuable and drought tolerant cereals. The
project aims to identify genes that are required for a functional AZ, and to
understand how modification of these genes causes morphological differences in
the AZ in different species. High school students, undergraduates and secondary
school teachers will be involved in conducting the research. The research
experience provided to secondary school teachers will be used to develop new
lesson plans, and further impact next generation education in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene regulatory networks are continually modified over
evolutionary time, but the speed of modification and the nature of the changes
are generally not known. This project addresses both the tempo and mode of
change in the network controlling the abscission zone (AZ) in plants, a
specialized cell layer that permits plants to drop seeds, fruits, petals or
leaves. The AZ of three distantly related grass species (weedy rice,
Brachypodium, and Setaria) is controlled by distinct sets of genes, suggesting
rewiring of the underlying genetic network. This project will investigate the AZ
networks among additional species in grass subfamily Panicoideae, including wild
and cultivated pearl millet (Cenchrus americanus, closely related to Setaria)
and sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), a more distant relative. Histology (using light
and transmission electron microscopy) and gene expression patterns (RNA-seq)
will be characterized at several stages of development. To determine whether the
extensive rewiring comes from changes in cis-regulatory modules, the upstream
and downstream regulators of two conserved transcription factors, YAB2/SH1 and
MYB26, will be characterized in the genetically tractable species Setaria and
Brachypodium, with a combination of mutant analysis, RNA-seq, DAP-seq and
bioinformatics. To determine if the disparate early regulatory networks converge
on a conserved late stage set of genetic interactions, transcriptomic,
enzymatic, and cell wall changes will be evaluated right before and after
abscission. Together, these data will determine how and how fast the gene
network regulating AZ formation is remodeled over time. High school students and
teachers will be involved in many aspects of plant
phenotyping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.