* 1938302
* EAGER:  Integrating host-associated microbes into trait-based community ecology frameworks
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Katherine Amato, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,806.00

Knowledge of how communities of animals respond to environmental change is
important for understanding patterns of biodiversity. Identifying the traits
that allow a species to occupy a given environment also allows us to predict if
that species will be able to persist in the face of environmental perturbation.
Research over the past two decades has shown that microbes living in the
gastrointestinal tracts of mammals, known as the gut microbiome, can shape host
metabolism, immune function, and behavior. The composition and function of the
gut microbiome also varies with host environmental factors, such as diet.
Because of these interactions, the gut microbiome could be considered a host
trait that responds to environmental shifts and helps determine whether host
populations can persist. Nevertheless, the gut microbiome has generally not been
integrated into models of host ecology. This project aims to determine the
extent to which gut microbiomes influence host population dynamics and can
therefore be considered a host trait that contributes to the improvement of
models of host ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study focuses on two
populations of wild, black and gold howler monkeys (Alouatta caraya) in
Argentina. Here, the climate is subtropical, with marked seasonal changes in
temperature and plant community structure, which puts A. caraya at high risk for
nutritional stress. Additionally, one of the two study populations experiences
stronger seasonal climate shifts than the other. The research team will collect
data describing climate and plant community structure as well as A. caraya diet
for five groups of A. caraya in each population during three seasons. Fecal
samples for describing the microbiome and its function, and urine for describing
A. caraya energy balance and inflammation status, will also be collected along
with demographic data. These data will be integrated to determine how the gut
microbiome shifts in response to environmental variation, to identify
physiological consequences for A. caraya, and to link these processes to A.
caraya population dynamics. The results will be a critical first step toward
integrating the gut microbiome into trait-based host ecological
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.