* 1938533
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering a novel 3D metal printed orthodontic system for lingual attachment-enabled clear aligner therapy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Christina Jackson, SOVE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I project aims to optimize
post-processing techniques of a novel three-dimensional (3D) metal-printed
orthodontic system for precise, personalized, and esthetic treatment.
Approximately 60% of adults need orthodontic treatment to improve the position
and function of their teeth; however, an obstacle to adults seeking orthodontic
treatment is the unattractiveness and moderately painful nature of traditional
braces. Up to 80% of these patients are not candidates for treatment with clear
aligners due to the severity of their malocclusion (improper positioning of
teeth). The proposed innovation is a complement to clear aligner therapy that
will enable all patients to be treated with an invisible orthodontic appliance,
regardless of malocclusion severity. 3D metal printing technology is used to
fabricate custom, one-piece, metal attachments with a wire-holding channel that
are placed on the back of the teeth and used in conjunction with clear aligners.
Successful development of this product and its implementation in dentistry will
shift the paradigm of tooth movement towards esthetic and effective personalized
treatment with minimum tooth reduction and maximum comfort for millions of
patients per year. The technology addresses a $30 billion
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will optimize 3D metal
printing as a high-potential technology for use in human orthodontia devices.
Although additive manufacturing fabricates unique 3D structures from metal
powder, layer-by-layer deposition results in a ladder structure and high surface
roughness. Further, laser sintering could yield enriched chromium carbide grain
boundary, which is not desirable, as it may lead to corrosion in the oral
environment. Post-processing techniques to prepare 3D metal printed appliances
for intraoral use have not yet been established. The funds from this SBIR grant
will be used to complete the following aims: 1) Determine a polishing strategy
for finishing 3D metal printed surfaces that reduces the surface roughness and
creates a passive surface layer that is resistant to corrosion; 2) Evaluate in
vitro and in vivo biocompatibility of the 3D metal printed brackets. A variety
of polishing methods will be explored, including heat treatment, chemical
solutions, and tumbling with an abrasive medium. The results of this research
will be impactful to the millions of patients seeking invisible orthodontic
treatment each year, as well as to the many manufacturers of medical and dental
appliances that are developing custom 3D metal printed devices for better
patient outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.