* 1938715
* NSF-BSF: Novel determinants of prokaryotic copper homeostasis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Amy Rosenzweig, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2023
* USD 797,134.00

Metals are essential nutrients for all life forms. In particular, copper plays a
role in respiration and antioxidant defense. However, too much copper is toxic
and can damage cells. Therefore, specific proteins are used to bind copper and
carry it to different cellular locations. Since metals are present in one third
of all proteins, studying their transport and delivery is of fundamental
importance and impacts understanding of many biological and environmental
processes, including global element cycles. The goal of this project is to
investigate how bacteria obtain and distribute copper. The project will provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research training at all levels as well as
for mentoring and outreach in the local community. Moreover, the project will
present a unique opportunity for scientists from the US and Israel to work
closely together, leading to expanded skillsets and experiences with diverse
scientific communities and ways of conducting research. Such exposure is an
essential component of training scientists in an increasingly global
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since prokaryotic copper enzymes are
extracytoplasmic, most research has addressed either copper import to the
periplasm for enzyme loading or mechanisms of copper resistance, with little
focus on the possibility of controlled cytoplasmic copper import. Nevertheless,
growing evidence suggests that import to the cytoplasm may be required for
loading of some periplasmic copper enzymes. Putative cytoplasmic copper
importers include members of the CopD/YcnJ/YebZ family of transmembrane
proteins. Genes encoding these proteins are typically found associated with
genes encoding periplasmic copper binding proteins, such as CopCs and other yet-
to-be characterized proteins. This project will investigate both periplasmic and
transmembrane proteins implicated in cyotplasmic copper import, focusing
primarily on systems found in E. coli. The approach combines genetic,
computational, biophysical, and structural methods that leverage the
complementary expertises of the collaborating laboratories in the US and Israel.
The research will result in elucidation of the structure and function of
previously uncharacterized copper-binding proteins and will lead to new models
of bacterial copper homeostasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the
Israeli Binational Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.