* 1938948
* Multienzyme complexes of methanogenic archaea
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Nicole Buan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/29/2024
* USD 598,983.00

Methane-producing archaea (methanogens) are “extremophiles”, organisms that
thrive under conditions at the limit of life on Earth. Methanogens are unique
organisms that grow by producing methane gas which can be harvested for
electricity, heat, and transportation fuel. The project will study the
biochemistry of a large multi-enzyme complex, akin to a “redox router” switch
that has the ability to direct carbon towards either biomass or methane
synthesis depending on the energy status of the cell. To the researchers'
knowledge this is the first such biological router switch described in any
organism that directly integrates energy conservation to biomass synthesis in
one enzyme complex. The principal investigator will determine the ratio of
enzymes in the complex, identify sites of interaction, and ascertain if the
complex changes composition in response to growth substrate. A postdoctoral
researcher and graduate students will be trained in the biochemical mechanisms
of biological methane production. Research will be shared using hands-on
educational modules through the Women in Science and other K-12 outreach
activities. This research has the potential to enhance bio-methane production
for renewable energy, mitigate methane production in the environment, and
engineer methanogens to produce useful chemicals through synthetic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has shown that enzymes in the Wolfe
Cycle (CoM-S-S-CoB heterodisulfide reductase, Hdr) and Wood-Ljungdahl CO2
fixation pathways (the carbon monoxide dehydrogenase Cdh, subunit of the acetyl-
CoA decarbonylase/synthase, ACDS; and methylene tetrahydromethanopterin
reductase, Mer) form a multienzyme complex in the methanogen Methanosarcina
acetivorans. The goal of the project is to determine if methanogens adjust
Cdh/Hdr/Mer complex stoichiometry in response to growth substrate switching. The
hypothesis is that methanogenic growth kinetics of M. acetivorans is dependent
on the formation and stoichiometry of the terminal oxidoreductase Hdr with the
carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (Cdh) of the ACDS complex. Molecular, biochemical,
and biophysical techniques will be used to detect and characterize multienzyme
complexes that form in vitro and in vivo. Enzyme complex composition and subunit
exchange kinetics will be assessed in relation to growth substrate, and the
effect of deletion and overexpression of enzyme complex components on cell
physiology will be measured. In vivo and in vitro crosslinking mass spectrometry
will be employed to map protein interaction interfaces which will then be used
to model the router complex using crystal structures of homologous subunits.
Subunit stoichiometries will be manipulated and their effect on growth rate,
product yield, and metabolic efficiency of cells will be determined. Graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers from underrepresented groups will be
trained in anaerobic microbiology, redox biochemistry, and synthetic biology
techniques. Research will be disseminated through publications, presentations,
and outreach activities such as the popular Women in Science
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.