* 1938676
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost High Efficiency Gallium-Nitride Power Amplifiers
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Nick Chopra, RECON RF, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the significant advancement of U.S. wireless technology and
infrastructure. The proposed research applies an innovative high-frequency
radio-frequency design process to address emerging market needs that current
products and design processes are unable to meet. The key feature of the design
process proposed is its basis on technically rigorous transistor-centric
measurement and model-based design processes and capabilities. This will serve
present and next generation applications in legacy 3G/4G, emerging 5G, Public
Safety and Wireless Charging markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
uses an innovative high-efficiency design technique for solid state power
amplifier (SSPA) integrated circuit (IC) products operating in the Ultra-High
Frequency (UHF), S and C bands. These new IC's will utilize GaN-on-Si, which is
far more cost-viable with high volume wafer sizes up to eight-inches in diameter
as compared to the conventional GaN-on-SiC substrate material. Use of GaN-on-Si
semiconductors, combined with our new design technique, will achieve
efficiencies far beyond incumbent products through waveform engineering and
time-domain load-pull methods. Anticipated technical results include GaN SSPA
pallet amplifier products realized on the UHF, S and C bands by the end of Phase
I, corresponding to the markets of wireless charging/RF-energy, public safety
wireless networks and 5G communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.