* 1938619
* SBIR Phase I:  Investigation of a Bioengineered Immunotoxin for Use as a Biopesticide for the Control of Aquatic Invasive Mussel Infestation
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2021
* John Higley, EQO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact &amp; commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the ability to control zebra &amp; quagga mussel
infestations with a cost-effective and target-specific biological treatment. In
addition to the estimated $7 billion economic impact, mussel infestation causes
substantial ecological impacts. Currently, there is no treatment option
available following infestation by quagga or zebra mussels functional at the
scale of commercial reservoirs without significant disruption of native species.
The successful development of an efficient and specific treatment has the
potential to improve the ability to restore and protect native aquatic
ecosystems, water infrastructure, power production infrastructure, and native
fisheries. Additionally, the approach has the potential to lower production
cost, and require a lower effective dose when compared to current treatment
options. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
biopesticide comprised of the enzymatic portion of a toxin for the mechanism of
action and the binding domains from antibodies for targeting zebra and quagga
mussels. Control of infestation by chemical means is largely restricted to
enclosed systems, and requires additional remediation prior to water use.
Biopesticides, however, can be considered a reduced risk treatment option. The
use of ScFv (single chain variable fragment regions) from mAbs (monoclonal
antibodies) has become common place in pharmaceuticals like Herceptin and
MT-3724 and can be used here, resulting in a treatment product with anticipated
high specificity, high efficiency, known mechanism of action, limited half-life,
no expected long-term environmental impact, and limited to absent off-target
impact. This work is believed to be novel as biopesticides utilizing immunotoxin
technology for the remediation of aquatic nuisance species are not well
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.