* 1938048
* SBIR Phase I:  Control Strategy for Parallel Hybrid Multirotor
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Joshua Resnick, PARALLEL FLIGHT TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a drone propulsion
technology potentially capable of a 10X improvement in flight duration over all-
electric heavy-lift solutions with other significant advantages. The initial
market for this technology will be unmanned solutions for wildland firefighters.
Applications include on-demand logistics solutions for supplies and large-area
controlled ignition solutions, and ultimately around-the-clock air support for
firefighters, where currently only 8 hours of air support per day is available.
It has been suggested that every 10% reduction in time to contain a fire is
worth approximately $300 M in savings in suppression costs alone. The overall
wildfire suppression market in the US is estimated at $6.5 B, and additional
opportunities exist in the the commercial unmanned air system market (estimated
to grow to $34 B by 2022) and urban air mobility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable the
development of a new UAS propulsion technology leading to new capabilities and
missions. Electric-only multi-rotors offer limited flight for heavy lift
applications, with the typical duration for a fully loaded electric multi-rotor
of 15-20 minutes. One solution is serial hybrid multi-rotors with a generator
added to the electric powertrain, but these systems suffer from low efficiency
and low power-to-weight ratio. The combined parallel/serial hybrid approach
eliminates many of the power conversion steps and components, yet retains the
benefits of electric propulsion. The result is an estimated 1.54X gain in
efficiency, lower mass, and higher power-to-weight ratio. The research
objectives are to develop the control algorithm for parallel hybrid multi-rotor
control, implement this scheme on a prototype aircraft, quantify overall system
efficiency, and quantify flight performance. It is anticipated that parallel
hybrid control of propeller angular velocity to be within +/- 1% of electric-
only control. We also anticipate flight performance of the prototype system to
have measured Control Power (CP) rates of 30 deg/s, 50 deg/s, and 60 deg/s for
pitch, roll, and yaw, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.