* 1938873
* Collaborative Research: The physical and chemical dynamics of groundwater flow across the land-sea interface in Arctic lagoon ecosystems
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Matthew Charette, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 02/29/2024
* USD 527,644.00

Coastal areas in the Arctic are changing rapidly, with increases in river flow,
coastal erosion, and permafrost thaw, and as underground ice melts, thin,
shallow aquifers develop. At the same time, the amount, organic and inorganic
nutrient content, and pathways of coastal groundwater have been understudied and
remain poorly understood in the Arctic. This study will combine field
measurements and numerical modeling to characterize groundwater flow to Beaufort
Sea lagoons and how it changes across seasons and years. The project will train
undergraduate and graduate students, disseminate the knowledge gained to
communities close to the study area and near the investigatorsâ€™ institutions,
including K-12 students and local agencies involved in managing the Arctic
coast, create and broadcast content for public education, and provide data and
tools to help understand fundamental processes in the Arctic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide fundamental new knowledge
regarding groundwater flow and biogeochemical processes in lagoon systems along
the Alaskan Beaufort Sea coast. The primary research objectives are: 1) to
determine the mechanisms and pathways for groundwater flow across the land-
lagoon interface and how these mechanisms and pathways evolve seasonally; and 2)
to understand seasonally-varying fluxes, sources, and lability of groundwater-
derived dissolved organic matter and inorganic nutrients delivered to lagoons
along the eastern Alaskan Beaufort Sea coast. A suite of methods will include
isotopic, biogeochemical, hydrologic, and geophysical field measurements of
groundwater flow and solute transport across the land-lagoon interface during
spring ice-break-up, later summer open water season, and until winter freeze up.
The investigators will interpret the observations and develop physical insight
using computation flow and transport modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.