* 1938285
* Collaborative Research: A New Theory of 3D Particle Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Moochul Shin, Western New England University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 95,708.00

Granular materials such as soils are prevalent in nature and broadly used as
engineering materials for civil infrastructure (e.g., in dams, levees, roads and
railways). 3D particle geometry is a key piece of information to fundamentally
understand the granular material behavior subjected to static and dynamic
loadings. While the 3D particle geometry is characterized in terms of four
features, i.e., volume, surface area, size and shape, the characteristics of the
3D geometry can only be fully understood through the interrelationships of these
four features. For example, there is limited understanding of how volume is
related to surface area for random mineral particles. This relationship clearly
depends on the particle shape as well (e.g., a sphere and an ellipsoid with the
same volume have different surface areas). The relationship between these
features is therefore key to comprehensively address the four-dimensional
aspects of 3D particle geometry, which will enable the fundamental understanding
of their combined influence on the behavior of granular materials and will help
to better design civil infrastructure against natural hazards such as
earthquakes. In addition, this project will develop educational modules for
undergraduate classes by closely integrating with the research activities and by
using recent advances in 3D printing and scanning technologies. The research
team will incorporate the education modules into existing undergraduate level
courses in geotechnical and materials engineering. This educational effort will
provide a new model for successfully integrating knowledge discovery, teaching
and learning in the area of granular materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a new theory for comprehensive 3D particle geometry
characterization based on a new, simple formula that correlates the parameters
defining the 3D particle geometry. This formula unravels the intertwined
relationships between the four particle geometry parameters by expressing the 3D
particle morphology as a function of surface area, volume and size. The study
develops three research hypotheses to test the new theory step-by-step. The
research will (i) characterize individual particles using the researched
formula, (ii) characterize particle groups (i.e., granular material) in
association with a power law relationship between the surface area and volume,
and (iii) perform testing to investigate the relationship between the
characterized geometric information using the new approach and various
mechanical properties of granular materials, including dilatancy and
strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.