* 1938787
* EAGER/GOALI: 3D Printing of Nanostructured Battery Electrodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Vibha Kalra, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 09/30/2023
* USD 140,436.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) and Grant
Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) funding will explore
the feasibility of combining 3D printing and nanoscale fiber electrospinning to
enable improved battery electrodes. Fusion Deposition Modeling (FDM) is a type
of 3D printing that creates a three-dimensional object by melting, extruding and
depositing a thermoplastic polymer filament in a pre-determined path layer-by-
layer. One limitation of the FDM process is the coarse feature size (50-400
microns). Electrospinning is a unique nanomaterial fabrication technique that
continuously produces nanoscale fibers but with very limited control over their
exact placement. The electrospinning process is inherently compatible with roll-
to-roll processing and potentially compatible with 3D printing. This research
will explore the feasibility of marrying the two concepts of 3D printing and
electrospinning, creating a new and potentially impactful type of 3D
nanoprinting. The team will use a combination of experiments and computational
simulations to test the effect of electric field on the spatial deposition of
nanofibers. The discovery could impact manufacturing capabilities of high
performance materials for applications in energy, healthcare and national
security. One graduate and several undergraduate students will be supported to
conduct academic and industrial research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aim
of this project is to build a dual-nozzle 3D electrospinning platform to enable
simultaneous nano-extrusion of polymeric conductive host and sulfur-rich
copolymer active material in a pre-defined path. The ultimate aim is to print 3D
cathodes for Lithium-Sulfur batteries that exhibit dimensional accuracy at
multiple length scales. While the overlapping extrusion of multiple functional
materials will allow nanoscale contact for enhanced electrochemical performance
(reaction kinetics, conductivity, and active material utilization), the design
freedom of 3D printing will enable precise x-y-z control over nanofiber
positioning for tailoring bulk macroscale properties such as porosity and
volumetric density - important considerations for commercial applications.
Finite element-based COMSOL simulations will be used to predict the electric
potential distribution as a function of various relevant process/equipment
parameters. The simulations will be integrated with experiments with the aim to
establish correlations between equipment/process parameters, electric field
distribution, fiber diameter and spatial deposition control. The final aim of
the research will be to study the fundamental electrochemical behavior, battery
assembly, battery testing and post mortem material and reactant/product
characterization in collaboration with the industrial
partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.