* 1938949
* Conference on Building a Shareable Knowledge Base for Teaching College Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Douglas Corey, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2021
* USD 74,240.00

This conference aims to contribute to increased quality of college mathematics
teaching and learning. It will do so by addressing how to generate, store, and
share knowledge about effective college mathematics teaching. Participants will
discuss the practical and theoretical issues about building a knowledge based
for teaching college mathematics. During the conference, approximately 20
participants will begin to develop a formal system for generating, storing, and
sharing knowledge of college mathematics instruction. Before the conference, the
participants chosen will begin drafting written instructional products and use
them at the conference to share instructional knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
main goal of the conference is to elaborate a framework for potential authors of
written instructional products to describe what knowledge they should capture
and what type of scholarly work can be done to generate such knowledge. The
conference includes a draft framework, called “Scholarly Design,” which is based
on research and scholarship of teaching and learning. The major goal of the
conference is to produce a framework characterizing Design Scholarship in
mathematics, illustrated with specific examples of such scholarship. It is
anticipated that this framework will help faculty begin to engage in building a
knowledge base for teaching in more effective ways. Two additional benefits are
expected to emerge from supporting this community of college mathematics
teachers as they engage in Design Scholarship to build a knowledge base for
teaching. First, college mathematics teachers may consume the published
products, adapt them for their students and instructional contexts, and
implement high quality lessons. Second, teachers who engage in the process of
Design Scholarship will learn about teaching (or how to analyze teaching) that
may apply to other mathematics lessons, not just the lesson that is the focus of
their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.