* 1938130
* EAGER: Enabling Secure Data Recovery for Mobile Devices against Malicious Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Bo Chen, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2022
* USD 199,975.00

Mainstream mobile computing devices, such as, smart phones and tablets,
currently rely on remote backups for data recovery upon failures. For example,
an iPhone periodically stores a recent snapshot to iCloud, that can get restored
if needed. Such a commonly used "off-device" backup mechanism, however, suffers
from a fundamental limitation, namely, the backup in the remote server is not
always synchronized with data stored in the local device. Therefore, when a
mobile device suffers from a malware attack, it can only be restored to a
historical state using the remote backup, rather than the exact state right
before the attack occurs. Data are extremely valuable for both organizations and
individuals, and thus after the malware attack, it is of paramount importance to
restore the data to the exact point (i.e., the corruption point) right before
they are corrupted. This, however, is a challenging problem. The project
addresses this problem in mobile devices and its outcome could benefit billions
of mobile users. The project also provides opportunities for training for
graduate students specially from underrepresented minority groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of the project is to enable recovery of
mobile devices to the corruption point after malware attacks. The malware being
considered is the OS-level malware which can compromise the OS and obtain the
OS-level privilege. To achieve this goal, the project combines both the
traditional off-device data backup and recovery and a novel in-device data
recovery. Especially, the following research activities are undertaken: 1)
Designing a novel malware detector which runs in flash translation layer (FTL),
a firmware layer staying between OS and flash memory hardware. The FTL-based
malware detector ensures that data being committed to the remote server will not
be tampered with by the OS-level malware. 2) Developing a novel approach which
ensures that the OS-level malware is not able to corrupt data changes (i.e.,
delta) which have not yet been committed to the remote server. This is achieved
by hiding the delta in the flash memory using flash storage's special hardware
features, i.e., out-of-place update and strong physical isolation. 3) Developing
a user-friendly approach which can allow users to conveniently and efficiently
retrieve the delta hidden in the flash memory for data recovery after malware
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.