* 1938497
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Advection-Enhanced Geothermal Heat Pump Fieldloop Demonstration
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Jimmy Randolph, DARCY SOLUTIONS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2020
* USD 249,971.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to address the high costs associated with building
heating and cooling in a sustainable fashion. Heating/cooling constitute
approximately 48% of building energy consumption. Ground-source or geothermal
heat pumps (GSHPs) represent an energy-efficient and environmentally sustainable
heating and cooling solution, but their high upfront capital costs have
significantly limited deployment. This project takes a fundamentally different
approach to GSHP heat transfer, with the expected result that installation costs
are decreased by up to 50% and operating costs by 20% compared to conventional
GSHP systems. This project will thoroughly field test and analyze the
performance of the GSHP innovation, advancing the technology design and
installation parameters, and readying it for commercial
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project addresses the problem of the high installation cost and large,
disruptive footprint of GSHP systems, with the objective to provide a cost-
effective, widely-deployable, renewable solution for building heating and
cooling. This project will advance an innovative GSHP field loop technology from
numerical and laboratory analyses to manufacturing and field testing. The
overall research objective is to determine the performance of the innovative
GSHP field loop under real-world conditions. The research program includes: 1)
development of a comprehensive numerical model of the innovative GSHP system for
field sites; 2) field testing, including final design, installation, and
operation of equipment at a field site; 3) numerical model and equipment design
refinement following initial field testing; 4) installation and testing of
modified equipment; and 5) development of a comprehensive cost, energy use and
emissions model. It is anticipated that the project will result in a
commercially-ready GSHP product, with design and installation guidelines, that
substantially (by up to 50%) reduces the installation cost of GSHPs while
improving their performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.