* 1938627
* SBIR Phase I:  Pressure-mapping surfaces made with nano-composite foam material
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Samuel Wilding, Nano Composite Products, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2020
* USD 224,781.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a soft, durable, and completely
flexible pressure mapping surface with application in long-term care bedding for
the prevention of pressure sores and ulcers. The project will advance a process
to transform current foam materials and compliant components into high-accuracy
deformation sensors. Treating pressure sores costs nearly $10 B in the US, and
thousands of related lawsuits are filed every year. For patients, pressure sores
can add up to an additional $40 k in hospital bills. This project will develop a
medical sensing technology by combining the properties of sensing composite foam
with efficient algorithms for electrical capacitive tomography (ECT). This
system will lead to applications such as prosthetics monitoring comfort levels,
diabetic insoles/midsoles monitor pressure hotspots, industrial gaskets and
seals that self-monitor, wheelchair pads that can monitor pressure, and
automotive/airplane seats that automatically adjust to maximize comfort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
Project will develop a system to prevent pressure ulcers associated with long-
term care, the treatment of which results in a cost of $10 B annually with
several objectives: 1) Develop a shape-reconstruction algorithm based on
electrical capacitive tomography (ECT). 2) Develop and prototype a composite
foam surface providing a similar feel to currently used materials but generating
an appropriate change in capacitance when compressed. 3) Adapt the composite
foam technology to lower-density foams typically found in bedding products. 4)
Construct a full-scale prototype to test the ability to accurately measure
pressure across the entire surface, optimize sensing resolution, and investigate
attachment methods for the ECT electrodes. 5) Conduct a large-scale
manufacturability review for scalability of the product in both materials
manufacturing and electrical assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.