* 1938816
* The African lungfish mucus cocoon is a living tissue with antimicrobial functions
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Irene Salinas, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 591,300.00

The transition of vertebrates from aquatic to terrestrial environments was one
of the most remarkable steps in evolutionary history. The environmental
conditions of land ecosystems imposed new physiological challenges to
vertebrates including desiccation stress, UV damage and novel pathogens.
Lungfish (Dipnoi), the closest ancestors of all tetrapods, aestivate forming a
cocoon that covers their entire body and protects them against external
aggressions. This cocoon has been viewed thus far as an inert layer made of
glycoproteins. The researchers propose that this cocoon is in fact a living
tissue that protects the lungfish against pathogen invasion for long periods of
time. The goal of this project is to determine the structure and function of
lungfish cocoons from both laboratory animals and animals caught from the wild
in Tanzania. Another goal is to identify how the cocoon protects the lungfish
from pathogens during aestivation and if specific immune mechanisms are
involved. The societal outcomes of this proposal are to establish the US as a
global leader in STEM research and education and to level the gender gap in STEM
both in the US and Tanzania. This will be achieved by cross-training summer
programs targeted to increase women and minorities representation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s intellectual merit is to investigate
novel immunological structures and mechanisms used by vertebrates to adapt to
environmental stress. Lungfishes are a good model to answer this question since
they can adapt to terrestrial environments under unfavorable conditions. The
lungfish cocoon, thought to be an inert mucus layer, has been largely
understudied. Preliminary studies indicate that this cocoon may be a living
tissue with unique immunological capabilities. Specifically, the researchers
hypothesize that the cocoon acts as a living, microbe-trapping structure that
utilizes neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) to halt pathogen invasion during
the aestivating months when the lungfish are immobile. A variety of
histological, immunological, molecular and sequencing approaches will be used to
determine the structure and function of the lungfish cocoon. The immune cells
and molecules involved in protection against pathogens in the cocoon will be
identified. Laboratory-based experiments will be coupled to field collections.
This research has the potential for advances in the fields of evolutionary
biology and immunology by characterizing immunological mechanisms that allow
lungfish to adapt to dessication stress, a key trait that would allow adaption
to terrestrial environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.