* 1938442
* SBIR Phase I:  Direct Optical Lithography of Functional Inorganic Nanomaterials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Yu Kambe, NANOPATTERN TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2021
* USD 224,890.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the opportunity to reduce current energy
consumption in existing displays (e.g. TVs, outdoor signage, mobile phones,
wearables, AR/VR) in the United States by 70% while simultaneously improving
color experience by 50%. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate the engineering parameters and
the reliability of the core technology for commercialization. The core
technology is a suite of ligand chemistries that enable virtually any functional
nanoparticles to be turned into an ink for patterning of next generation
electronics such as displays. Unlike any other technology, the final film, can
pattern extremely dense films with over 90% loading of nanoparticles. When the
technology is applied to quantum dots and displays, the resulting device is 70%
more energy-efficient while simultaneously 50% better in color experience. The
Phase I project research objective is to identify the ink formulation comprising
of our technology that is compatible with at-scale manufacturing equipment.
Variables such as viscosity, solvent composition, and shelf life will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.