* 1938758
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Building Capacity for K-12 Artificial Intelligence Education Research
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Ning Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) will profoundly impact society in the US and around
the globe. It is beginning to permeate every aspect of our daily lives and is
fundamentally reshaping our workforce. Because AI will dramatically impact both
the economy and national security, it is imperative that we develop a thoughtful
national response to this phenomenally disruptive technology. This response must
include a meaningful approach to introducing K-12 students to AI. However,
despite the accelerating pace of AI technology development both in the US and
abroad and the rapidly growing interest in a strategy for K-12 AI education,
there is no research foundation on which such a strategy can be readily based.
It is therefore essential to develop an evidence-based approach for K-12 AI
education, which calls for a concerted capacity building effort within the
education research community to address this significant need. The objective of
the project is to begin building an interdisciplinary research community to
address the critical challenge of creating a national K-12 AI education strategy
by convening two interdisciplinary workshops. This project is funded by the STEM
+ Computing (STEM+C) program, which supports research and development to
understand the integration of computing and computational thinking in STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will bring together experts in
education research, AI, industry, and K-12 educational practitioners to develop
a shared understanding and create a research agenda to bring evidence-based AI
education to K-12 classrooms. Education researchers will include leaders from AI
in education, the learning sciences, STEM education (including science
education, mathematics education, computer science education, and computational
thinking), teacher education, and developmental psychology. The workshops will
play a central role in establishing the connections that are essential to the
success of a national K-12 AI education initiative. Collectively, leaders in
these fields will create a research agenda for developing best practices for AI
education for K-12 student populations. The project team will also conduct broad
analyses of how K-12 AI education research should respond to AI's far-reaching
societal impact. These analyses will both be informed by and will guide the
workshops. The findings will be presented in reports in publications prepared by
the project team. Together, the workshop series and analyses hold significant
transformative potential to address the urgent need to catalyze a research
community that will guide curricular design and implementation for K-12 AI
education. As a long-term objective, the project will be conducted to most
effectively inform, shape, and define a national strategy for K-12 AI
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.