* 1938476
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Salinity Produced Water Management by Recovering Solid Waste with Low Grade Thermal Energy
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Wei Wu, Savengy Technologies., LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
develop a desalination system powered by solar energy. Water is used for lithium
and rare metal mining, requiring energy-efficient water treatment to produce
fresh water and concentrated brines. This type of water treatment in mineral
recovery systems can yield valuable critical materials as byproducts. Many
lithium and rare metal mining fields are located in regions in the US where
solar energy is abundant. Energy efficiency in traditional distillation
processes must be significantly improved to make water treatment economical. The
use of solar energy to power the proposed system also reduces or eliminates the
need for transporting fuel for deployments of the process in remote areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Phase I project will develop a system using
solar energy to treat salty tailing waters through thermal desalination by an
integrated system of lithium bromide (LiBr) multi-effect distillation (MED)
dryer. The system also includes a second MED with mechanical vapor compression
(MVC) and a LiBr regenerator. All the electrical and thermal energy used in the
system are converted from solar heat. The water treatment process includes
lithium and rare metal recovery as well. The design incorporates a distillation
system with mechanical vapor compression. Comparing to traditional MED, our
unique design enables our system to be 10-20 times more compact than traditional
MEDs. During the Phase I project, the company will develop physics-based models
to analyze the technology, as well as build and evaluate small prototypes to
confirm the feasibility. The proposed integrated, enhanced and compact MED plus
MVC equipment can intensify the heat and mass transfer processes and reduce heat
losses. By integrating multi-cylinder configurations in one single cylinder or
similar configurations, our equipment designs will exceed those of traditional
MED systems. Modeling and simulation of the proposed distillation system show up
to 10-fold improvement in energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.