* 1938565
* SBIR Phase I:  Robotic Forest Inventory and Mapping
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Steven Chen, TREESWIFT INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation (SBIR)
Phase I project is modernizing monitoring systems for the forestry industry,
environmental sustainability, and nature conservation purposes. The estimated
commercial potential on the $325 B global forestry industry is an additional
$3.4 B of unlocked value through faster, cheaper, and more accurate inventory
systems. Warmer temperatures have contributed to an explosion in pest epidemics
that have destroyed over 120 million acres of timberland in the US since 1998.
In addition, these temperatures and dead trees have exacerbated wildland fire,
with annual economic damage estimated to be $350 B. The societal impact of these
problems is pervasive, as smoke plumes can drift for thousands of miles and
adversely affect human health and environmental pollution. One fundamental
requirement to address these problems is an automated forest monitoring system,
as current systems still heavily rely on manual measurements. This project will
enhance scientific and technological understanding by developing autonomous and
large-scale semantic mapping robotic systems for dense, natural forests to
tackle these broader high-impact problems. In addition, this project will
provide high-tech career opportunities in rural communities by training skilled
operators to develop, deploy, and control the robot teams in forests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation (SBIR) Phase I
project will develop the first commercially viable automated timber cruise to
estimate forest volume from below the canopy level. The forestry industry still
relies on manual measurements because, due to fundamental technical challenges,
the technology to autonomously measure tree sizes under the canopy over long
distances does not exist. This project will overcome two limiting challenges: 1)
Robust Autonomy Challenge: No one has achieved robust autonomy in truly 3D,
unstructured, GPS-denied environments where manual control (teleoperation) is
not feasible; and 2) Large-Scale Semantic Mapping Challenge: No one has
attempted semantic mapping at the scale and accuracy proposed, as most
demonstrations have been for a few object instantiations and without the need
for precise measurement. To tackle these challenges, the project anticipates
three technical results: 1) Real-time tree detection to robustly detect trees in
challenging conditions; 2) Continuous-Time Semantic Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping to precisely model trees over vast distances; and 3) Fast Online
Motion Planning with Deep Model Predictive Control to robustly navigate unmanned
aerial vehicles in cluttered forest environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.