* 1938112
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Quantifying coral microbiome dynamics under change
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Carrie Manfrino, Central Caribbean Marine Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2022
* USD 29,982.00

Corals are the architectural base of reefs, one of the most biodiverse and
ecologically complex ocean ecosystems that also provide substantial economic
resources to coastal communities. Unfortunately, recent episodes of widespread
bleaching and disease have reduced coral populations and contributed to declines
in reef ecosystems. There is speculation that the coral microbiome, including a
community of bacteria and archaea, may provide added resistance and resilience
to corals facing pathogens and warmer ocean conditions. However, there are no
quantitatively methods available to track specific microbial lineages within
coral microbiomes, thus limiting the ability to examine these concepts. This
research will improve capabilities to quantitatively measure and track specific
microbial lineages within the coral microbiome. Coral reefs are one of the most
globally threatened ecosystems in the ocean. The project will provide
methodological advancements that will enhance understanding about the response
of coral microbiomes to warming, disease and environmental-related disturbance.
These efforts will help provide a necessary knowledge framework for scientists,
reef managers and decision makers who are urgently exploring solutions to
prevent the further decline of coral reef ecosystems. The team will communicate
project findings broadly through publicly accessible narratives shared through
press releases and an online magazine. This project will promote data sharing
and collaboration amongst coral microbiome scientists, through a data sharing
and visualization portal. The project will train undergraduate and graduate
students and will be led by two female PIs (one
Hispanic).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to transform our
current ability to quantify ecological changes within coral microbiomes and to
understand and predict how coral-associated microbes may be able to contribute
to the resilience and resistance of corals to warming, disease and environmental
change related stressors on reefs. This project will contribute methodological
and resource contributions that will advance knowledge and studies of coral
microbiomes as well as other host-microbiome systems. Specifically, the team
plans to develop and test two types of controls, 1) spike-in microbial cells and
2) a coral microbiome specific mock community. These methods will be used to
address the following hypothesis: improved quantitative descriptions of coral
microbiome dynamics in relation to relevant scenarios of change are obtained
using spike-in controls and coral-specific mock communities. To address this,
the investigators will develop endogenous spike-in controls of bacteria and
archaea to track microbial load or abundance within samples and construct a
coral microbiome mock community to optimize PCR, sequencing and data analysis.
These methods will first be optimized in a replicated experimental manner across
healthy, nonstressed and ecologically and phylogenetically diverse coral
species. Next, optimized methods will be applied to coral samples from
experiments, which are expected to show changes in microbiome dynamics over
time. These experiments include scenarios of thermal stress, reef environmental
change, and disease development. These experiments will take place in Little
Cayman, a location with reefs with contrasting temperature and other
environmental properties, as well as the U.S. Virgin Islands, a site of a recent
coral disease outbreak.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.