* 1938121
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Enabling Regulatory Compliance for Software Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Aaron Massey, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 560,541.00

Software systems are ubiquitous in modern society, but engineering systems that
are demonstrably compliant with relevant laws and regulations remains both
theoretically and practically challenging. Unfortunately, assessing a system for
regulatory compliance is challenging and expensive, which ensures existing laws
and regulations have low enforcement rates. Further, organizations have no
standard approach they can use to document their due diligence and compliance
efforts, and the number and types of regulations applicable to software is
expected to increase, as software becomes more integrated and central to
traditionally non-software domains. This proposed research seeks to create a
software development methodology for regulatory compliance. Software engineering
professionals using this methodology will be able to both manage the regulatory
compliance aspects of their systems under development and also to demonstrate to
an outside auditor, to customers, and to the public, their approach towards
compliance at each stage of the software development lifecycle (SDLC). This
research has the potential to affect every software system developed for use in
a regulated domain. In general, society regulates domains first and considers
software second. For non-software domains that nevertheless depend on software
(e.g., healthcare, automotive, finance, etc.), organizations are left measuring
inputs and outputs, and they have no insight into the full engineering process
used to develop the software that controls potentially critical elements of the
system. This work will transform how organizations think about liability and
compliance by providing organizations the tools needed to demonstrate that they
attempted to do the right thing, even if a failure occurs. The results of this
work will be incorporated in graduate and undergraduate courses on topics such
as security and privacy, systems analysis, software testing and software
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The core research problem this award
addresses is: How can software engineers incorporate and demonstrate compliance
with security and privacy laws, regulations, guidelines, and standards
throughout the design, development, and maintenance of software systems? The
goal of this project is to develop a full-lifecycle methodology, based on
current practice and research, to help software engineers, policy makers, and
regulators build and assess software systems. This goal is organized into three
phases: (1) the development of a comprehensive core framework of definitions,
concepts, models, and templates for security and privacy regulatory compliance
based on current practices and new research; (2) the identification and
mitigation of gaps in particular phases of the SDLC that research and practice
have not fully addressed (in particular testing and maintenance); and (3) a
longitudinal mixed-method interaction with a variety of stakeholders to
continuously explore current practices of organizations building software in
regulated domains, identify gaps between research and practice, and iteratively
evaluate this methodology. Upon completion, this framework will address
management of intentional and unintentional regulatory ambiguity, improve
communication between stakeholders from disparate domains, (e.g., lawyers,
policy makers, regulatory agencies, developers, managers, and testers), and
ameliorate the dearth of methods for testing and maintaining regulatory
compliance of software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.