* 1938570
* STTR Phase I:  Asphalt Rehabilitation Utilizing a 3D Shaped Asphalt Overlay
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,02/28/2022
* John Smith, Advanced Paving Technolgies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2022
* USD 224,466.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project are to use lidar and advanced computer modeling with a
3D asphalt paving machine for asphalt rehabilitation by enabling milling only
over areas where the material has broken down, then applying a 3D asphalt
overlay tailored to compensate for surface deformations. This will reduce the
overall footprint of the project by reducing the milling, hauling and remixing
of asphalt by at least 50%, as well as reducing traffic congestion. This will
produce a better, longer lasting road at a fraction of the time and cost while
delivering it in a way that is much friendlier to the environment and society.
Benefits of this approach are to create higher quality roads that are safer,
enable improved gas mileage, and reduce vehicle maintenance costs; and faster
completion of paving projects at reduced cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will study an innovative
method of asphalt rehabilitation utilizing a 3D asphalt overlay. Current asphalt
paving machines are limited to delivering a flat layer of asphalt inadequate to
address surface deformations and requiring the entire road surface to be milled
flat. The goal of this research project is to transform an uneven road surface
into a smooth, flat driving surface with an International Roughness Index (IRI)
&lt;=60, but without having to grind down the entire surface to a flat plane.
Research will include scanning multiple test sections of roadway and using the
point-cloud data to model and design the 3D shape of a compensating asphalt
overlay for each test section. The asphalt overlay is then delivered by a paving
machine modified to deliver asphalt in 3D. Additional scans will be performed
both before and after final compaction of the test sections to assess the
accuracy of predictive algorithms and provide feedback into subsequent tests.
The anticipated result will show that a 3D asphalt overlay can be modeled and
accurately delivered to produce a smooth flat driving surface without having to
mill down the entire surface flat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.