* 1938352
* SBIR Phase I:  Internal Combustion Engines as Small Scale Chemical Plants for Compact, Low Cost Gas to Liquids to Reduce Flaring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Emmanouil Kasseris, PLASMA ENERGY INNOVATION
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2021
* USD 224,650.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the elimination of flaring from oil and gas
production. Globally, there were an estimated 150 billion cubic meters (5.3
trillion cubic feet) of flared produced gases in 2016 and around 10 billion
cubic meters (353 billion cubic feet) in the U.S. At $2 per thousand cubic feet
(MCF) (wellhead natural gas price), the value of flared gases is equivalent to
$10.6 B per year globally and $706 M in the U.S. Gases are flared because
processes converting them to liquids for transportation (GTL) are expensive and
are difficult to execute at a smaller scale. Replacing customized process
equipment with mass-produced engines enables significant cost and size
reductions. An 8-liter diesel engine that costs ~$10,000 can convert 400
thousand standard cubic feet (MSCF)/day of gas to liquids, rather than a large-
scale GTL plant costing ~$15,000/MSCF/day. This project will develop a novel,
ultra-compact and low-cost gas to liquids mini-plant. The plant will process
methane, ethane and propane near the wellhead (which currently would be flared
and wasted) into methanol, a high value chemical that can be transported to
market. If converted to methanol at a value of $432/ton, these otherwise flared
gas volumes would be valued at $2 B/year for the US market and nearly $30 B/year
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to use
modified automotive internal combustion engines as small scale chemical reactors
and compressors. The necessary pressure and temperature for the reaction is
created in-cylinder by piston compression action and partial combustion. This
project will develop a staged system of engines: The first converts methane,
ethane and propane into carbon monoxide and hydrogen; subsequently, produced
gases will be processed in a second engine compressing them and converting them
into methanol. This will be accomplished with a high surface area metal foam
impregnated with a catalyst placed inside the piston bowl of the second engine.
Phase I of the project will: 1) demonstrate a proof-of-concept engine that can
synthesize methanol from carbon monoxide and hydrogen, and 2) conduct the
systems engineering studies describing integration of the engine reactor into a
compact GTL plant to be placed near the wellhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.