* 1938135
* SBIR Phase I:  St. Gabriel's ROBOCALL Blocker
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Eric Adolphe, Forward Edge AI, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this proposal is to reduce fraud in
telecommunications. Americans received approximately 26 billion so-called
"robocalls" last year, and in March 2019, a new monthly record of 5 billion
robocalls was reached, according to the FCC. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
reports the agency is on pace to receive 5+ million complaints about robocalls
in 2019, a 30% increase over 2018. Robocalling scammers rely on relatively cheap
technology that works on a large scale, and new schemes are getting smarter and
pose a growing threat. Significantly, robocallers leverage artificial
intelligence (A.I.), synthesized voice (so-called "deep fakes"), and caller ID
spoofing, creating fraud of over $22 billion annually. This proposed project
will work to reduce robocalls and associated fraud by filtering at the
telecommunications device level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovation
leverages new decentralized ledger technology with blockchain encryption, real-
time parsing of records, and real-time machine algorithms to block robocalls and
reduce connection delays. The goal of the proposed innovation is to dramatically
reduce the volume of fraudulent phone calls. This SBIR proposal focuses on
filtering at the device level; initially applied to prevent robocalls, but
potentially relevant for other secure applications. The innovation leverages
blockchain's shared storage and memory, ability to operate in a "trustless
environment" (due to lack of cross-telecom network collaboration on centralized
robocall lists), as well as advances in blockchain encryption, artificial
intelligence and machine learning, and real-time parsing of records and machine
algorithms to block robocalls and reduce connection
delays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.