* 1938440
* SBIR Phase I:  Brillouin Microscopy for Early Detection of Dental Caries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Steven Burns, MSTATT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I project will apply Brillouin
spectroscopy (an optical method of measuring the speed of sound in a sample) to
the early detection of dental caries (cavities). While Brillouin spectroscopy
has been used to study other materials, it has not been used before to study
caries in the dental enamel. However, initial data and theoretical models
suggest that the technology can effectively detect early carious lesions. Once
developed, this method will be capable of detecting caries in teeth early enough
that remineralization treatments can be effectively used to reverse caries
progression, thus sharply reducing the need for drilling, cavity filling, root
canals, and implants. Upon widespread commercial adoption, this concept would
fundamentally change dental practice, and allow it to focus on prevention
instead of intervention. This will improve the patient experience by reducing
the need for painful or uncomfortable dental procedures, thereby increasing
patient satisfaction and compliance with bi-annual dental exams. The total
addressable market for these systems and associated consumables is estimated to
be worth nearly $2 billion per year in the United States, and around $5 billion
per year worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes Brillouin
spectroscopy as a new modality of detecting early caries. The advantage of
Brillouin spectroscopy over existing methodology is that it directly detects the
enamel softening associated with demineralization in early caries. This patent-
pending method is theorized to be more robust to confounding factors such as
stains, calculus, and plaques, while maintaining the significant advantages of
optical detection: it is non-ionizing, non-damaging, and non-contact, allowing
for flexible detection geometry. The overall objective of this proposal is to
validate Brillouin spectroscopy as a new, cost-effective, reliable diagnostic
method of positively identifying carious lesions at an early stage. To achieve
this goal, the project proposes two steps: First, a controlled, in vitro
characterization of the sensitivity of Brillouin spectroscopy to early caries
will be conducted. The caries will be induced incrementally by a pH-cycling
protocol to create physiologically realistic demineralization. Second, the
influence of common and potential confounding factors, such as staining,
hydration, and incident angle of the light will be assessed. The expectation is
that the resulting data will conclusively support the further development of
Brillouin spectroscopy for early caries detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.