* 1938064
* EAGER: Detecting and Avoiding Side-Channel Attacks with Security Conscious Prediction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Daniel Jimenez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2023
* USD 220,000.00

For many years, computers have been using a technique called "speculation" to
achieve good performance. Computers also implement security policies that
prevent private data from being revealed to unauthorized entities. Recently,
researchers have learned that speculation can unintentionally allow private
information to be leaked. An attacker can manipulate speculation to communicate
data through a "side-channel," defeating security policies. This project will
explore ways to use machine learning to detect whether a computer is under a
side-channel attack and trigger defenses that will keep private data from being
leaked. The work will enable secure computing while maintaining the benefits of
speculation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A predictor will be trained to detect whether
the system is under attack, providing a level of confidence in the prediction.
Input to the predictor will be features such as counts of microarchitectural
events. The predictor will be trained offline and implemented in hardware to be
used during execution. Using measurements from real and simulated systems,
features correlated with malicious behavior will be explored. Predictors based
on neural learning will be trained with those features. The predictor will be
prototyped and evaluated in a microarchitectural and circuit simulator.
Mitigations based on the predictor confidence will also be
prototyped.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Side-channel attacks threaten the continued use
of speculation to provide high performance. It is expected that this work will
enable the continued use of speculation with high confidence in the security of
private user data while continuing the much needed level of performance demanded
by today's mobile, server, and embedded applications. Students from under-
represented groups will be encouraged to participate in the research. The
research will be featured in classroom teaching at Texas A&amp;M
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project code and data will be made
available for at least two years following the completion of the project. The
products of this project including technical papers, code archive, and datasets
will be made available at
http://taco.cse.tamu.edu/secure/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.