* 1938571
* CAREER:  Cryptic origins of evolutionary novelty in Caribbean pupfishes: genomic, functional, and ecological conditions for crossing fitness valleys and colonizing adaptive peaks
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Christopher Martin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 478,354.00

One of the most fascinating features of the natural world is the evolution of
novelty, when existing structures take on new functions or new ecological roles.
Think of the narwhal's tooth, the anglerfish's lure, or the lightning beetle's
glowing abdomen. Novelty underlies major transitions in the history of life,
including moving from sea to land and the origins of unique mammalian traits
such as fur and lactation. However, this process is challenging to study because
novel transitions are not often observed at their earliest stages. Missing the
early stages means missing out on the opportunity for experimental studies. This
research will use a rapidly evolving group of fish to study novel transitions.
Since these fish exhibit novel skeletal structures, prey capture behaviors, and
ecological niches, they are well-suited for such studies. This project will
produce fundamental knowledge of how genes control facial structures and
behavior; this knowledge will be useful in understanding variation in all
vertebrates, including humans. In addition, a public database for managing
endangered species in captivity will be created. New, research-immersive courses
will be developed. These courses will provide valuable training in statistical
programming and data analysis for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research spans genotype to ecosystem to address a fundamental question: how does
novelty originate from the intersection of ecology, natural selection,
performance, and genetics? Answering this question is key to understanding how
microevolutionary processes promote macroevolutionary patterns of novelty across
the tree of life. Conventional understanding suggests novelty arises from
resource abundance in new environments. More recent laboratory studies suggest
complex dynamics lead to the evolution of novelty. This project will help bridge
the gap between these two fields. To do so, the research will experimentally
investigate novel transitions to scale-eating and snail-eating. Both feeding
modes originated from an ancestral diet of algae in Caribbean pupfishes. The
researchers will employ: 1) field and laboratory experiments measuring selection
on hybrid phenotypes across environments; 2) ecosystem-scale measurements of
productivity; 3) functional studies of hybrid performance; and 4) quantitative
genetic and genomic analyses of the genetic basis of adaptive traits and source
of adaptive variation. Hybrid crosses among pupfish species will be reared in
the lab. Their fitness will be measured within field enclosures in hypersaline
lakes on San Salvador Island and neighboring Bahamian islands. Lake respiration
and macroalgae biomass will be measured across these lakes to assess resource
abundance. The age and origin of genetic variation associated with adaptive
trophic morphology will be investigated using whole-genome resequencing, genetic
crosses, association mapping, and introgression
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.