* 1938363
* EAGER: Comparative Analysis of Institutions to Govern the Groundwater Commons
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Christopher Ansell, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 03/31/2022
* USD 204,723.00

Groundwater, a classic common pool resource, is a vital and life-sustaining
resource for billions of people worldwide and for many ecosystems. It is crucial
during drought when surface water is limited. Yet unsustainable depletion of
groundwater is now well documented on regional and national scales, and
overdraft is projected to increase under climate change. Although groundwater
has been the subject of theorizing about institutional arrangements to govern
the management of common pool resources, further work is essential if we are to
prevent depletion of this vital natural resource. A critical area of study is
how groundwater institutions evolve over time and how this dynamic process can
incentivize sustainable resource use and more inclusive management. A comparison
of alternative approaches will be valuable in devising management systems in
multiple settings where groundwater is an indispensable resource and where there
are unsustainable levels of demand. Through the training and mentoring of
graduate students, and the use of presentations and publications, it will both
advance the integration of research and teaching and enable the broad
dissemination of research findings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research will be
conducted in California where groundwater is a major water supply source for
human consumption, agriculture and many ecosystems. The state's geographic,
physical and social diversity complements the diversity of management
institutions in other groundwater-reliant regions. The investigators will employ
a new dynamic and comparative approach that links the evolution of resource
institutions to resource outcomes. This will be accomplished utilizing an
exploration over time of two very different models: Court Adjudication - where
the court defines and assigns private rights to groundwater; and legislatively
created Special Act Districts (SAD)-with a mandate to provide enhanced local
public regulation of groundwater. Both adjudicated basins and SADs are embedded
within polycentric systems, interacting with state, federal and local
institutions, and while both have been noted as potential approaches to achieve
sustainable groundwater management, no research has explicitly examined whether
this is the case over time. Research will analyze their different foundations
and mandates and closely observe their dynamic development over time. The goals
are to understand how they incentivize different management approaches, evolve
specific patterns of horizontal and vertical interdependence, and how these
interactions over time produce specific resource outcomes. Findings will help to
formulate recommendations and guidelines for the future sustainable management
of common pool resources in general, and groundwater in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.