* 1938111
* SBIR Phase I:  A Digital Design-Delivery System for the Large-scale Deployment of Mass Timber Building Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,12/31/2020
* John Klein, GENERATE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to democratize mass timber systems, rendering
them accessible across the architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC)
industry. Buildings account for 40% of all greenhouse gas emissions, indicating
an urgent need for energy-intelligent building prototypes. Mass timber buildings
require less energy for production than competitive technologies and were
approved in 2019 by the International Building Code for structures of up to 18
stories in the US. Yet, they remain inaccessible as a technology, in part
because developers, architects and manufacturers remain unfamiliar with mass
timber and its benefits. This proposal seeks to unlock a latent market of
development potential on sites to which mass timber offers unique advantages.
Because our technology integrates adaptable-to-site building solutions into the
industry's supply chain, it is designed to improve adoption by reducing risks,
barriers, and costs usually associated with innovative technologies. By giving
designers, engineers, and builders access to cutting-edge mass timber building
systems, our proposal aims to encourage the use of a sustainable and profitable
technology for the rapid urbanization of North American
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will focus on developing adaptable mass timber building
solutions that are replicable and commercializable. This will be achieved by
designing a variety of rigorously tested and cost-effective building solutions
in mass timber and developing a generative design system that can generate and
deploy optimal building proposals using these pre-designed building solutions.
The first component of our technology comprises the development of pre-approved
structural building solutions across a range of building scales (3-18 stories)
and mass-timber technologies, including novel hybrid structural solutions
developed with support from manufacturers and engineers. The second component
the generative system will handle different development scenarios from large
urban blocks to small urban infill sites. The tool will generate a wide variety
of potential compliant options, analyze and test these for user-specified
performance metrics, and sort among them to find a best-case building proposal.
The tool will incorporate the structural solutions developed in the first
component of the work and deploy them within their constraints to test real-
world building solutions against the constraints of each development project.
The tool will also seamlessly integrate with existing BIM (Building Information
Modeling) project-delivery platforms for easy
interoperability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.