* 1938893
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Efficient biological activation and conversion of short-chain hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 12/31/2018,06/30/2021
* Ramon Gonzalez, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 157,882.00

Advances in the recovery of oil and gas reserves, through the use of fracking
and horizontal well drilling, for example, have dramatically increased the
amount of natural gas that can be economically harvested in the US. These
reserves also contain compounds, know as natural gas liquids (NGLs), that are
expensive to convert to useful products using current refinery technology.
Fortunately, many microorganisms are capable of consuming NGLs for biomass and
energy production using pathways that are much more efficient and less
expensive. The biological mechanisms of these conversions will be studied in
order to design organisms that exhibit even greater yield of product. By
eliminating the generation of waste products and enhancing the effectiveness of
these microbes, the resulting technology will be more widely deployed at
fracking sites, increasing the energy security of the US while decreasing the
negative environmental impact of natural gas extraction. This project will also
provide STEM research opportunities to traditionally underrepresented groups,
including to high school students through outreach to high schools in Houston,
through the Science Academy of South Texas, and through the McNair program at
Penn State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By cloning and repurposing poorly understood
alkane-metabolizing enzymes, this project aims to develop metabolically
engineered microorganisms capable of converting short-chain alkanes to target
products such as butanol. Harnessing alkylsuccinate synthases for such
biocatalytic applications requires functionally expressing their partner
"activase" enzymes, that require iron-sulfur cluster incorporation, in a
microbial host amenable to metabolic engineering. Screens for functional
expression of known or putative enzyme pairs and for activation by non-cognate
activases will be executed. Enzyme directed evolution strategies to achieve
alkylsuccinate synthase activation will also be employed. Functional,
heterologous partners will be thoroughly characterized, providing new insights
into activase-alkylsuccinate synthase interaction, and new opportunities for
biotechnological applications of these and related enzymes. The overall research
plan combines protein and metabolic engineering to establish a novel engineering
platform for biocatalytic processes with enhanced carbon and energy
efficiencies. If successful, this project could transform the commercial
processing of NGL away from large, capital- and energy-intensive refinery
processing to smaller-scale processes with high mass and energy efficiency. This
would in turn eliminate a major source of waste involved in natural gas
processing.