* 1938599
* GEM: Integration of Plasma Sheet Bubbles into Modeling of the Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Joachim Raeder, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 11/30/2023
* USD 414,767.00

Space weather results from changes in the solar wind and how it impacts the
near-Earth space environment. Plasma injections from the outer region of the
magnetosphere (known as the magnetotail) bring relativistic particles into the
inner regions of the magnetosphere. Understanding this process is important for
building predictive models of space weather â€“ to predict, for instance, levels
of radiation and relativistic particles that can damage spacecraft, provide
health risks to astronauts, disrupt radio communications, and cause power grid
blackouts. The results of this project have direct applications in space weather
models, and will thus contribute to the goals set out in the National Space
Weather Action Plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A newly-coupled global magnetosphere-
inner magnetosphere model (OpenGGCM-CIMI) will be used to investigate the
integration of plasma sheet injections into the inner magnetosphere region. The
work will focus on the transient injections associated with regions of low flux
tube entropy known as bubbles. The new model will provide novel capabilities for
the analysis of plasma sheet injections, including: (1) the ability to track
plasma sheet injections from birth in the plasma sheet to dissolution into the
inner magnetosphere, (2) the preservation of pitch angle distribution
information to track the position and evolution of the injection, and (3) the
inclusion of the entire inner magnetosphere particle energy spectrum and most
loss processes (to provide realistic behavior). Satellite data will be used to
validate model results. Data from the Van Allen Probes will be used to identify
and characterize injections in the ring current region. Data from other
spacecraft (THEMIS, GOES, Cluster, and MMS) will be used to analyze these
bubble-driven flows in the plasma sheet region. Where possible, conjunctions of
spacecraft will be used to connect the observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.