* 1938997
* Support for Student and Post-Doc Participation in the 2019 International Meshing Roundtable
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Daniele Panozzo, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2020
* USD 22,025.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 7 graduate students
and 3 postdocs in the 28th International Meshing Roundtable (IMR) and to cover
some of the expenses associated with the IMR short courses which are
specifically targeted to this cohort. The IMR conference was created in 1992 to
serve as a focal point for an international community of researchers from
academia, national labs and industry to discuss the latest work in mesh and grid
generation along with allied topics such as meshing for high-performance and
distributed computing, parallel meshing, high-order meshing, mesh adaptivity,
mesh warping, computational geometry, computer-aided design issues,
visualization of meshes, and applications of meshes in finite element analysis.
Organized by Sandia National Laboratories, these events are the premier
conference in this field. IMR 2019 will be held October 14-17, 2019, in Buffalo
NY, and will include, in addition to the short courses, plenary talks,
presentation of scientific papers, a poster session, a meshing contest, an open
spaces session, and a user forum. This award will be used for student/postdoc
conference registration, short course registration, and travel and living
expenses for the students and the short course instructors (about 4). Increased
student and postdoc attendance at the 2019 IMR will be beneficial to the meshing
research community, in that the community's newest members will be given the
opportunity to participate in the premier meshing conference and to further
their knowledge and training in the field. Accordingly, this opportunity will
increase the number of young people prepared for meshing careers in the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attendance at the 2019 IMR will be beneficial to
students and postdocs. They will be exposed to a large number of topics in
meshing and related areas through presentations and short courses, which is
important given that very few U.S. universities offer specialized training on
mesh generation. In addition, students and postdocs will be able to present
their research and gain valuable feedback on it from the international research
community. Furthermore, they will be able to meet and network with meshing
professionals from academia, industry, and government laboratories. This will
boost their academic career and network of contacts, fostering development in
mesh generation and its applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.