* 1938221
* SBIR Phase I:  Molecular Composites of Functional Silica Networks within Natural Rubber Compounds for Green Tires
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Charles Rosenmayer, SILPARA TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable the further development of
sustainable mobility by developing a new, disruptive class of renewable
materials for low-rolling resistance tire tread rubber compound applications.
The company will be active not only in materials development and sales, but also
in the exploration of new and valuable application areas for energy-efficient
renewable materials. The initial target application area is the material used in
low-rolling resistance tread compounds for tires currently using petroleum-
derived materials, a $5 B market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project will be directed to the technical
feasibility of a critical enabling technology supporting the use of renewable
elastomers in low-rolling resistance tire applications. Specifically, the
innovation will focus on latex-phase nano-scale reinforcement of natural rubber
using novel functional silica-based materials. The technical hurdles include
translation of the technology from spin-coating of polytetrafluoroethylene
nanoemulsion thin films to bulk solids formation from a natural rubber latex.
These are significant challenges because the formation mechanisms, required
functional groups, and end-use performance requirements are significantly
different. Specific challenges include creation of novel functional silica-based
materials; uniform dispersion of the materials in a natural rubber (NR) latex;
interactions between the material and the phospholipid of the NR latex particle
surface; the chemistry and concentration of the functionalization;
characterization of the resulting composite polymer and its microstructure; and
adaptation and processing of the innovative polymer into a vulcanized rubber
tire tread compound with the desired properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.