* 1938430
* STTR Phase I:  Assessing an innovative Microfluidic Tissue Array device for applications in drug development and precision medicine
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Lian Wang, Vivoz Biolabs LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2022
* USD 224,700.00

The broader/commercial impact of this project aims to develop and commercialize
a microfluidic device as a clinical platform to rapidly identify precise and
effective therapies for individual cancer patients. Currently, prediction in
precision medicine only has limited success, and the American Society of
Clinical Oncology (ASCO) does not recommend using any specific drug sensitivity
testing method alone to guide clinical treatment decision-making. Therefore,
there is an urgent and unmet clinical need to create a rapidly implementable and
clinically relevant experimental system that can rapidly and economically test
the effects of therapeutic options on an individual patient's biopsy. The
microfluidic platform developed in this project aims to rapidly and accurately
evaluate drug efficacy using individual patient's biopsies, thus guiding
personalized cancer treatment and leading to increased survival rates, reduced
cost of healthcare, and improved quality of patient life. In addition, this
technology will facilitate cancer drug discovery and development in terms of
cost and time, leading to reduced costs of drug development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will develop a microfluidic system that preserves viability, structure,
and other biological properties of tissue biopsy samples, providing a platform
for efficient drug screening and determining the responsiveness of individual
patient cancer samples to therapeutic drugs. Current precision medicine for
cancer treatment is mainly prediction-based on cancer genomic data instead of
direct test or validation of the responsiveness of patient cancer samples to
drugs. Lack of rapid and accurate methods for such direct tests is a major
obstacle in cancer treatment. To overcome this obstacle, Microfluidic Tissue
Arrays (µFTA) will be developed to mimic physiological blood perfusion to
maintain the native microenvironment of tumor samples. As a result, tumor
tissues cultured in the µFTAs can preserve their in vivo biological properties.
This project will establish the feasibility of setting up a robust assay in the
µFTA for measuring tumor tissue response to drugs and assess initial correlation
of the obtained data with in vivo results. The ultimate goal of this project is
to develop a µFTA-based platform to directly evaluate the responsiveness of
patient biopsy tissues to different therapies, thus providing drug selection
guidance for individual patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.