* 1938454
* SBIR Phase I:  Activation Station Technology for In-line Solar String Inspection
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Sergei Ostapenko, Ultrasonic Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,974.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to enable manufacturers of solar cell assemblies to conduct quality
control in real time. potentially reducing the cost of the solar cell modules
and increasing production by an estimated 26%. Prospective customers of the
envisioned technology are firms that make the assemblies (known as "strings"),
and specifically producers of cell stringer tools. The system will have other
renewable market applications, such as testing cracks on incoming silicon wafers
prior to vacuum deposition of thin layers for back-side solar cells. The
production-grade systems at the initial commercialization step will be made
domestically, creating new jobs. In Phase I, Ultrasonic Technologies will team
with a US-based module producer to integrate and validate the prototype in a
commercial stringer and production environment. The project will be supported by
two university research teams which provide education and training of graduate
students in a high-tech production facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will demonstrate a multi-head Activation Station (AS) system, using
controllable mechanical stress applied to the cell string through a specially
designed multi-head vacuum chuck. The string stressing is followed by fast
measurements of the responding deflection of the cell caused by vacuum loading.
This deflection provides a sensitive means to assess the cell's mechanical
integrity and to exhibit any hidden invisible cracks. The cell deflection also
provides real-time control for how tight the technological parameters are of the
stringing processes, e.g., annealing temperature, soldering thickness and
soldering quality. A new AS method for rapid in-line crack detection in strings
will adhere to a throughput rate of 4,200 cells per hour or a cycle time of 0.85
seconds per cell in modern production stringers. In parallel, the vacuum chuck
design will be optimized to assure a high level of crack coverage which will be
quantified through experimentation. Finite Element Analyses model will support
the experimental data of crack inspection accuracy and sensitivity of the AS
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.