* 1938466
* SBIR Phase I:  3-D printing of high strength-to-weight closed-cell polymer foam with gyroid lattices
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Matthew Pearlson, IGNEOUS IP HOLDINGS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance the state of the art of additive
manufacturing, through development of a novel foam resin technology for rapid
3-D printing of ultra low-density parts with high strength-to-weight ratios. The
demand for lightweight, high-strength printed parts is growing across all
sectors of the manufacturing industry. The additive manufacturing market is
expected to more than double by 2026, with high resolution vat
photopolymerization as its largest market segment (&gt;$1 B). By accelerating
production speeds and overcoming size limitations that have limited
manufacturing output to small products, the technology also opens the doors for
general manufacturing. Within the automotive, aviation and shipping industries,
for example, the technology will support lightweighted designs, thus increasing
efficiency, while lowering energy consumption, material consumption, and
greenhouse gas emissions, resulting in lightweight printed
parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will develop a novel method to modify the high resolution vat
photopolymerization process, to enable 3D printing with resin that is foamed
using a patent-pending process. Because the proposed technology can be adapted
for use on most vat photopolymerization systems, industries can apply it to
their existing resins, machines, and processes. The technology will allow for
the manufacture of lightweight parts with up to 75% gas fractions, translating
to parts that are 75% lighter and less expensive to produce compared to
traditional additive manufacturing processes. In order to establish proof-of-
concept and progress the technology toward commercialization, several critical
objectives must be met. Materials that can produce strong, lightweighted
products using this technology will be identified. Different types of materials
will be investigated in experiments designed to vary the gas fraction in the
cured foam, and at least 3 resin formulations will be selected to generate foams
for further evaluation of their mechanical properties. The results of three
types of tests (compression, impact, and 3-point bending) on foams printed using
the proprietary PrintFoam process will be compared to other materials to
demonstrate that the technology delivers materials with improved strength-to-
weight ratios. In addition, plans for scale-up of the machine and technology
will be generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.