* 1938515
* STTR Phase I:  Realizing the Untapped Potential of Multielectron Insertion/Extraction Reactions in Lithium Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2020
* Brian Schultz, Dimien Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) project is the commercialization of a high-capacity
energy storage material with potential impact for electrified vehicles, grid-
level energy storage, and portable electronic devices. Increased electric
vehicle range and grid-level energy storage capacity would lead to greater
market penetration of electrified vehicles, renewable energy sources, and
batteries, with environmental benefits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project aims to develop a
lithium ion intercalation cathode that can reversibly access more than one
lithium ion per reduction-oxidation center, boosting energy storage capacity
substantially. The problem is that after nearly a decade commercially available
lithium ions batteries such as the commercially dominant lithium cobalt oxide
and its derivatives are still limited to just one lithium per redox center,
which establishes an immutable constraint on performance. In fact, these
materials likely represent the ultimate limit for intercalation reactions
involving just one lithium. The recently discovered zeta-V2O5 polymorph
demonstrates the reversible intercalation of multiple lithium ions per vanadium
redox center reaching remarkable capacities without a loss in capacity due to
poor structure stability. In fact, zeta-V2O5 demonstrates near zero
expansion/contraction during charging and discharging. This project will focus
on (1) a high throughput screening of compositional space with the aim of
increasing the nominal voltage, (2) iterative coin cell fabrication and
characterization to correlate composition to performance, and (3) post-mortem
analysis of cell failure. Lithium ion zeta-V2O5 based battery prototypes will
demonstrate the highly reversible accessibility of vanadium 5+/4+ and 4+/3+
redox couples, approaching the 440 mAh/g theoretical
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.