* 1938315
* SBIR Phase I:  Design and Development of a Dynamic Spacecraft Charging Test Chamber and Combined Spacecraft Charging Effects Simulation Environment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* justin mckennon, Electro Magnetic Applications Inc Denver
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will offer the space industry a timely and cost-effective means for
accurately quantifying and evaluating the effects of space radiation on their
materials and products. Companies will have the capability to understand the
performance of their materials and products in dynamic, realistic space
radiation environments, which will lead to advances in materials, longer
lifespans, and fewer accidents/failures. The capability to study subsystem
response in a realistic simulated environment and inform complex models will
enable faster optimization and design iterations at lower
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a simulation tool
coupling the drastic timescale differences of surface and internal charging in a
user-friendly interface, and pairing this tool with a dynamic space radiation
testing chamber. A simulation tool with these capabilities addresses the
usability gap in the state of practice and enables the solution of the complete
spacecraft charging problem in a single simulation. The ability to produce broad
spectrum energies and alter these sources in-situ allows for materials and
objects to be exposed to realistic environmental changes without the
approximations and extrapolations currently required due to the limitations in
capability, scheduling, and size at appropriate facilities. The proposed system
will offer a new capability for testing and modeling of subsystems such as human
radiation protection devices, satellite materials and components, solar panels,
and others; this will enable design advances that are faster, more accurate, and
more effective than those currently available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.