* 1938179
* EAGER: Nanomodular Systems for Efficient Light Emission from a Heterogeneous Integration of Polymers, Two-Dimensional Semiconductors and Insulators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Ananth Dodabalapur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 290,001.00

Light emission is an important part of modern technological age. Every major
advance in the generation of light from engineered structures has had a huge
impact on society and the nation's security. Such previous advances include the
semiconductor laser, the light emitting diode, and solid-state lighting. They
have revolutionized almost every aspect of life by impacting lighting,
communication, information storage, entertainment, and others. It is essential
that innovation in this area continues to take place and new types and
architectures of light emitting systems be realized that exceed the capabilities
of previous technologies. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award supports research that allows new types of light emitting
structures to be created that combine dissimilar materials in architectures that
hold promise for improved functionality. In this research, light emitting
polymers are combined with atomically thin semiconductors and quantum dots using
a manufacturing approach that integrates multiple materials. This research
advances the science and technology of manufacturing to create processes that
facilitate such a heterogeneous integration. The availability of nanomodular
systems positively impacts U.S. electronics and optoelectronics industries, thus
boosting the nation's economy and prosperity. The project involves women and
under-represented groups in research and trains engineering students in advanced
technologies that are important in next generation manufacturing. The project
also exposes students at all levels to cutting-edge research, thus motivating
them to pursue careers in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project combines bottom-up (self-assembly) and top-down (lithography)
nanomanufacturing approaches to create nanomodular systems for vastly improved
functionality of light-emitting structures. The structures are based on
combinations of 2D semiconductors, semiconducting polymers, quantum dot
nanocrystals, and insulators. Ambipolar injection of electrons and holes by the
2D semiconductor is a crucial component of the research which leads to light
emission from either the polymer or the quantum dot via combinations of charge
and energy transfer. In such hybrid combinations of materials, the advantageous
properties of different materials are combined. For example, 2D semiconductors
have good charge injection and transport properties but poor light emission
properties. Semiconducting polymers and quantum dots can possess very high light
emission efficiencies but have generally poor charge transport properties. In a
successful heterogeneous integration, the favorable properties are combined to
create a level of performance that is very difficult to attain with the
individual materials. The project directly addresses the manufacturing and
design challenges that result in a successful functional integration. The design
of nanomodular systems is guided by charge transport theory and numerical
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.