* 1938428
* Symposium on the M7.1 November 30, 2018, Anchorage, Alaska Earthquake; Anchorage, Alaska; September 24-26, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Heidi Tremayne, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2020
* USD 91,185.00

This award provides support to the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
(EERI) to organize a symposium in Anchorage, Alaska, on September 24-26, 2019,
to capture the lessons learned and future research directions resulting from the
magnitude 7.1 November 30, 2018 Anchorage, Alaska earthquake. The symposium will
bring together researchers, practitioners, emergency managers, policy makers,
and federal, state and local experts to develop a cross-disciplinary research
agenda by showcasing a very broad set of observations from this earthquake in a
single symposium venue. The symposium will be held in Anchorage, Alaska, to
maximize participation by state and local experts who were impacted by the
earthquake and will also include participation by individuals and organizations
that conducted post-earthquake investigations, response, and recovery. By
engaging a wide range of participants, the symposium will help facilitate that
the lessons learned not only influence future research, but can also inform
future mitigation actions that have the potential to save lives, reduce damage,
and maintain critical post-event services, thus fostering national, state, and
local health, welfare, and prosperity. Recommendations from the symposium will
be shared widely with the broader research and earthquake risk reduction
community through a symposium report to be posted on EERI's website
(https://www.eeri.org). This award supports the National Science Foundation's
role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The November 2018 Anchorage, Alaska earthquake
presents a major learning opportunity for the U.S. research and practitioner
community across many disciplines. The symposium will include two days of
plenary and break-out sessions and a one-day educational field trip to areas
affected by the 2018 earthquake. The symposium will cover a wide range of
topics, including, but not limited to: geology, seismology, ground motion,
geotechnical and structural engineering, lifelines, public health, emergency
management and response, recovery, tsunami monitoring and modeling, societal
impacts, school safety, and public policy. Through the participation of
attendees from a wide range of disciplines and the integration of experts from
academia and practice, the symposium will also start important dialogues that
promote future and continued knowledge transfer from research to practice and
vice versa, thereby opening new areas for discovery and innovation. EERI will
plan this symposium with the Alaska Earthquake Center at the University of
Alaska, Fairbanks, and convene a multi-disciplinary organizing committee to plan
the symposium agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.