* 1939203
* Collaborative Research:  Accurate, Efficient and Robust Computational Algorithms  for Detecting Changes in a Scene Given Indirect Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Guohui Song, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 140,000.00

Detecting change from a temporal sequence of collected data is important in a
wide variety of applications, including speech recognition, medical monitoring,
credit card fraud detection, automated target recognition, and video
surveillance. In applications such as medical monitoring, it is very important
to find where the change occurs. In other applications, such as video
surveillance, the type of change, e.g. the movement or insertion/deletion of an
object of interest, is also critical. While detecting such changes from direct
data (e.g. images already formed) has been well studied, there are many
applications, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), ultrasound, and
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) where the temporal sequence of data are acquired
indirectly. The typical approach to detecting changes in these applications
would be to first form the image or signal of interest. As a consequence,
information that is stored in the indirect data that may be valuable to
detecting change is often lost. Therefore, this project seeks to develop
accurate, efficient, and robust computational algorithms for detecting changes
in a signal or image from a given temporal sequence of indirect data without
first reconstructing the signal or image of interest. Additionally, the project
seeks to incorporate the change information to develop better image and signal
reconstruction algorithms. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be
involved in the research investigations to enhance their career preparation in
science and engineering. The participants will apply these new techniques on
publicly available data sets, notably obtained for MRI, ultrasound, and SAR
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will employ tools in frame theory,
optimization, and statistics to develop and rigorously analyze new change
detection and image/signal recovery algorithms. Specifically, the PIs will
address the following technical issues in the proposed work: (1) the
incorporation of prior information with appropriate mathematical/statistical
formulation in the model; (2) the extraction of rotation/translation of an
object from a sequence of indirect data; (3) model parameters tuning through
statistical analysis; (4) the employment of intra- and inter-signal correlations
in the recovery algorithms; (5) the design of distributed algorithms for the
resulting large-size optimization model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.