* 1939311
* Construction and Field-Testing of 16 Broadband Ocean Bottom Seismographs for the OBSIC Fleet
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* John Collins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,844,383.00

Understanding Earth processes, such as mantle dynamics and plate tectonics, and
the phenomena they produce, such as earthquakes, volcanoes, and planet-scale
elemental cycling, requires sustained deployments of seafloor instruments, since
~ 70% of the earth's surface is covered by the oceans. While data from land-
based instruments can tell us much about large-scale structure and earthquake
activity under the oceans, many questions related to the structure and dynamics
of mid-ocean ridges, hot-spots, subduction zones, and continental margins can
only be addressed by data acquired with Ocean Bottom Seismometers (OBSs).
Discovery is advanced by an efficient, effective means for scientists to acquire
ocean-bottom seismic data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ocean Bottom Seismometer
Instrument Center (OBSIC) at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI)
provides seafloor seismographs and at-sea technical support to all U.S.
investigators whose research would benefit from seafloor seismic observations.
OBSIC currently operates a fleet of 124 Ocean-Bottom Seismographs (OBS), of
which 30 are short-period and the remaining 94 are broadband units of varied
type. This award support construction of 16 new broadband ocean-bottom
seismographs that will bring the total OBSIC fleet to 150 and the broadband OBS
count to 110. The new OBS will carry a Nanometrics Trillium T-240 3-component
broadband seismometer and a Differential Pressure Gauge, be deployable to 6000
m, and have an endurance of at least 15 months. The OBS will be equipped with a
low-powered Seascan clock disciplined by a power-cycled Chip-Scale Atomic Clock
that will provide improved timing accuracy without an undue power penalty.
Overall, these new instruments are an important enhancement to the NSF-supported
OBS fleet, and will increase OSBIC's capacity to field OBS arrays with greater
numbers of instruments, to support additional contemporaneous experiments, and
to reduce the wait-time for the deployment of funded
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.