* 1939058
* PHASE II IUCRC Clemson University: Center for Robots and Sensors for Human Well-Being
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Jerome McClendon, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/28/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) on Robots and
Sensors for Human Well-Being (ROSE-HUB) Phase II will play a leadership role in
nurturing and accelerating the deployment of robotics and intelligent sensor
technologies in a wide range of application domains key to the national economy,
e.g., transportation, energy, logistics, manufacturing, and infrastructure and
the well-being of the society, e.g., in healthcare. The ROSE-HUB center will
facilitate center university researchers to work with partners from industry,
government, other universities, and non-profit organizations to seek solutions
to critical real-world challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research efforts at
the Clemson site focus on exploring the integration, deployment and validation
of Connected Autonomy paradigm in networked real-time robotics and automation
systems-of-systems. This new generation of distributed intelligent robotic
systems build upon recent advances in AI-enhanced perceptual processing and low-
latency real-time wireless communications within the real-time sense-think-act
robotics paradigm. Tangible embodiment into integrative use-cases and domain-
customization remain crucial for success with edge- and cloud-based autonomy
systems. To this end, we will focus both on process-improvement evaluations as
well as creation of exemplar demonstrators for the advanced manufacturing,
agribusiness, automotive, and logistics verticals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center
research will focus on applications including physical/mental health, robots and
sensor systems to assist humans, innovative robot designs for monitoring and
data collection, precision agriculture, digitization of construction processes,
intelligent transportation systems, etc. Research will impact: a) industrial
members by inserting research into product pipelines, b) researchers by
exploring new ideas and application domains, c) students by providing hands-on
experience and future employment potential, and d) academic curricula.
Additionally, annual technology days will attract middle school students from
underrepresented groups to engineering, and outreach programs to local K-16
institutions will encourage pursuit of engineering education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create hardware and software and collect
experimental data from fixed and mobile robots, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs),
and sensors. A data management and dissemination framework will be established.
The software components include: (i) system framework software (e.g., low-level
software that operates electro-mechanical systems, i.e., robots, UAVs, etc.),
(ii) software for the planning, control, sensing, and learning algorithms, (iii)
software for demonstration testbeds and prototypes. The data retention period is
five years after the conclusion of the award. The data will be released as it
becomes available to the http://rosehubiucrc.github.io
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.