* 1939124
* Phase III IUCRC at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee: Center for Grid-connected Advanced Power Electronics Systems (GRAPES)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* David Yu, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 247,976.00

The NSF IUCRC on GRid-connected Advanced Power Electronics (GRAPES) has been
providing significant benefits to member companies and the nation's emerging
electric power grid modernization efforts since 2009. GRAPES is advancing
knowledge in grid-connected power electronics, producing much-needed talent for
the industry, and developing world-first technologies that impact the electric
power grid and other sectors where power electronics applications are expanding.
The University of Arkansas (UA) and the University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee (UWM)
are the two university sites of GRAPES that seek to achieve the mission of
accelerating the adoption and insertion of power electronics into the grid, in
order to improve system stability, flexibility, robustness, and economy. The
primary broader impact is to touch the lives of all Americans with technologies
that lead to a modernized, but equally reliable electric power grid that is able
to more directly incorporate increased penetrations of renewable energy sources
than before. Further impacts are to provide the highest quality, differentiable
integrated engineering education and research experience to meet the emerging
workforce and technical needs of the nation's energy industry. Collaborative
research is conducted in teams that include professors, graduate and
undergraduate students, and industry experts. Both GRAPES' sites have influence
at many levels: high school students, undergraduate and graduate students,
working professionals, minority and underrepresented groups, and member
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application areas that GRAPES addresses include
solid-state protection, power conditioning and conversion, interfacing
renewables to the grid, and assessing the impacts and advantages of grid-
connected power electronics. This work focuses on low-voltage (up to 480 V) and
medium-voltage (up to 35 kV) areas that are most suitable for power electronics,
therefore directly impacting distribution grids. Key focus areas are on
distributed generation integration, AC and DC Microgrids, distribution and
protection, high frequency magnetics, ancillary services, smart distribution,
grid connected energy storage systems, and SiC-based converters. Fundamental
technologies include power electronic packaging, control methods, gate drivers,
and software tools that are robust and resilient in the presence of the high
voltage and current conditions present in the grid. The UA and UWM sites provide
complementary facilities and expertise. An example of a facility is the National
Center for Reliable Electric Power Transmission (NCREPT), a 6 MVA test facility
capable of 15 kV testing of research prototypes as well as commercial grade
power electronics. The facilities also include a 350 kVA microgrid system,
center for sustainable electrical energy systems, energy storage systems and
interface, test setups for high voltage wide band gap devices, and DC protection
setups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.