* 1939486
* CSSI: Elements: First Workshop on NSF and DOE High Performance Computing Tools
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Sameer Shende, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2020
* USD 20,954.00

High Performance Computing (HPC) software has become increasingly complex to
install. The complex inter-package dependency can lead to significant loss of
productivity. This project will conduct a two-day hands-on workshop that brings
together NSF resource providers and system administrators, NSF PIs and HPC
application developers, and scientists and facilities administrators from the
DOE national laboratories, and industry to develop a strong collaboration on HPC
software deployment. The Software Development Kit (SDK) that will be used is
available through a containerized distribution as well as Spack - an app store
for supercomputers. The workshop will have a significant impact on enabling the
delivery of HPC software to NSF and other supercomputing sites. It will better
equip application developers in the use of modern software delivery
infrastructures including HPC containers and the Spack platform.

High Performance Computing (HPC) software has become increasingly complex to
install. The complex inter-package dependency can lead to significant loss of
productivity. This workshop on HPC tools will bring together NSF resource
providers and system administrators, NSF PIs and HPC application developers, and
scientists and facilities administrators from the DOE national laboratories, and
industry to develop a strong collaboration on HPC. DOEs Exascale Computing
Project (ECP) has produced an Extreme-Scale Scientific Software Stack (E4S) of
HPC libraries and tools in a Software Development Kit (SDK). This SDK is
available through a containerized distribution as well as Spack - an app store
for supercomputers. Spack includes recipes for building packages from source
code and is the primary means of deploying ECP software. This two-day workshop
will focus on the Spack platform and E4S. The expected outcome of this meeting
will be actual deployment of the ECP SDK software stack and container-based
runtimes on the HPC systems and an understanding of how to develop custom
recipes for Spack based builds. The proposed workshop will have a significant
impact on enabling the delivery of HPC software to NSF and other supercomputing
sites. It will better equip application developers in the use of modern software
delivery infrastructures including HPC containers and the Spack platform.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.