* 1939321
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Development of novel CRAC channel photoswitches
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Michael Kienzler, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 05/31/2021
* USD 796,236.00

This project will provide new molecular tools and understanding about Calcium
Release Activated Calcium (CRAC) channels. These are key proteins that affect
calcium entry and signaling in cells. Calcium is one of the most important
signaling molecules in living cells. Understanding calcium entry and signaling
has important implications in understanding numerous cellular processes
including migration, proliferation, and gene expression. This NSF-BSF project is
led by researchers at the University of Maine in the US, in collaboration with
researchers at the Technion in Haifa, Israel. As part of this international
collaboration, graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in
interdisciplinary research at the interface of organic chemistry, molecular
biology, and biophysics. Interactions and training will be facilitated through
regular video meetings and travel to the collaboratorâ€™s laboratory in Israel. As
a complimentary goal, the Broader Impacts of this proposal will increase
research participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM at the
University of Maine, particularly women and first-generation college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to better
understand and control the function of CRAC channels, which are an essential
component of store-operated calcium entry (SOCE), an evolutionary conserved
mechanism that regulates intracellular calcium levels in metazoans. The first
aim of this proposal will combine synthetic chemistry and molecular biology in
order to develop small molecule Light Operated CRAC Channel Inhibitors (LOCIs),
which will provide rapid and reversible control of the function of both native
and genetically engineered CRAC channels. A set of LOCIs with different
photophysical properties will be synthesized and evaluated using
electrophysiological and live cell imaging techniques. As there are multiple
CRAC channel isoforms, the second Aim of this project will combine synthetic
chemistry and genetic engineering to develop new types of LOCIs with two-
component optogenetic constructs that will enable covalent tethering of LOCIs to
the cell membrane or directly to different CRAC channel components. These
constructs will enable the control of CRAC channel activity in a cell-type and
isoform specific manner and with high spatial and temporal precision. Finally,
LOCIs will be used as light activated modulators of calcium dependent biological
processes, particularly cell migration and gene
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.