* 1939790
* Collaborative Research: Long Term Maintenance of Sustainable Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Jillian Swift, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 101,948.00

Establishing sustainable and productive agricultural systems is increasingly
important as global population growth and climatic instability pose new
challenges to food security. However, the centuries- or millennia-long time
scales necessary to evaluate true long-term sustainability are often
inaccessible through contemporary ecological datasets. The deep-time cultural
and environmental datasets analyzed by archaeologists therefore offer a unique
window into understanding sustainable agricultural practices across millennia,
allowing researchers insight into both the social and environmental factors that
contribute to (or inhibit) the longevity of productive agro-ecosystems systems.
This project will apply a multidisciplinary archaeological and ecological
approach to investigate 800+ years of indigenous agricultural activities in a
windward Hawaiian Valley (Halāwa Valley, Moloka‘i Island) and evaluate its long-
term productivity and sustainability. It will provide new insight into the
establishment and growth of intensive agricultural systems, including the
impacts of agriculture on local soils, water use, and vegetation, as well as the
ways past people adapted to climatic fluctuations and resource limitations. As a
community-based participatory research project, researchers will work in
collaboration with local community members and non-profit organizations to
facilitate archaeology and heritage management training opportunities for local
stakeholders, and to apply research results towards ecosystem restoration and
sustainable agriculture on Moloka‘i. This research will also offer STEM training
opportunities for Native Hawaiians and other underrepresented stakeholders in
field, laboratory, and museum settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
combine re-analysis of previously excavated archaeological collections with
renewed field survey and excavations in Halāwa Valley to test the hypothesis
that intensive wet-valley Hawaiian agro-ecosystems were not only highly
productive, but sustainable across centuries of agricultural activities. This
research will address six primary objectives: (1) archaeological survey and
mapping, targeted excavation, and new high-precision radiocarbon dating will be
applied to document the development of irrigated agriculture and water flow
control mechanisms. (2) GIS mapping, soil, and microbotanical analyses will be
applied to investigate the nature and extent of colluvial slope agriculture
within the valley, an under-researched but likely critical component of food
production in Halāwa Valley. (3) Chemical analyses of soil samples will
characterize soil fertility across the valley and examine the impacts of
centuries of agriculture on soil nutrient availability. (4) Analysis of archival
records will investigate early post-contact land use and water rights to
characterize the past social and political context of agricultural systems in
Halāwa. (5) Analysis of archaeological faunal remains will examine the
development of animal husbandry and its integration into food production and
resource allocation decisions. Stable isotope analysis of pig, dog, and rat
remains will examine changes to food webs and nutrient flows across agro-
ecosystems to evaluate changing land use and sustainability. (6) Limited test
excavations at Hawaiian agricultural temple (heiau) sites will provide a
chronological sequence for sociopolitical developments in the valley linked to
agricultural intensification and productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.