* 1939237
* EAGER: N-Body Algorithms for Mobile and Social Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Carter Butts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Today's fast-growing mobile device and online social media infrastructure is
producing an unprecedented volume of data on &lt;br/&gt;communication, system
and device-level interaction, and user behavior. Examples include cellphone data
(including voice &lt;br/&gt;calls, SMS and Internet data, cellular signal
strength) and activity on online social media (itself often sent from mobile
&lt;br/&gt;devices). This presents both opportunities and challenges. On one
hand, the increasing availability, high quality, and &lt;br/&gt;relatively easy
collection of such data provides a way to better understand online human
activity, infer activity patterns, &lt;br/&gt;and design new services. On the
other hand, the combination of big data and powerful inferential&lt;br/&gt;
techniques pose both computational challenges and privacy concerns. In both
cases, there is a need for efficient &lt;br/&gt;algorithmic techniques that can
support learning from mobile and social data sets, and that enable principled
creation &lt;br/&gt;of synthetic data at similar scale for modeling, testing and
anonymization purposes. This project aims to address problems in the above space
by framing them in terms that are traditionally the domain of the physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on the core insight that
many problems in the above space can be framed in terms of pairwise
&lt;br/&gt;interactions among spatially embedded entities, traditionally the
domain of N-body problems in the physical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;As a consequence,
revisiting and adapting N-body algorithms specifically to mobile and social data
analysis and &lt;br/&gt;learning can increase our capacity to (i) work with such
data at scale and (ii) do so in a privacy-preserving way. &lt;br/&gt;The
methodological contributions will include novel N-body and parallel algorithms,
specifically designed for &lt;br/&gt;processing hierarchical, and geospatially
embedded, mobile and social data, where the size or access to datasets
&lt;br/&gt;is prohibitive. In addition to the algorithmic design, this project
will develop software modules (e.g., special purpose &lt;br/&gt;compilers,
crowdsourcing tools and generators of synthetic datasets) that implement these
methods. The design will&lt;br/&gt;be primarily applied to improve cellular
network monitoring and control, mobile data privacy, and smart city
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.