* 1939009
* Phase II IUCRC  at University of Florida: Center for Multi-functional Integrated System Technology (MIST)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Toshikazu Nishida, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2025
* USD 768,113.00

The broader impacts of the Multi-functional Integrated System Technology (MIST)
Center are to develop the hardware technologies necessary to propel the next
generation of smart systems. The center focuses on translating novel materials,
devices, and manufacturing processes into multi-functional integrated systems
via collaboration with industry and government partners. The MIST Center targets
pre-competitive research along the entire stack from emerging materials,
electron, magnetic, acoustic, photonic, microelectromechanical, and photonic
devices, to circuits and architecture needed to tackle complex challenges in
developing the hardware underlying the Internet of Things (IoT). The Center
trains the next generation of graduate students versed in the center's
precompetitive research, actively recruits and mentors participants from
underrepresented groups in science and engineering, and fosters public-private
research networks across multiple academic, industrial, and government
organizations. The UF Site will expand its STEM- and diversity-enhancing
undergraduate outreach effort, called the “MIST Makers,” mentored by MIST Center
faculty that develops IoT prototypes using off-the-shelf hardware. UF will also
continue outreach to industry by organizing an industry/university symposium to
promote dissemination and discussion of technology trends in smart system IoT
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed MIST Industry University Cooperative
Research Center will be structured around five technology thrust areas –
sensing, computing, wireless, power, and integration – to drive system
technologies such as wearable devices, IoT systems, sensor networks, and "mist
computing", bringing computing hardware to the sensor node and is the logical
progression of the IoT ecosystem beyond cloud computing and fog computing. The
MIST center will address specific technology challenges such as high-speed
communication; self-powered, edge-of-the-node sensing; energy-efficient, low-
power computing; advanced networking; and system integration. The UF research
will focus on interdisciplinary microsystems, including acoustics, devices,
magnetics, metamaterials, microfluidics, microelectromechanical systems, radio
frequency antennas, and circuits, with research on topics such as: integration
on flexible platforms, zero- power magnetic field sensors, shear-stress sensors,
miniature LiDAR for autonomous applications, and low-loss, high-gain 5G
antenna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.