* 1939975
* 2020 Geobiology GRC/GRS: January12-17, 2020 - Galveston, TX
* GEO,EAR
* 10/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Boswell Wing, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Philip Bennett
* 03/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This is a request to support the participation of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows from U.S. institutions in the 2020 Geobiology Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) that will bring together scientists from across the
globe to Galveston, TX between January 12 to 17, 2020. The field of geobiology
investigates the coevolution of life and the environment over Earth history,
including studies of life and the environment today and the title of this
conference is "The evolution of a living planet: Outstanding and emerging
questions in the field of Geobiology". Over the past decade, the field of
geobiology has produced a strong cohort of scientists who greatly benefit from a
meeting of their own to exchange ideas, tools, and expertise. The Graduate
Research Seminar (GRS), a two-day meeting for graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars, will immediately precede the GRC and give early career scientists an
opportunity to organize and participate in focused meetings. GRC and GRS
actively promote diversity and request that researchers share the latest and
greatest ideas and questions during the poster and discussion sessions. Because
the attendances of GRC and GRS, respectively, are limited to 200 and 60 people,
respectively, these meetings will stimulate thoughtful and engaging discussions
and spontaneous interactions as well as offering numerous networking
opportunities for junior scientists. By supporting the attendance of GRS and GRC
by graduate students and postdoctoral scholars from the U.S., the requested
funding will strengthen the sense of community, train junior scientists, promote
collaboration and diversity in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geobiology uses
the tools of paleontology, geology, geochemistry and microbiology, but is
separated from these more traditional disciplines by an interest in the complex
relationships and feedbacks among biological, chemical, and physical processes.
The scientific programs for Geobiology GRC and GRS 2020 will investigate
interactions among biological, chemical and physical processes on Earth?s
surface in daily poster sessions and oral sessions, each with two or three
invited speakers and a discussion leader. These sessions will highlight open
questions, novel experimental and conceptual approaches and active areas of
research within the field. Both meetings will encourage open and honest
intellectual debate and ask each session chair to encourage rigorous analysis of
all science presented or discussed in a manner respectful to all conferees. GRC
and the preceding GRS will offer numerous opportunities to socialize and network
for early career scientists. These interactions will advance discovery,
disseminate results, and train attendees in methods, approaches and presentation
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.