* 1939880
* Multi-scale Analysis of Congo Basin Precipitation: Understanding the Regional Rainfall Climatology and the Potential for Change
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Kerry Cook, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 890,427.00

The Congo Basin rain forest is known around the world for its biodiversity and
rich cultural heritage. But the rains that provide water resources to the people
and ecosystems of the forest are understudied and fundamental aspects of their
behavior have not been fully documented. One challenge to understanding rainfall
in the basin is lack of observations, as economic hardship and political
instability have hampered development of weather observing networks. Another
challenge is that much of the rainfall comes from mesoscale convective systems
(MCSs), intense propagating thunderstorms like the ones seen over the central US
in summer, which are difficult to observe in
detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research performed under this award seeks to
characterize the rain-bearing weather systems of the Congo Basin, including
their seasonality, connections to the large-scale atmospheric circulation,
moisture distribution, and the extent to which evaporation and transpiration
from the vegetated land surface serves as a moisture source for rainfall. The
work takes advantage of recent datasets that make up for the lack of ground-
based observations through satellites and global atmospheric data assimilation
systems. The datasets have high enough resolution to track MCSs and determine
their formation regions, propagation paths, total contribution to precipitation,
and interaction with the large-scale environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further
research is conducted using the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, a
regional model which can capture MCS dynamics. Here WRF is applied in a triply
nested configuration over Central Africa with boundary forcing from reanalysis
products, which ensure that the large-scale features of the simulations mimic
their real-world counterparts. In some simulations the boundary forcing is
modified to represent the effects of future climate change based on output from
global climate models. The impact of simulated future precipitation change on
the rain forest is assessed using a Potential Vegetation
Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal as well as scientific
interest given the vulnerable population of the region and its importance as a
biodiversity hotspot. In addition, the Principal Investigators conduct local
outreach through the Jackson School's GeoForce program, which introduces
students from rural and inner-city schools to geoscience by conducting field
trips and other activities. Geology has been the primary focus of GeoForce, and
outreach efforts under this award bring weather and climate into the mix of
topics addressed in the program. The project also supports two graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.