* 1939612
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Industry-University Partnerships and the Future of Work
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Anthony Boccanfuso, University Industry Demonstration Partnership
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 03/31/2021
* USD 90,235.00

This project will include a series of events to gather research community input
on the NSF Big Idea: Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF),
focusing specifically on the needs and objectives of the NSF Convergence
Accelerator program. The overarching goal is to help refine one or more FW-HTF
use-inspired research topics that could be appropriate for a future NSF
Convergence Accelerator funding track. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in
this event series will come from large research universities, emerging research
institutions, companies, government agencies, and others interested in
partnering to advance FW-HTF and NSF Convergence Accelerator initiatives.
Together, the participants will attempt to identify:&lt;br/&gt;- Research topics
that are of greatest interest to the private and are most likely to be fruitful
for the NSF Convergence Accelerator use-inspired model of support. &lt;br/&gt;-
Methods that the Convergence Accelerator program can adapt to expand and enhance
academic-corporate collaborations&lt;br/&gt;- Strategies for the NSF Convergence
Accelerator program to help catalyze the application and transition to practice
of research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This FW-HTF event series began with a
kick-off event organized by UIDP at an international workshop in Oxford, UK
(July 2019) where academic, corporate, and government decision-makers convened
to identify goals for heightened academic-corporate engagement. During the Fall
of 2019 UIDP will organize a series of six "Listening Sessions" at locations
across the United States where researchers and practitioners from the private
sector as well as other stakeholders will convene and share their perspectives.
These events will be organized in conjunction with academic and corporate
sponsors, event hosts, and technical experts, as well as the input of NSF. The
event series will conclude with a conference in Massachusetts in November 2019.
The outcome of this series will be a set of actionable recommendations for the
NSF Convergence Accelerator program and the organizations represented at the
events focused on use-inspired FW-HTF topics that will provide mutual benefit
and interest for collaboration between academics, practitioners from the private
sector, and other stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.