* 1939447
* CoPe: RCN: Building a Collaboratory for Coastal Adaptation over Space and Time (C-CoAST)
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Richard Luettich, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 03/31/2024
* USD 499,864.00

Developed coastal environments are shaped by interactions between human
activities and natural processes. These interactions cascade such that
mitigation and recovery strategies that promote adaptation at the time scale of
hazardous events (months to years) can be maladaptive on longer timescales
(decades). The Collaboratory for Coastal Adaptation over Space and Time Research
Coordination Network (C-CoAST-RCN) will build the new collaborative capacity
necessary to address two Grand Challenge Questions (GCQs): 1) How do
event/recovery-driven dynamics of human and natural systems alter risks and the
resilience of communities, ecosystems, and landscapes?, and 2) What
levers—actions of individuals, communities, governments, and other groups–enable
mutual resilience of communities, ecosystems, and landscapes? By building the
capacity for a comprehensive scientific understanding of the human-natural
coastal system, C-CoAST will enable the potential for steering the coastal
system away from future states that communities want to avoid, and toward
outcomes they deem more desirable. C-CoAST RCN findings, and the research it
facilitates, will contribute to recently invigorated state-level resilience
planning. C-CoAST’s integration of stakeholders—from counties representing
variations in vulnerability and socioeconomic, political, and cultural
characteristics—in network activities culminating in co-production of a research
agenda and development of collaborative teams will broaden participation in
coastal research and contribute to improved public perceptions of science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing the C-CoAST RCN GCQs requires a radically
transdisciplinary understanding of the coupled human-natural coastal system.
C-Coast will fuse diverse perspectives and develop new long-term collaborations
that span previously uncrossed boundaries. C-CoAST activities will integrate
scholars from many disciplines—biogeochemistry, demography, design, ecology,
economics, education, engineering, geomorphology, hydrology, land-use planning,
law, non-linear dynamics, political science, sociology, as well as the arts and
humanities—who address human dynamics, natural dynamics, and their interactions
within coastal systems. C-CoAST will build and cultivate capacity by integrating
researcher, practitioner, and stakeholder expertise across coastal interests
through a suite of facilitated activities: a) Discipline 101 Seminars in which
participants share their specialized “languages,” perspectives, and methods; b)
small-group Listening Sessions in which researchers, practitioners, and
stakeholders develop a shared understanding of barriers to managing coastal
systems in a way that considers how short-term couplings unfold over longer time
scales; c) interactive, public Gallery Walks that synthesize Listening Session
findings and elicit feedback; and d) a Research Agenda Workshop to co-produce
and prioritize specific CoPe-science research questions and develop teams to
address them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.