* 1939051
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Local and National Government Narratives on Renewable Energy Transitions
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2021
* James McCarthy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 15,406.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project will examine the local
and national narratives on large-scale renewable energy projects and their
impacts for rural communitiesâ€™ natural resources and wellbeing. This project
will improve understanding of the national-level dynamics of renewable energy
development, of the factors that determine justification for large-scale
projects, and of best practices regarding local community involvement in such
projects. Findings will be broadly disseminated through peer-reviewed journal
articles, conference presentations, and policy briefs and papers, with
implications on environmental sustainability and human health and wellbeing. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish an independent research
career.

This project will examine how local and national government narratives influence
the development of largescale renewable energy projects. The project will
explore how national government dynamics influence the type of renewable energy
projects that are selected, where such projects are implemented, who implements
them, and how they impact local communities. Data collection will be carried out
using the following methods: archival research to collect policy and technical
documents, media reports; participant observation at meetings on renewable
energy; social network mapping of and semi-structured interviews with actors
involved in renewable energy transitions. The theories and methodologies
developed in this research will provide new insights and approaches to research
involving governments and communities that are pursuing transitions to renewable
energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.