* 1939954
* CoPe EAGER: Collaborative Research: COMET: the Coastlines and people Open data and MachinE learning sprinT
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Evan Goldstein, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2023
* USD 173,115.00

Timely release of research results is important to advance understanding of the
impacts of climate change and sea level rise on coastlines and the communities
that live there. The growing library of open, freely accessible data and
analysis tools (i.e., code) enables scientists to investigate a range of
societally relevant questions at the intersection of Coastlines and People. This
project pilots an incubator approach to catalyzing data-driven research and
creating networks of researchers ready to tackle the complex problems of the
coast. The program is modeled on other 'science sprints', where teams of
researchers assemble to transform an idea into open, freely accessible research
products within a short, fixed time window - thereby accelerating scientific
advances. This project will advance science in three ways: 1) By creating
cohorts of scientists using data-driven approaches to address the
interdisciplinary problems along the coast; 2) Scientists at each event will
create open tools, code, deliverables and data products, creating freely
available methods and knowledge; 3) Multiple events and iteration between events
will enable evaluation of the sprint approach, and its success in producing
science at the intersection of Coastlines and People.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
three sprint events are focused on quick turn-around research using open data
and machine learning, and will take advantage of the vast data volumes available
through data.gov and other FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Re-usable)
sources. The objective is to produce results and deliverables rapidly.
Applications from the scientific community will be solicited for each of the
three planned events, and selection of cohorts will prioritize having
representation of a diverse set of fields and perspectives. Each event will
adhere to a Code of Conduct that will additionally include an 'open by default'
statement for code, data, and reports generated at the sprint. At each event,
participants will break into small groups to spend 72 hours working on selected
projects. Groups will produce oral and written reports, as well as associated
open source code at the end of each event. Outcomes from each event will be
measured using surveys (pre- and post- event), and by following the use of
digital object identifiers associated with the open deliverables from each
event. Datasets used by the participants will also be collected and curated on a
publicly available website as a crowd-sourced list of relevant open data. The
three sprint events will take place in North Carolina and Colorado. A range of
external collaborators will interact and network with
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.