* 1939290
* Can tight linkage mimic pleiotropy during speciation?  The effects and evolution of recombination between mating and local-adaptation loci.
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Maria Servedio, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 465,289.00

This research will develop mathematical models that examine the evolutionary
processes by which one species splits into two: speciation. It has been thought
that the genes that are uniquely important in promoting speciation are those
that have dual functions that both allow the survival of individuals in their
environment and allow individuals to attract mates of the same species. However,
such genes appear to be quite rare. Some evidence exists that close physical
proximity on a chromosome of genes involved in these two functions (survival and
mate attraction) may also be very effective in allowing populations of recently
diverged species that then come in contact to maintain their identity. The
research will further explore the conditions under which close proximity of
these genes mimics the properties of one gene with two functions, both in the
maintenance of species and in the generation of new species. The researchers
will also develop and distribute curriculum materials for teaching biology
majors how to approach questions using mathematical modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address these questions through
mathematical modeling using a combination of population-genetic and individual-
based approaches. These models will first address whether tight linkage of genes
under ecologically divergent selection and genes that are the targets of
assortative mating can mimic a single pleiotropic gene with these functions,
concentrating on the evolution of choosiness during assortative mating. Next,
the researchers will address whether traits under divergent selection and those
used in mate choice will evolve to co-localize during the process of speciation
with gene flow. This will be explored both by assessing the evolution of
modifiers of recombination rate and by examining the fate of standing variation
of genes when ecological and mating traits are controlled by many loci across
the genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.