* 1939139
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Linchpin of WAIS Collapse with Diatoms and IRD in Pleistocene and Late Pliocene Strata of the Resolution Drift, Amundsen Sea, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Reed Scherer, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 324,889.00

Part I, Non-technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Concerns that the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet (WAIS) might be susceptible to releasing its ice as giant icebergs into
the Southern Ocean due to a warming climate, raising global sea level, were
first expressed more than 40 years ago. To best-assess this threat, scientists
need to know whether such events occurred in the geologically recent past,
during warm intervals of past glacial-interglacial cycles. Ocean drilling near
the most vulnerable sector of the WAIS, in 2019, yielded seafloor geologic
records demonstrating times when icebergs dropped large volumes of sands and
pebbles, called ice-rafted detritus (IRD) in deep water of the Amundsen Sea.
Occurring together with IRD that was eroded from bedrock beneath the ice sheets,
there are abundant microfossils of diatoms (algal plankton), which indicate high
biological productivity in the open ocean. The new sediment cores provide a
complete, uninterrupted record of a time of dramatic fluctuations of ice sheet
extent that occurred over the last 3 million years. Therefore, they provide the
means to obtain clear answers to the question whether ice sheet collapse
occurred in the past and offering clues to its potential future. This project
will investigate sediment intervals where IRD coincides with evidence of high
diatom production, to test whether these two criteria indicate rapid ice sheet
collapse. Geochemical analysis of IRD pebbles will help trace the source of the
icebergs to likely on-land sites. By analyzing conditions of high diatom and IRD
accumulation in deep ocean sediment, where local coastal influences can be
avoided, we will assess oceanographic and climatic conditions associated with
past ice sheet collapse events. Diatoms provide powerful evidence of temperature
and ocean productivity changes in the past, that, when linked to time, can
translate into rates of ice sheet drawdown. These results will provide critical
data for designing, constraining and testing the next suite computer models that
can determine the likelihood and timing of future ice sheet collapse in a
warming world. The project will include training of undergraduate and graduate
students from diverse backgrounds, and the public will be introduced to
Antarctic science and engaged through several different outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2, Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New drillcores from the Amundsen Sea, Antarctica
(IODP Expedition 379) contain a continuous record of oceanographic changes and
iceberg rafted debris (IRD) spanning the last 5 million years. This study aims
to identify the signature of retreat/collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
(WAIS) in these continental margin, deep-sea sediments by quantitatively
analyzing, in detail, diatom and IRD records across glacial-interglacial
lithostratigraphic transitions to establish the timing and frequency of Late
Pliocene and Pleistocene WAIS collapse events. The investigators will secure age
constraints and diagnostic observations of marine paleoenvironmental conditions
for selected interglacial intervals of cores from sites U1532 and U1533, using
high resolution micropaleontology of diatom assemblages coupled with
microstratigraphic analysis of IRD depositional events, while petrography,
geochronology and thermochronology of iceberg rafted clasts will provide
evidence of iceberg sources and pathways. Depositional paleotemperatures will be
assessed via a new paleotemperature proxy based on quantitative assessment of
morphologic changes in the dominant Southern Ocean diatom Fragilariopsis
kerguelensis. Their results will contribute to parameterization of new ice sheet
models that seek to reconstruct and forecast West Antarctic Ice Sheet behavior.
This project will directly contribute to undergraduate education at an
undergraduate-only college and at a public university that serves a demographic
typified by first generation university students and underrepresented groups.
Spanning geology, geochemistry, sedimentology, paleontology and
paleoceanography, the proposed work will allow undergraduate students to develop
diverse skills through hands-on research within a collaborative team that is
dedicated to societally relevant research. The two graduate students will
conduct original research and work alongside/mentor undergraduates, making for a
well-rounded research experience that prepares them for success in future
academic or employment sectors. The discoveries that come from this deep-sea
record from West Antarctica will be communicated by students and investigators
at national and international conferences and an array of public science
outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.