* 1939304
* EAGER:  Linking functional traits to coexistence mechanisms in a novel assemblage
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Amber Wright, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,977.00

One of the biggest questions that ecology asks is, how can so many different
kinds of species coexist? Species interact with each other in many different
ways. Some species compete for resources like food or places to live, some eat
or parasitize others, some need other species in order to survive. Given all of
these relationships, how do we explain, or even better predict, which species
will be able to live with each other long-term (i.e. stably coexist)? This
question is particularly important today, as global changes are altering which
species are encountering each other. Ecologists have devised several theories to
address the question of how species coexist. For example, species that compete
for food may coexist by eating different types of food when they co-occur. Or,
species may be better at acquiring food in different types of environments, and
so may coexist by using different microhabitats. If species differ in traits
that allow them to use resources or habitats in different ways, then trait
differences can be used to predict if and how species can coexist. Whether trait
variation predicts coexistence in consistent ways across all types of
communities is a potentially powerful hypothesis that if true would allow
researchers to predict how communities will change over time in response to
environmental change. In principle, this hypothesis should apply across the tree
of life. However, key aspects of the underlying theory have only been tested in
a handful of study systems, mainly plants and microorganisms. As a result, the
generality of these ideas and therefore their full impact remains untested in
animal communities. This research will integrate morphology and ecology to test
whether these ideas can apply to a lizard community. This research will
contribute to broadening participation in science by providing research training
to undergraduate students from the University of Hawaii, one of the most diverse
college campuses in the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research strategy is
to 1) measure traits, 2) generate predictions for experimental outcomes based on
trait differences and hypothesized coexistence mechanisms, and 3) test
predictions using a mesocosm experiment. The study species are two anoles
(Anolis carolinensis, A. sagrei), and a day gecko (Phelsuma laticauda), all of
which are non-native to Hawaii. Lizards will be introduced to experimental
enclosures with two different habitat treatments. The degree to which prey are
differentially depleted by each species will be measured in the two habitats as
a proxy for R*, which is the minimum resource level that can support a
population. This will allow for determination of the importance of resource
partitioning vs. spatial heterogeneity in competitive ability. Monitoring of
mortality due to predation in the different habitat types will indicate the
potential role for spatial heterogeneity in predator susceptibility in driving
coexistence. By distinguishing among these mechanisms and connecting them to
traits this research will generate and test predictions regarding the outcome of
species interactions in arboreal lizard communities specifically, and more
generally provide a case study to guide future work testing coexistence theory
in macrofauna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.