* 1939942
* Doctoral Consortium and Playable Experiences Track at the 2019 AIIDE Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Gillian Smith, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2020
* USD 19,590.00

AAAI's Artificial Intelligence in Interactive Digital Entertainment (AIIDE) is a
yearly conference that brings together representatives from both academia and
industry to present novel research and discuss interesting problems in the field
of human-centered artificial intelligence and interactive media. AIIDE 2019, the
15th conference in the series, will take place October 8-12 at the Georgia
Institute of Technology in Atlanta, GA. This is funding to provide scholarships
to support participant travel for two tracks at the conference that both have
the goal of strengthening and diversifying this growing research community: (1)
the AIIDE doctoral mentoring program, and (2) the AIIDE playable experiences
track. The organizers expect to have about 8 students participating in the
doctoral mentoring program, and 4 playable experiences showcased in the playable
experiences track. Artificial intelligence in digital entertainment is an
inherently interdisciplinary research area, including artificial intelligence,
human-computer interaction, psychology, digital media, and modeling/simulation,
as well as humanities and the arts. AIIDE serves an important role as an
interface between AI and society, through its focus on digital entertainment and
related applications. The conference investigates not just how to make
intelligent machines, but how to produce transformative technology that impacts
engineers, designers, and authors on potentially large-scale projects with broad
cultural visibility. The conference also endeavors to grow relationships between
academic research and industrial practice. The theme of this year's conference
is "Human-Centered Evaluation." More information about the conference is
available online at https://web.cs.wpi.edu/~gmsmith/aiide2019/. The AIIDE
doctoral mentoring program and playable experiences tracks are crucial to the
health and growth of the AIIDE community. Supporting participants to attend
enriches the conference experience for all attendees, not just those who receive
travel scholarships. By providing underrepresented students with mentoring
opportunities early in their career, the doctoral mentoring program will serve
to broaden the diversity of the whole AIIDE community (and the other communities
it interacts with). The playable experiences track also offers an opportunity to
broaden participation in AIIDE. By offering travel support to independent
scholars, practitioners, and artists in communities that have greater diversity
than core computer science/AI, it is possible to promote diversity by easing
financial barriers to full participation in the community. The organizers are
committed to improving diversity; to these ends, they will specifically be doing
outreach to underrepresented groups, and they will also be limiting the number
of accepted students to at most two per institution,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
AIIDE doctoral mentoring program will invite early-stage (ideally just before
thesis proposal) students to receive feedback on their proposed research
program. The purpose of the program is to foster connections between student
peers at different institutions, establish faculty mentoring relationships that
can lead to participation on committees (including thesis proposal committees),
and provide other contacts that can help guide students early enough to have a
large impact on the trajectory of their research. The mentoring program begins
with lunch on the first day, asking mentors and mentees to get to know each
other before their presentations and give the mentees the opportunity to deepen
their professional network during the conference. During the doctoral
consortium, students will each give brief presentations of their proposed thesis
topic followed by conversation and questions with the mentors and conference
attendees. These presentations will serve as encouragement for interested
attendees and mentors to provide one-on-one feedback at the poster session. The
committee will select students who are early in their career so that mentors
have an opportunity to help shape the future of their research and so students
may begin to build their professional network. Mentors for the doctoral
consortium will be invited based on the research areas of the accepted students
and will be selected from senior faculty and respected industry leaders in the
field. To facilitate external feedback, mentors will be selected from outside
the student's thesis committee and institution. After students are accepted to
the cohort, DC co-chairs will ask them to provide more information about their
professional goals in order to best match them with academic and/or industry
mentors. During the doctoral consortium, all mentors will be invited to the
presentations and poster session to encourage discussion across research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AIIDE playable experiences track aims to
integrate research and practice through showcasing innovative, AI-based games
and interactive media. This track aims to bring independent game developers,
students, industry practitioners, and researchers together. The track fosters
discussion of applications of the AI research shown in the main conference
towards designing new kinds of playable experiences, and encourages
interdisciplinary collaboration between conference attendees and the broader
interactive digital entertainment community; it consists of published short
papers about the work, a panel with representation from each playable experience
to discuss the role of AI in design, and a conference session where attendees
are able to play the games and discuss the work one-on-one with participants.
The playable experiences track is especially valuable to students in the
doctoral mentoring program who are interested in pursuing careers in industry,
since designers and technologists who attend the playable experiences track can
be excellent mentors. For all students, especially in the early stages of their
research, it is useful to see high-quality examples of how their research might
be used in polished, complete games. To ensure the health of this track, it is
important that independent developers, artists, and practitioners outside of the
traditional academic AI research community have the financial means to attend
and show their work; often, those who are most qualified to submit work to the
playable experiences track do not come from traditional computer science
backgrounds, or do not have access to travel funds of their
own.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.