* 1939257
* Workshop Proposal:  Mapping a Future for Management of Low-Temperature Geochemical Data: Atlanta, GA or Charlotte, NC - February 2020
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Susan Brantley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 09/30/2021
* USD 94,225.00

Science moves forward at least partly because of data. In turn, publicly
accessible datasets are an imperative for a country to benefit from its science.
In the past, scientists have relied mostly on printed data, often published in
many journals from around the world. Today, data are increasingly available
online. The increase in data availability allows scientists to use integrated
datasets and to test models. In this period of increasingly 'big data,'
scientists are working together with data specialists to learn to manage, share,
and interrogate data. Some disciplines lag in the process of publishing data
online for data sharing and public accessibility. One example is low-temperature
geochemistry and geobiology (LTGG). LTGG includes data for water, soils, rocks,
air, organic material, built materials, living organisms, and other materials.
The sheer diversity of samples and diversity of types of analyses makes these
datasets difficult to manage. Some datasets are very large (sensors, remote
sensing) while others are relatively low in volume but high in descriptive
complexity. These issues lead to questions about the best way to move forward
with data management in LTGG, and the best way to strategize about data
publication in this field. This proposed effort will fund a series of webinars,
surveys of the community, a workshop, a post-workshop meeting, a white paper,
and final publication that will address the question of what to do with data in
the field of LTGG. With these publicly accessible outcomes, the work will
position the LTGG for a future of data sharing that provides data to the public
and promotes open science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A workshop is proposed to be
held in 2020 to develop a proposed roadmap for geochemical data for the Low-
Temperature Geochemistry and Geobiology program at NSF. This workshop will bring
together leading scientists in the fields of geochemical science and data
science. The workshop will be held in university or hotel facilities in a hub
for major airlines to facilitate travel by participants. The final goal of this
workshop will be to produce a written document that lays the groundwork for
advances in management of low-temperature geochemical and geobiological data
(with little to no emphasis on genomics data). The first product will be
development of a white paper that will be placed online for public comment.
After receiving comments, the team will write a peer-reviewed publication with
lessons learned and the roadmap. In the workshop, small- and large-group
discussions will be fostered so that workshop participants can identify needs
within geochemistry and data science that could be addressed. Participants will
also develop a list of targeted priorities for the roadmap. All participants
will listen to webinars and write text before the workshop: this will ensure
that a white paper and final publication will be completed. All facilities and
materials will be accessible to anyone who needs accommodations (hearing-,
sight-impaired or the physically disabled). The outcome of the project will be a
community-led roadmap for moving forward with low-temperature geochemical
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.