* 1939078
* I-Corps: Sustainable Functional Nanocellulose Hydrogels
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Suraj Sharma, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on
reducing the environmental footprint of conventional dyeing and finishing
processes. This is enabled by the the significantly reduced level of
contaminants, as well as the general sustainability, of nanocellulose as a raw
material. Environmental and health concerns related to the effects of wastewater
and consumption of water in the textile wet processing industry provide reasons
for ongoing interest in the development of cleaner production methods.
Nanocellulose-based technology uses cellulosic waste materials that would
otherwise be discarded, thereby significantly decreasing the water usage and
eliminating chemicals in the dyeing and finishing processes. This technology
could help sustainability-focused companies to bring new products to the market
and reduce their environmental impact.

This I-Corps project further develops functional nanocellulose hydrogels as a
textile coating for cotton and blended fibers, yarns, and fabrics, with
synthetic and indigo dyes. Nanocellulose coatings can be deposited on the
surface of fibers, yarns, and fabrics made of synthetic and natural polymers for
apparel, residential and contract furnishings fabrics, accessories, carpets,
industrial, and smart textiles. Cellulose is an abundant natural materials that
features sustainability, low environmental, health, and safety concerns, and
provides biocompatibility. Nanocellulose is engineered, nanostructured
cellulose, which is categorized as nanofibrillated cellulose and nanocrystalline
cellulose depending on the production method and the overall size. Because of
their low environmental impact, large surface area, and high reactivity,
nanocellulose can be used as a coating and finishing alternative to the other
chemically intensive materials and procedures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.