* 1939762
* Collaborative Research: Workshop - BP in STEM, Computer Science and Engineering through improved Financial Literacy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Erick Jones, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2022
* USD 28,238.00

This collaborative research award supports our nation's capacity to build
computer science, engineering and related scientific/mathematical workforce
excellence through contribution of a convergent, interdisciplinary, and
knowledgeable team that possesses the requisite financial literacy knowledge
base. This workshop will convene a consortium of academia, industry, and
government to seek understanding on how student financial literacy and related
topics impact broadening participation in the computer and information sciences
and engineering future workforce. This activity will result in understanding
motivations of students in considering financial options such as excessive
student loan debt through the project's graduate financial options framework.
The input from this consortium will allow additional understanding on
underrepresented populations which are shown to have excessive debt in
comparison to their counterparts and how it impacts their decisions to join and
participate in the U.S. STEM workforce. While a few workshops have been held to
discuss broadening participation of underrepresented populations in computer and
information sciences and engineering, there has not yet been a dedicated
workshop to address the gaps in entering the workforce as caused by lack of
financial literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
activity are the models investigated to support the graduate financial options
framework. The workshop sessions will serve to inform and provide understanding
on how future career choices of students from underrepresented populations in
computer science and engineering and related convergent data science fields are
negatively impacted by preconditions such as excessive student loan debt. The
broader impact of this workshop of supporting research that impacts recruitment,
retention, and entry into the workforce of underrepresented students is
significant. We expect workshop involvement of underrepresented minority student
populations from Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Hispanic
Serving Institutions at the associate, bachelor, masters and doctoral degree
levels in computer science and related convergent fields such as computational
neuroscience, operations research, and data science to promote the breadth of
computer and information sciences and engineering field. By addressing this
important topic through this research, this project will support and provide
understanding on how to increase America's role for innovation, excellence, and
advancement in the contributions of underrepresented minority students to the US
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.