* 1939088
* Planning IUCRC Stevens: Center for Cyber-SMART
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Jeffrey Nickerson, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 03/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

The project will undertake activities to launch a new Industry-University
Cooperative Research Center for cyber research, hosted jointly by Georgetown
University, Stevens Institute of Technology, and Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. The vision of the center is to foster multi-disciplinary
collaborations for the revolutionizing roles of cyber security, management,
applications, regulation, and training (Cyber SMART). These collaborations are
necessary for the laws, policies, and regulations to develop and evolve in
tandem with new cyber technological innovations. Cyber SMART brings researchers
from business, computer science, engineering and law from multiple universities
to collaborate with public and private sector affiliates to define the cross-
disciplinary agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cross-disciplinary teams at
Stevens include the fields of economics, financial engineering, physics,
computer science, mathematical sciences and artificial intelligence. The teams
will examine critical issues with the shared goal of better understanding the
effects of technological change on the financial industry through collaboration
with the partnering universities. The Stevens site aims to address fundamental
research challenges by examining three different technologies: i) artificial
intelligence in the form of AI-assisted financial decision systems; ii)
distributed ledgers and smart contract technologies used to create new types of
payment platforms and exchanges; iii) quantum computing focused on transforming
foundational processes in cyber-security and
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research resulting from this site will
benefit the economy by reducing uncertainty related to introducing new
technologies and new regulations. In particular, the research will help policy
makers and industry participants in better understanding and managing risks and
unintended market disruptions. It will also help industry participants learn
better decision making in the face of technological and regulatory uncertainty.
Moreover, it may broaden participation in STEM disciplines in the financial
industry. It will involve local communities, and students from underrepresented
groups starting at the high school level through Stevens’ Center for Innovation
in Engineering and Science Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant
will support a workshop held at Stevens, jointly with RPI, to engage with
potential industry affiliates of Cyber SMART to explore research projects of
mutual interest. Stevens has proximity to Manhattan and ties with the financial
industry; RPI is equidistant from Boston and New York City, and has ties with
financial and technology industry; Georgetown is in Washington DC, in proximity
to regulators. The workshop will involve participation from banks, insurers,
regulators, exchanges, and FinTech companies. The content generated from the
workshop, such as agenda, presentations, will be permanently hosted at Stevens’
Hanlon Financial Systems Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.