* 1939947
* The 2019 Joint Computer Systems Research and Networking Technology and Systems PI Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Songqing Chen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 07/31/2020
* USD 21,759.00

The Computer Systems Research (CSR) and the Networking Technology and Systems
(NeTS) programs support a wide range of computer systems and network research,
from small low-power embedded systems to large high-performance systems, from
basic connectivity technologies to enable faster networking on both wired and
wireless systems, from performance to availability, and from reliability to
security. Nowadays, systems and networking research areas are often highly
intertwined. The purpose of the CSR and NeTS combined principal investigators
meeting is to bring together researchers from both communities to exchange ideas
and provide a platform for cross-fertilization of
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting is organized as a collection of keynote
speeches, panel discussions, posters, and breakout sessions. Keynote
presentations and panel discussions will offer visions for future research.
Breakout sessions will focus on different subfields to identify challenges and
solutions. Poster sessions will enable face-to-face discussion and promote
interactions of researchers from the two communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
identifying major research challenges in systems and networking areas over the
next decade, and their synergies, the meeting has the potential to have
transformative impact on both the CSR and NeTS research communities. The
organizers of the meeting plan to produce documents detailing the discussions on
the research topics. The project will also provide a forum, both for learning
and for disseminating ideas, for early career (aspiring) principal
investigators, and those from diverse backgrounds and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.