* 1939228
* The LIBRE [Lake Izabal Basin Research Endeavor] Scientific Drilling Workshop: Drilling and Coring the Lake Izabal Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Andreas Eckert, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,892.00

The LIBRE (Lake Izabal Basin Research Endeavor) Scientific Drilling Workshop
provides the opportunity to promote and explore science in two broad and
interdisciplinary fields regarding Lake Izabal Basin (LIB) located along the
southern border of the North American Plate in Guatemala. First, the basin
formed along a fault analogous to the San Andreas Fault in California. Despite
significant scientific efforts to understand the likelihood of such faults to
rupture and cause significant structural damage and loss of human life, there
are still fundamental scientific questions that remain unsolved. This workshop
facilitates science experts coming together to discuss current knowledge and
remaining unsolved questions of this plate boundary. Second, drilling the
sediments in the basin would provide the opportunity to answer questions related
to climatic, biologic, ecologic, and volcanic changes in the tropics for &gt; 1
million years. The workshop convenes experts from around the world to discuss
these research endeavors and to recommend a scientific plan that results in
significant contributions to the Earth Sciences and society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LIBRE (Lake Izabal Basin Research Endeavor) Scientific
Drilling Workshop provides a forum for scientists and students to discuss the
scientific importance and societal significance of drilling and coring the Lake
Izabal Basin (LIB), an active pull-apart basin that developed along the North
American and Caribbean plate boundary. Drilling the northern fault of the plate
boundary and collecting cores from the thick sedimentary cover in the LIB can
improve understanding of regional tectonics and associated geohazards along
strike-slip plate boundaries; paleoclimate and tropical feedback on climate
change across multiple glacial-interglacial cycles; associated paleoecological
and paleobiological changes; and geohazards associated to the Central American
Volcanic Arc. Further, discussions on climate, biology, ecology, and volcanology
can lead to development of specific scientific questions related to the response
of tropical ecosystems to environmental changes. Funds for the workshop ensure
that students from groups typically excluded from geosciences and early career
scientists can attend the workshop and participate in the
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.