* 1939428
* Planning IUCRC at University of Michigan: Center for Hierarchical Emergent Materials (CHEM)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Jinsang Kim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

The IUCRC Center for Hierarchical Emergent Materials (CHEM) will study the
engineering of materials for applications such as paints, pigments, printed
electronics, biomedical devices, consumer products, tires and other materials.
The Center will develop a multidisciplinary approach to the design, simulation,
and modeling of these materials to control electrical, structural, and chemical
properties. The Center will host a research experience for undergraduates
focusing on underrepresented minorities, women, differently abled scientists,
and other groups by integrating these students across the three campuses and
industrial partners for research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
CHEM IUCRC is to address chemical and biological products and processes where
chemical and nanoscale manipulation and processing lead to the emergence of
complex hierarchical structures with direct impact on performance. The proposed
Center will advance developments in rheology, structure, simulation, and
modeling for complex emergent structures, such as paint, inks, reinforced
elastomers, complex personal health care products, polymer compounds,
heterogeneous catalysts, and printed electronics. The Center will couple
academic expertise in chemical synthesis, rheology, morphology, simulation, and
modeling with industrial control of emergent structures governing features like
gloss, haze, biocompatibility, electrical and ionic conductivity, and toughness.
The Center will be organized in three thrusts: I. Disordered Structural
Hierarchies including reinforced elastomers, synthetic skin, and pigments; II.
Ordered Structural Hierarchies including semi-crystalline materials and
synthetic approaches to self-assembly; and III. Surfactants and Coacervates
including worm-like micelles, coacervates, and biometric
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.