* 1939743
* FAI: Addressing the 3D Challenges for Data-Driven Fairness: Deficiency, Dynamics, and Disagreement
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Tanya Berger-Wolf, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 631,013.00

Data-driven decision making systems are increasingly used to guide important
decisions ranging from loan approvals to school admissions to prison sentencing
guidelines. Existing methods for providing these decisions are often exclusively
designed to maximize a single criterion (e.g., accuracy, utility). For socially-
impactful applications, such an approach ignores most of the other important
decision considerations. Moreover, most of the current methods assume that
decisions are made once or are independent of previous similar decisions, that
all the information necessary for the decision is available, and that a single
criterion of fairness can characterize the decision. Not surprisingly, these
assumptions do not hold in the real world. This project investigates education,
public health, and urban revitalization decision-making applications in the City
of Chicago, as well as environmental policy applications in collaboration with
Wild Me, an AI for conservation non-profit. The project aims to develop a fair
machine learning approach that takes into account deficiency of information,
dynamic decision making, and disagreement about a single fairness criterion.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a fair machine learning
approach based on robust estimation to address three forms of complexity common
in application domains: deficiency of information, dynamic decisions, and
disagreement about a single fairness criterion. It approaches information
deficiency by generalizing the notion of proxies and learning latent group
membership structure as a transfer learning task. It flexibly extends the notion
of fairness to dynamic settings with repeated interactions by defining it over
states of the individuals rather than decision maker actions. Finally, it
addresses fairness disagreements by rationalizing the fairness criteria of
observed decisions and balancing different criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.