* 1939814
* NSF/MCB-BSF: TWIST1 post-translational modification crosstalk in EMT
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Mark Bedford, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 759,956.00

The ability of subsets of cells to form new cells with different characteristics
is fundamental to biological processes such as embryonic development, tissue
regeneration, and wound healing and depends on changes in the expression of a
cell’s genes. Gene expression is guided by proteins called transcription
factors. The transcription factor TWIST is important for the formation of
different cell types by helping induce changes that cause epithelial cells to
become mesenchymal cells during the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Although EMT is required for proper organ development, EMT also endows cells
with potentially detrimental migration and invasion properties, and thus must be
tightly regulated. This project will provide a better understanding of how EMT
is controlled by defining specific mechanisms that change the molecular
structure and activity of TWIST by using a novel platform to rapidly identify
proteins that recognize these changes in molecular structure. Overall, the
project will also provide an ideal opportunity for the training of graduate
students and postdoctoral scientists in molecular biology and proteomics, as
well as introducing elementary, high school, and undergraduate students,
particularly those in underrepresented minority groups, to basic science
research and advanced technology. In addition, this project will provide
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) opportunities in a rural area
with few options for students with STEM interests through established
educational and community outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information
is relayed from the cell surface into the nucleus through the process of signal
transduction. Signal transduction is driven by protein interactions that are
controlled by posttranslational modifications (PTM). Typically, a specific
protein domain on one protein recognizes or “reads” the PTM signal present on
its interacting partners. This project will address fundamental questions
regarding the crosstalk between PTMs in the regulation of transcriptional
programs that govern EMT. A recently discovered regulatory node on the
transcription factor TWIST1 potentially harbors a combinatorial code consisting
of three distinct PTMs that occur within six amino acid residues of each other.
The code is established through lysine and arginine methylation by SETD6 and
PRMT1, respectively, and lysine ubiquitinylation by RNF8. The project seeks to
define the molecular crosstalk among these enzymes, and how they function to
promote EMT through TWIST1. An important part of dissecting the molecular
mechanism of signaling through this methyl/ubiquitin node on TWIST1 is a novel
protein domain microarray platform that will be used to rapidly identify
protein-protein interactions dependent upon specific PTMs and combinations of
PTMs. This platform will help answer fundamental questions including: 1) which
protein domains bind each of these different PTMs in the TWIST1 methyl/ubiquitin
regulatory node; and 2) whether specific combinations of these PTMs block or
facilitate protein interactions? This study will provide not only a basic
mechanistic understanding of how the distinct PTMs on TWIST regulate each other,
and how they regulate interactions with other proteins, in the context of EMT,
but also a broader perspective on how PTMs might regulate protein-protein
interactions in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel
project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli
Binational Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.