* 1939098
* Planning IUCRC Northeastern University: Center for Cloud and Data Center-Scale Computing (DCSC)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Gene Cooperman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

Cloud computing has become pervasive in recent years, with a large fraction of
enterprise computing moving to the cloud, and entire categories of new
enterprises exclusively using the cloud rather than on-premises servers. Yet to
date innovation in cloud computing has been difficult for members of
organizations - whether academic or industrial - which are not one of a small
number of large cloud providers. Many advances have depended on not only access
to large-scale computing environments, but also to users and their applications,
to (a) inform research with data on what problems to target, and (b) evaluate
how proposed technologies might address real problems or enable new uses. The
Center for Data Center Scale Computing (DCSC) seeks to increase the pace of
innovation in this field by making the prerequisites for such research available
to faculty and industrial collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DCSC seeks to
harness the computing demand within participating academic institutions to both
inform research and provide a path for evaluation and translation into practice.
At the same time, the Center will take advantage of open-source licensing to
allow close collaboration between university researchers and industrial
partners, allowing engineering and system-building on a level difficult to
achieve solely within a university environment. Particular areas of focus of the
Center at Northeastern University include data storage for the cloud, including
emerging storage technologies and storage for Big Data and machine learning, and
the use of new accelerator technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
this work will come in part from development of new technologies for cloud
systems, storage, and platforms, especially those targeting use cases outside of
the main public cloud markets, such as academic, research, and hybrid clouds;
the impact of these developments will be amplified by the wide-spread use of
cloud computing. Graduate students will be involved in high-quality research
projects, and both graduate and undergraduate students in support roles will
receive training in skills of value to industry. In recruiting students for
Center positions we will work closely with Northeastern's ALIGN program and its
diversity efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.