* 1939090
* EAGER: The role of the environment on the evolution of recombination rates
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Laurie Stevison, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 252,132.00

This study addresses the influence of biotic and abiotic processes on the
generation of genetic variation through meiotic recombination. Meiotic
recombination can be influenced by environmental and physiological conditions,
however we do not know how this plasticity affects recombination rate evolution
over time. Sequence-based genotyping methods will be used to survey
recombination rate plasticity in response to heat stress at a fine-scale along
the entire genome of the fruit fly, Drosophila pseudoobscura. These empirical
data are crucial for understanding how recombination rates evolve in changing
environments. The results of this work will break new ground in assessing if
changes in recombination are adaptive and to what extent those changes have
directional effects on the rate of evolution. In addition, undergraduates and
graduate students, including those from underrepresented groups will be trained
in bioinformatics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies of environmentally-
induced changes in recombination rate have used visible mutants. In this study,
several high resolution sequencing methods will be combined with novel
bioinformatic approaches to provide a genome wide map of meiotic crossovers. The
first aim is a detailed map of recombination rate variation as a function of
heat stress. The second aim is to assess the longer-term evolution of
recombination rates and divergence in response to the short term, plastic
responses. Ultimately, this research will test the hypothesis that plasticity
explains some proportion of genetic signatures of recombination differences
within and between species. If supported, this hypothesis would challenge the
validity of linkage disequilibrium-based estimates to capture recombination rate
evolution. Evolutionary theory currently suggests that environmental changes can
affect population genetic signatures of diversity and divergence; this study
would directly evaluate this question with empirical
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.