* 1939094
* I-Corps: Wireless Vital Signs Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Woon-Hong Yeo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
wireless, skin-like vital signs monitor that provides clinical grade data while
maximizing patient comfort and mobility. The current clinical standard for
monitoring patient vital signs consists of physically tethering the patient to
multiple sensors with wires connected to a bed-side monitor. These systems
present a number of drawbacks for those involved in the care stream, including
patients, providers, and payers. The current wired systems are not typically
used for detailed monitoring at home. They are a barrier to patient mobility and
lead to skin irritation and infection. The value proposition of this project is
to improve quality of care and shorten hospital stays by permitting uninhibited
patient mobility and preventing skin injury while providing critical data to
accurately diagnose patients. Additionally, the development of a wireless system
will enable flexibility in monitoring equipment for hospitals and has
significant potential to improve care in low-resource or at-home
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will further develop a
flexible, stretchable wireless sensor platform which can improve monitoring of
patient vital signs in a wide array of potential healthcare applications. The
sensor consists of an ultrathin nanomembrane electrode supported by a soft
flexible substrate. The flexible, stretchable nature of the sensor enables
conformal contact with a patient's skin and high-resolution measurement of
multiple vital signs to monitor heart, brain, and muscle activity. These
wireless measurements can be used to monitor patients in hospital or at-home
settings. Combining multiple high-resolution signal modalities will improve
diagnostic accuracy as machine learning methods are
implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.