* 1939340
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 ACM International Conference on Underwater Networks (WUWNet)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Aijun Song, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 16,000.00

Our oceans are integral to climate regulation, nutrient production, oil and gas
retrieval, and transportation. As such, there is significant interest to develop
underwater sensor network technologies for scientific, environmental,
commercial, safety, and military missions in the oceans. The WUWNet conference
has established itself as one of the premier technical venues in the field of
underwater sensor networks. The fourteenth ACM WUWNet, which will be held in
Atlanta, Oct 23-25, 2019, promises to build on its previous success and further
expand the scope. The organizing committee is in charge of putting together a
very strong program, including technical sessions, panels, keynote speeches, and
special sessions, as well as poster/demo sessions and vendors
exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;This main goal of the project is to promote student
participation in WUWNet19. Participation in high-quality scientific meetings,
such as WUWNet, is an extremely important part of the research training
experiences. It allows the students to interact with their peers, gives
opportunities the young investigators to learn from senior researchers and
scholars, exposes the students to cutting-edge research, and allows the students
to take part in discussions that are likely to shape the future of the field.
The requested funding will be used to provide travel support for both
undergraduate and graduate students who might otherwise be unable to attend the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total amount of $16,000 will be used to
support approximately sixteen students to attend WUWNet19. Special attention
will be paid to recruit the first-time attendees from undergraduate and
beginning graduate groups. The project will give high preference to support the
under-represented groups to participate in WUWNet'19, including women,
minorities, and students with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.