* 1939943
* CoPe Conference: Anticipating Economic Growth of Northern New England Coastal Communities: Portland, ME - Fall 2020
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Terry Shehata, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 12/31/2021
* USD 60,607.00

The changing Arctic environment brings both risk and opportunity to coastal New
England. Arctic ice melt connects northern ports through new economic activities
such as shipping, trade, resource extraction, fishing, and tourism, even as it
accelerates sea level rise, severe weather, and other ecological changes. More
resilient locales can expect increased migration from more vulnerable areas.
While many communities are developing local coastal adaptation plans focused on
specific problems such as infrastructure planning, natural resource management,
and emergency response, fewer are comprehensively linking economic, demographic,
and ecological forces. A workshop in Portland, Maine will consider the resilient
urban planning and landscape design needed for smaller cities and towns of
northern New England to grow into the future vibrant, sustainable, and adaptable
coastal cities of 2100. Stronger partnerships among scientific, business,
governmental, non-profit, and neighborhood groups will advance the exploration
of visionary futures and expand the scope of research and educational
initiatives that inform coastal climate adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
central workshop goal is to determine what types of data and knowledge will help
communities align incremental adjustments with more integrated visioning of
uncertain futures involving urbanization, in-migration, and transformative
paradigms in science and engineering. Workshop discussions will highlight the
built environment and implications of more diversified economic and demographic
futures for socio-ecological resilience, thereby embracing uncertainty and
anticipating transformative change. A primary outcome will be a collection of
student internship projects engaging communities and private industry in
coastlines and people science through student learning as a boundary spanning
activity. Workshop outcomes will benefit society by developing an understanding
of how coastal resilience to environmental variability and hazards might
synergize with urbanization and economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.