* 1939192
* Human Variance and Assessment for Learning Implications for Diverse Learners of STEM, A National Conference
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Edmund Gordon, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Fulmer
* 02/28/2021
* USD 118,303.00

The conference purpose is to stimulate a national conversation concerning the
relationships between assessment, teaching and learning that include scholarly
research and development of tests; members of city and state boards of
education; officials from states and major school systems; policymakers; and
representatives of teachers' associations and parents' associations. This
conference aims to attract these important professionals has important co-
sponsors like the Urban Institute. This national conference flows from the work
of the Gordon Commission on the Future of Assessment for Education that
addressed the advancement of achievement in STEM disciplines (PRE-K - 12) for
students who are underrepresented among high achieving students. This issue of
advancement of underrepresented high achieving students has received little
concentrated effort and a conference would help in providing greater
understanding of this special concern, which includes a student in poverty in
complexed family structures.

The conference will attract thought leaders, policy makers, supervisors of
practice and scholars of measurement science to be informed of emerging thought
and developments and to discuss selected models for the implementation of new
ways of generating and utilizing data from education tests. The conference will
stimulate national conversation and ultimately a market that demands educational
assessments that inform and improve teaching and learning transactions. The
conference will be organized around four conceptual and theoretical papers that
focus on the knowledge base upon which six concurrent workshops will be based.
The four papers are: (1) Human Diversity and Assessment; (2) The Limits of Test
Bias and Its Corrections; (3) Towards an Assessment Science Capable of Informing
and Improving Learning; and (4) Assessment in the Service of Learning. The
workshops will focus on models of pedagogical practice that show promise for
informing and improving teaching and learning processes and their outcomes.
These issues will be discussed by 11-15 expert presenters who understand student
learning and the types of information gleaned from different types of
assessments. The attention to URMs and their needs and contexts are prioritized
in discussions surrounding measurement science and the integration of
assessment. Several important issues that address understanding of student
learning, and the relationship between the varieties of information concerning
students that can be accessed through assessments are: (1)The importance of the
broader and more productive use of educational testing to improve the learning
of STEM subject matter and values;(2) Curriculum embedded assessment and the
reduction in disparities in achievement by STEM learners from diverse social
divisions;(3)Innovative procedures and programs for the use of data concerning
learners and teaching and learning transactions in the teaching and learning of
STEM with learners who are underrepresented among high achieving STEM learners.

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.