* 1939347
* 4-D Reconstruction of Magmatism at a long-lived Andesite Locus: Goat Rocks Volcanic Complex, Cascade Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Anita Grunder, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2022
* USD 229,380.00

The large composite volcanoes that are distinctive of subduction zones are the
surface expressions of the magma factory that distills mantle material to create
and change the Earth’s crust. While the volcanoes themselves pose hazards to
human health and property, the magma systems that drive them result in the
circulation of hot water used for power and recreation, and also lead to the
formation of many types of ore deposits at depth. For these reasons, the nature
and development of subduction volcanoes and the magmatic underpinnings that feed
them are critical. This project will investigate the long-term (~3 million year)
development of the Goat Rocks Volcanic Complex, a cluster of eroded composite
volcanoes in the Washington Cascade Range, to understand the origin and storage
conditions of magmas erupted there and how they changed over time. Broader
impacts of this study include the training of a female PhD student and
undergraduate students in diverse field, laboratory, publication, and outreach
skills; collaboration with the Washington Department of Natural Resources on
projects and publications; and an animation of the development of the Cascade
Volcanic Arc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Goat Rocks Volcanic Complex makes a
particularly good natural laboratory because it is well exposed by glacial
erosion, it is relatively young, and it spans a large part of the global
compositional range of subduction zone stratovolcanoes. Preliminary work at the
Goat Rocks Volcanic Complex indicates that the magma system changed
substantially in time, from potassium-rich magmas stored at modest depth in the
crust, to low-potassium and more water-rich magmas stored at greater depth.
Detailed stratigraphy and geochronology (mainly 40Ar/39Ar dating) will provide a
more robust time framework for the geochemical analyses of rocks and minerals to
be used in reconstructing the magmatic history (e.g., pressure, temperature and
water conditions), which will be quantified using computer models that couple
mass and thermal balance. The reconstruction of this volcanic complex will then
be compared to the magmatic histories of other subduction volcanoes in the
Cascades and in other arcs. A particular aim is to evaluate conflicting models
of magma generation and storage, i.e. (1) a model wherein deep crustal magma
generation is prevalent, with only transient shallow storage before eruption;
vs. (2) extensive interaction between crust and magma at all levels, as
suggested by exposed sections of volcanic arc crust. We posit that seen through
the lens of development in time, such models may be
reconciled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.