* 1939037
* EAGER: Multi-Modal Communication for Teachable Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Reid Simmons, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2022
* USD 315,823.00

Peer tutoring, in which one student teaches material to another student, has
been proven to increase learning, especially for the student who is taking on
the role of teacher. This is because detecting and correcting mistakes often
requires the student teacher to reflect on their own knowledge to develop
explanations, reinforcing their knowledge of the subject matter. The
effectiveness of such peer tutoring, however, depends on how learners behave --
if they pick up the subject too quickly, the student teacher may benefit less;
if they pick it up too slowly, the teacher may get frustrated or confused
themselves. An alternative is to have the learner pretend not to know the
subject and help guide the teacher by "back leading" -- asking the right
questions, making occasional "mistakes", etc. To this end, the goal of this
research is to develop a social robot that plays the role of learner, guiding
the student teacher using both verbal and non-verbal behaviors, modeling both
the cognitive and emotional state of the student, and providing feedback and
encouragement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on developing multi-
modal communication for a social robot that provides cognitive and emotional
support of students who are trying to teach the robot multi-step mathematical
problem solving. The student and robot collaborate around a "smart" whiteboard
that forms the joint focal point for learning. Concepts from Theory of Mind are
used to infer the affective state of the student from their multi-modal
behaviors and to provide support and encouragement, with the goal of
facilitating the student persevering in the task and developing meta-cognitive
skills to teach more effectively. Concepts from Common Ground Theory are used to
generate robot actions, such as asking questions or making deliberate mistakes,
to help guide the student teacher to better explain the concept, through an
interactive presentation/acceptance process. As part of this project, a robot
ambassador is being developed that can explain robotics and STEM to middle-
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.