* 1939903
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Heritage speakers processing of the Spanish subjunctive during online comprehension.
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Paola Dussias, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2022
* USD 14,821.00

With 48.4 million people of Hispanic origin, the U.S. is the country with the
second largest number of Spanish speakers. Many of these speakers are heritage
speakers of Spanish: English bilingual speakers who are raised in homes where
Spanish is spoken. Past studies have characterized grammatical knowledge in the
heritage language as deficient relative to grammatical knowledge in monolingual
speakers of Spanish. The goal of this dissertation project is to move away from
this perspective in order to better understand the grammars of heritage speakers
of Spanish in the U.S. Why is this important? The home language of heritage
speakers is often stigmatized. However, ample evidence suggests that maintaining
the home language is important because it is the most linguistically-developed
parental language and provides the best foundation for learning both a home
language and a societal language. Therefore, the study of heritage languages
contributes to the validation of language practices that are commonly looked
down upon by the general public and the academic
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned study examines a grammatical feature
of Spanish that has been argued to be misused and simplified, and to display so-
called "erosion" by heritage speakers of Spanish: the Spanish subjunctive.
Unlike past research that has relied on prescriptive notions of what is
grammatically "correct" and "incorrect" in the use of the Spanish subjunctive,
the experimental materials employed here will mirror spontaneously produced
speech extracted from a large corpus. Two questions are addressed: (1) To what
degree are heritage speakers who live in a long-standing bilingual community
sensitive to the linguistic factors (lexical and structural) constraining the
selection of the Spanish subjunctive?, and (2) To what degree do social factors
modulate heritage speakersâ€™ sensitivity to mood selection? Data will be
collected using auditory pupillometry, and changes in pupil dilation will be
used an as an index of processing difficulty. Pupillometry was selected as the
method of data collection because of its high ecological validity in the context
of heritage speakers, whose language experience in the heritage language is
mostly oral and aural. By using an appropriate methodology and by incorporating
corpus data in the design of the planned experiments, the goal is to contribute
to a theory of language acquisition and processing in heritage language contexts
with greater explanatory adequacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.