* 1939255
* RESEARCH-PGR: Genomic analysis of heat stress tolerance during tomato pollination
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Gloria Muday, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2025
* USD 3,054,190.00

High temperatures during flowering and pollination can result in significant
fruit losses, because of heat sensitivity of pollen tube growth. Different
tomato varieties show significant differences in heat sensitivity of pollen tube
growth. Making use of this naturally occurring variety, this project seeks to
identify the molecular basis of adaptations that mitigate the yield-damaging
consequences of heat stress during crop reproduction. The goal is to develop new
tomato varieties that are fertile and continue to produce fruits at high
temperature. This project will train undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in genome science, developmental biology, and computational
analysis of genetic variation. The project will build on the successful outreach
program developed by one of the team members. This program has been used to
teach plant genetics and the science of plant breeding and genetic engineering
to more than 1000 9th grade students, tailoring it to focus on the effects of
temperature stress on tomato reproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
hypothesized that thermotolerant tomato varieties express a pollen tube heat
stress response that is either absent or diminished in thermosensitive cultivars
and that the thermotolerant pistil buffers heat stress and facilitates pollen
tube growth. To identify the molecular mechanisms of thermotolerance in tomato,
transcription changes that accompany heat stress in pollen tubes and pistil will
be measured in heat tolerant and heat sensitive tomato varieties. Haploid
selection mapping of pollen tube heat tolerance will be performed, followed by
experimental tests whether identified candidate genes are causally related to
heat tolerance. This project will generate accessible and readily available
community databases 1) detailing reproductive gene expression responses to
elevated temperature and 2) registering genetic variants across hundreds of
tomato genomes to enable analysis of heat stress adaptation and other traits.
The project will define the transcriptional changes that accompany heat stress
in the pollen tube and pistil (Aim 1), genetic variation responsible for pollen
tube thermotolerance (Aims 2 and 3), and the functions of individual
thermotolerance genes using reverse genetics (Aim 4).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.