* 1939061
* Phase II I/UCRC WPI: Center for Robots and Sensors for the Human Well-Being
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Jie Fu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/28/2025
* USD 533,949.00

The NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) on Robots and
Sensors for Human Well-Being (ROSE-HUB) Phase II will play a leadership role in
nurturing and accelerating the deployment of robotics and intelligent sensor
technologies in a wide range of application domains key to the national economy,
e.g., transportation, energy, logistics, manufacturing, and infrastructure and
the well-being of the society, e.g., in healthcare. The ROSE-HUB center will
facilitate center university researchers to work with partners from industry,
government, other universities, and non-profit organizations to seek solutions
to critical real-world challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research foci of
Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) ROSE-HUB projects strive to make
fundamental advances both in key technology components, such as algorithms,
sensors, and robots, and in integrative systems. The objectives are to advance
mobility, manipulation, robot learning, human-machine interaction, and multi-
agent coordination capabilities in general and in the context of relevant
applications by collaborating with industrial partners. Methodologies will be
developed to balance real-time operation and computational cost or energy while
providing high-level semantic information of task environments through
integrating perception, planning, and learning. Novel robot and sensor systems
will also be developed, especially soft robots, sensors, and assistive
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center research will focus on applications
including physical/mental health, robots and sensor systems to assist humans,
innovative robot designs for monitoring and data collection, precision
agriculture, digitization of construction processes, intelligent transportation
systems, etc. Research will impact: a) industrial members by inserting research
into product pipelines, b) researchers by exploring new ideas and application
domains, c) students by providing hands-on experience and future employment
potential, and d) academic curricula. Additionally, annual technology days will
attract middle school students from underrepresented groups to engineering, and
outreach programs to local K-16 institutions will encourage pursuit of
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create hardware
and software and collect experimental data from fixed and mobile robots,
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), and sensors. A database for data management and
dissemination will be established. The software components include: (i) system
framework software (e.g., low-level software that operates electro-mechanical
systems, i.e., robots, UAVs, etc.), (ii) software for planning, control,
sensing, and learning algorithms, (iii) software for demonstration testbeds and
prototypes. The data retention period is five years after the conclusion of the
award. The data will be released as it becomes available to the
http://rosehubiucrc.github.io site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.