* 1939948
* EAGER: Development of statistically significant reaction models describing electrochemical conversion of biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Peter Harrington, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2021
* USD 149,842.00

Lignin is a polymeric material from plants that is currently burned for energy
in biorefinery processes. The goal of this project is to convert lignin to other
potentially more valuable products in an electrochemical reactor. This would
yield potentially higher-value uses for lignin, which could improve biorefinery
economics and eventually reduce the cost to produce next-generation biofuels. In
addition, products generated from lignin could replace chemicals currently
sourced from petroleum. Reduced dependence on petroleum could address the United
States' energy and materials security. Currently, the mechanism governing
conversion of lignin is not well-understood. This project seeks to address that
fundamental issue by investigating the conversion of less complex model
compounds that share some features with lignin. Generating better understanding
of how these reactions occur would advance the field of biomass conversion and
could eventually lead to a more environmentally friendly way to generate
biofuels and bioproducts. This project also contains an educational outreach
program focused on high school students in Appalachia who are underrepresented
in the STEM fields. The outreach program seeks to increase Appalachian students'
matriculation in the STEM fields at four-year colleges and universities, which
would diversify STEM workers' backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop better understanding of the reaction pathways that
dominate electrochemical conversion of lignin. Because of the complexity of the
lignin biopolymer, the PIs will work with lignin model compounds that share key
features with lignin itself. The project will involve the electrochemical
oxidizidation of the lignin model compounds at different electrode potentials,
and the use of NMR spectroscopy to determine structural changes resulting from
electrochemical oxidation. This analysis will be used to elucidate the reaction
mechanism. The PIs hypothesize that two major reactions pathways are likely
possible: direct electrochemical conversion or indirect conversion mediated by
hydroxyl radicals. Additional of hydroxyl radical scavengers will help determine
the relative importance of the hydroxyl radical mediated reaction. Once the
reaction pathway models have been developed using the lignin model compounds,
the PIs will compare and assess the model?s descriptions on lignin itself,
determining how well the reaction pathways describe the actual reaction
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.