* 1939187
* eBird Enterprise: Maintaining the Cyberinfrastructure to Support the Collection, Storage, Archive, Analysis, and Access to a Global Biodiversity Data Resource
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Jeff Gerbracht, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,171,473.00

Cornell University is awarded a grant to support the cyberinfrastructure to
sustain the continued exponential growth of eBird, an online data resource for
global bird biodiversity. With its launch in 2002, eBird opened a new era of
real-time data gathering by birders, and by 2020, the project has become the
world’s largest biodiversity-related citizen science project. More than 500,000
contributors have submitted almost 750 million bird observations of more than
10,000 bird species globally. These data provide comprehensive, high-resolution
information about the spatial and temporal distribution of bird populations
across a species full range, throughout the year. Modeling eBird data has
generated North American bird status and trends results that provide an
unparalleled window into a species’ full annual cycle providing a valuable
source of population-level distributional data for basic biological research and
conservation applications. All eBird data is openly available and has been
downloaded more than 130,000 times by students, educators, government staff, and
researchers, resulting in more than 300 peer-reviewed scientific papers. True to
its beginnings, eBird is still grounded in serving as an essential tool for
birding and more than 8 million people access eBird every year from every
country to explore eBird data through interactive exploration, visualization and
analysis tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the research in basic and applied
ecology is founded in descriptions of distribution and abundance of species.
Long-term, well-organized data covering broad spatial scales are necessary for
documenting change, generating hypotheses for their causes, and ultimately
understanding how these changes relate to overall ecosystem health and function.
While collecting a single-species occurrence datum is a well-understood process,
the coordinated collection, curation, access, and storage of these data is no
small task. Appropriately structured, openly available, and maintained in a
consistent long-term cyberinfrastructure species occurrence, as well as other
large-scale environmental datasets have become essential for studying
biodiversity. The goal of eBird’s data management infrastructure is to provide
a: (1) a single, consistently gathered and curated data source that is openly
available and widely in use, (2) represents a substantial proportion of all
available data on distribution of all bird species globally, and (3) provides
these data in a suite of value-added products that lower the threshold of data
management needed to use these data. For more information about eBird, visit its
website at http://ebird.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.