* 1939342
* Exploring the Use of Non-Science Themed Art in Science Education: A Conference
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Aaron Price, Museum of Science and Industry
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 70,365.00

STEAM, the use of art as a context and tool for science education, is currently
a hot topic in the science education field. In almost all instances of study and
practice, it involves the use of science-themed or science-informed art in
science education. As such, it does not take advantage of the majority of
artistic output that does not have an obvious connection to science. The
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine recently called for
more research to expand the "limited but promising" evidence that integrating
arts and humanities with science education leads to better learning. The goal of
this 2.5-day conference is to bring together representatives of both art and
science groups to have a shared discussion around how non-scientific art can
influence science education in theory, and how we can apply empirical results to
the theory. For purposes of this conference, "non-science art" is defined as art
that was not inspired by science. Conference attendees will include researchers
(art and science education researchers) and practitioners (artists, art museum
interpreters, and science educators). The conference will take place during the
2020 Black Creativity exhibition at the Museum of Science and Industry, Chicago.
It is anticipated that by holding the conference at that time the audience for
the conference and its impact will be informed by more diverse
attendance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will be implemented starting
with a pre-conference reading. Attendees will be sent a copy of the white paper
from the Art as a Way of Knowing report for background reading and also asked to
contribute to a Google Document that describes their various contexts. Each day
of the conference will focus on a theme -- state of the field and possibilities
and research -- and be comprised of large and small group interactions.
Attendees will be invited from the ranks of practitioners, researchers and
educators in the art and science education fields; several slots will be
available for open (non-invited) participants. Key outcomes include: (a) a
summary of all the research that has been conducted on using non-science art in
science education, (b) starting points for building a theory on why non-science
art can be used in science education; and (c) a list of specific research topics
that would help inform, advance, and test the theory. In addition to assessing
satisfaction with the conference, evaluation will also include a one-year post
conference survey to investigate impact of participation in the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences. This conference will
generate products that will give guidance to both researchers and practitioners
who want to use art in science education. These products include a white paper
synthesizing the discussion and appendices that include raw transcripts and a
bibliography of resources. Another product is a roadmap to create interventions
that can be studied, which should lead to a stronger, more rigorous theory of
practice about how art can be integrated into science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.