* 1939968
* CoPe EAGER - Identifying Multiple Values for Beaches and Coastlines Under Sea Level Rise
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Makena Coffman, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,095.00

Sea level rise represents a major threat to coastal ecosystems and communities.
Responding requires a clear understanding of the multiple uses and values of
coastlines and design of adaptation strategies that best supports these values
or accounts for tradeoffs. There are two main adaptation solutions: (a) adapt in
place through coastal hardening or elevation; or (b) strategic or managed
retreat from the coast, either all at once or gradually over time. Proponents
argue that managed retreat is an option that minimizes community exposure to
coastal hazards exacerbated by sea level rise. However, while the process may
appear orderly, the combination of existing infrastructure, social, economic and
cultural ties to place, and land-use practices, make the implementation of such
policies difficult. Jurisdictions struggle to find place-appropriate solutions
at a scale that meets the problem of global change. Prioritizing public
investments for coastal management requires understanding and communicating
multiple ecological, socio-cultural, and economic values held by diverse user
groups at a highly localized level in terms that can be utilized for policy and
planning. This study considers a variety of coastal sites to better understand
how their multiple values change with expected sea level rise. The investigators
expect their study to result in a framework to support local decision-making for
proactive policy and planning for coastlines facing rapid change. Students are
involved with all aspects of this study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessing the
costs and benefits of adaptation approaches in different contexts requires
understanding the diverse uses and values of coastal areas, and how these may
change with anticipated sea level rise. This study draws upon the emerging field
of integrative valuation to assess the suite of benefits and tradeoffs between
values associated with beaches and coastlines. Hawai'i serves as an excellent
model system given the high socio-cultural, economic, and ecological values of
diverse coastlines in a small geographical area. The investigators use several
sites to identify and illustrate multiple ecological, cultural, and economic
values. The study has three objectives: (1) Evaluate the ways that sea level
rise and adaptation strategies have already influenced coastal ecosystems and
communities through historical and archival analysis; (2) Develop indicators
representing multiple values of beaches and coastlines using mixed qualitative
and quantitative analysis, and assess how these are likely to change under sea
level rise both with adaptation in place and managed retreat; and (3) Develop an
innovative tradeoff framework that assists local decision-makers to proactively
address these challenges in their coastal communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.