* 1939977
* Resolving uncertainties in sewage subsidies to urban aquatic ecosystems using continuous sensing and stable isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Emily Elliott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 389,205.00

The presence of sewage in urban streams and rivers poses significant risks to
human and environmental health: pathogens increase costs to treat drinking water
and make recreation dangerous whereas excess nutrients from runoff and waste can
cause algal blooms that can decimate aquatic ecosystems and limit recreational
uses. This project addresses interactions between urban streams and urban water
infrastructure systems. Sewage pipes flow by gravity, and thus are often
deliberately installed in stream channels. As pipes age and leak, stream-sewer
interactions and contamination are more likely. Currently, 45 major US cities
have domestic sewer and storm drains combined into the same pipe system. When it
rains, excess wastewater combines with stormwater, and can flow directly into
streams and rivers through a combined sewer overflow. Despite the prevalence of
this problem, neither of the two national centers of urban stream research in
Baltimore and Phoenix include watersheds with combined sewer overflows. For this
project, a nest of in-stream sensors will be established within an urban stream
in Pittsburgh, PA. Sensors will collect water quality measurements at 15-minute
intervals and give unprecedented insight as to how sewage leaks and overflows
affect urban stream water quality at finely resolved time scales. This project
will broadly benefit society by deepening understanding of a significant health
risk, strengthening relationships between academia and local watershed
associations, and educating the public about water quality, public health, and
ongoing monitoring efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to altered hydrology and
anthropogenic nutrient subsidies, there remains a critical need to understand
the impacts of urban infrastructure systems on stream nutrient loads. This
research investigates the elusive connection between catchment pipe
infrastructure and ecological impacts in urban aquatic ecosystems by measuring
finely-resolved changes in nitrate concentrations and other water quality
parameters, evaluating the effects of sewage subsidies on in-stream gross
primary productivity, and exploring changes in nitrate mobilization and
transport during storm events. This will be accomplished using an unusual
combination of stable isotope tracers (nitrate, water) and continuous sensing to
disentangle the convoluted signals of watershed transport and transformation of
nutrients in urban systems. Nine Mile Run, an urban stream in Pittsburgh, PA
with buried headwaters, co-located sewer pipe infrastructure, and combined sewer
overflows, will be the focus of the study. A water quality station featuring an
ultraviolet nitrate analyzer and a multi-parameter water quality sonde will
measure high frequency water chemistry over a two-year period. In-situ sensors,
along with an ISCO autosampler, will capture and reveal the full range of daily
variations, as well as mid-storm changes, that have not been visible with
previous grab sampling. This combination of data on the sources, timing, and
delivery of both nitrate and water will allow for better characterization of
solute flow paths, elucidate when and how wastewater-groundwater-surface water
interactions are occurring, and the effects they have on catchment transport,
stream productivity, and stream biogeochemistry. This project will broadly
benefit society by deepening understanding of a significant health risk and
educating the public about water quality, public health, and ongoing monitoring
efforts. It will also expand upon ongoing efforts by the Pittsburgh
Collaboratory for Water Research, Education and Outreach to strengthen
collaborations between University of Pittsburgh researchers with communities and
to continue building a graduate program centered on community-engaged water
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.