* 1939362
* Capillary-Assisted Printing of Structured Colloidal Monolayers
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Xin Yong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2024
* USD 570,000.00

Thin films made of micrometer-sized particles can be used in sensing, optical
coatings, anti-counterfeiting, and electronics. These applications require that
the position and orientation of each particle in the film be tightly controlled.
Contemporary manufacturing techniques are unable to provide this level of
precision. This award supports fundamental research to create a new additive
manufacturing technique that uses the interface of a liquid droplet (a template)
to build ordered particle films. The particles are delivered to the surface of
the template, where they assemble under the subtle forces that exist at the
interface. The droplet evaporates and the particle assembly is mapped to the
underlying substrate, creating a dry ordered thin film. The research team will
combine computer simulations and experimental testing to discover the
relationship between the processing conditions and the characteristics of the
thin film deposits. The new knowledge will lead to a scalable platform to
manufacture thin film materials with complex patterns from particle building
blocks. The educational component of this grant will motivate and train a
competitive workforce in advanced manufacturing by focusing on student research
experiences and public outreach. A course-based summer program and community
activities will be developed to engage students at different levels and the
general public. This award will break new ground in engineering thin film
materials and contribute to U.S. global leadership in advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create an
additive technique for manufacturing dry colloidal monolayers with hierarchical
microstructures by exploiting the unique capabilities of interfacial capillary
assembly and electrospray targeting. The new method will use a geometrically
controlled droplet as a template to assemble two-dimensional crystalline
superstructures of microparticles delivered directly to the droplet surface by
electrospray. A dry monolayer will be transferred to the underlying structure
upon the evaporation of the droplet template. To realize the full application
potential of this technique, this research will fill the knowledge gap on the
complex interplay of capillary assembly and evaporation-induced transport on
non-uniformly curved interfaces. The research team will create surface-evolving
models and lattice Boltzmann simulations to predict the interface evolution,
droplet hydrodynamics, and particle transport. Advanced flow imaging and
particle tracking methods will be applied to validate the model and uncover the
underlying physics of structure formation. Electrospray targeting and
evaporation experiments will be conducted to test the hypothesis that a surface
flow aligned with capillary migration is required to form a structured monolayer
in a dry form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.