* 1939920
* CONFERENCE PROPOSAL: WETLANDS MITIGATING HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2019
* William Mitsch, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 11,498.00

This grant is in partial support of a workshop on wetlands mitigating water
quality problems. The workshop will be held on August 3, 2019 on the shores of
Lake Erie in north central Ohio, The workshop will include presentations on
early research results from ongoing wetlaculture experiments in Ohio and south
Florida, the role of wetlands in mitigating algal toxicity, current studies of
large-scale wetland restoration and creation of wetlands for water quality
control, as well as studies by a UNESCO lab in Poland on ecohydrological
approaches to dealing with harmful algal blooms. Landscape-scale approaches are
needed that integrate wetland retention of nutrients from stormwater and
polluted rivers and ditches with a recycling mechanism that will return those
nutrients to agricultural production, thereby decreasing downstream
eutrophication, including harmful algal blooms and hypoxia, while reducing the
requirements for additional fertilization for agricultural
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Treatment wetlands in high-nutrient landscapes
integrate food (agricultural production), energy (solar-based ecological systems
replacing fossil-fuel-based treatment systems) and water (water quality
improvement. The western basin of Lake Erie will be the feature of several of
the presentations and probably most of the discussion at our workshop. It has
suffered extensive late summer algal blooms for the past seven years, starting
with the then-largest recorded algal bloom in Lake Erie in 2011 and leading to a
total shutdown of the Toledo Ohio water supply in 2014. Subsequently, one of the
most extensive algal blooms occurred in 2017 in Lake Erie. Restoration of some
of the former Black Swamp of northwestern Ohio has now been proposed for the
strategic purpose of reducing nutrient inflows to the western basin of Lake
Erie. There are many scientific inquiries that need to be implemented before the
feasibility of a restoration on this scale can be attempted. Research is needed
on wetland design in this former-wetland landscape, and on whether the
wetlaculture approach would work well in this region. This workshop will focus
on identifying and articulating the required research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.