* 1939471
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: NERIED Fall Meeting
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Stephen Uzzo, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Chaitanya Baru
* 01/31/2021
* USD 99,999.00

Increasingly, the most important discoveries in contemporary science are
emerging from data-driven approaches. Skills and knowledge in these approaches
will play a significant role in 21st century STEM learning, as well as in
addressing issues of equity. Astronomy and Earth sciences are areas of
significant interest to young learners, and as such, can serve as entry points
for teaching and learning with data. An important goal of this workshop is to
launch a new Network for Earth-space Research, Education and Innovation with
Data (NEREID), to help articulate an actionable, equitable and inclusive path
toward Earth and space data science literacy for lifelong learners. In addition,
these findings are likely to be transferable to data learning in other
disciplines as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In support of this, the Associated
Universities, Incorporated (AUI) will organize a visioning and capacity-building
workshop to develop the Network for Earth-space Research, Education and
Innovation with Data to support large-scale convergence efforts in Earth-Space
sciences. NEREID will include members from academia, industry and research
communities. It will have the goal of engaging learners as well as policymakers
in topics related to Earth-Space sciences and will build a community of practice
around the use of data and related tools. The workshop will bring together a
variety of stakeholders in order to build an interdisciplinary community of
practice in Earth-Space data science learning and practice. Such a community
would help develop and disseminate best practices and curricular resources in
teaching and learning with Earth-space data; elicit diverse points of view and
enfranchise underrepresented groups; identify knowledge and policy gaps and
develop strategies that will more effectively address those gaps; and
conceptualize a related NSF Convergence Accelerator
activity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NEREID workshop will help define the kinds of
research, resources, data and tools that are best suited to building convergence
around space and Earth data and will begin to lay out the design for the
advancement of that work. The workshop will produce a white paper and roadmap
articulating the feasibility for applying data science to advancing the
important NSF priorities in Earth and space sciences. It will address gaps in
understanding and gaps in processes for better advancing the convergence of
scientific knowledge across these disciplines, focusing especially on learning
communities. The workshop outcomes will be shared broadly with the NEREID
community and beyond. One of the goals is to also help define a process that may
inform other convergence efforts as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.