* 1939310
* ST2: Programmable Interfaces- Exploring the Intersection of Synthetic Biology, Biomaterials, and Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Allen Po-Chih Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The award supports a Square-Table workshop, the second of its kind, to explore
the intersection of synthetic biology, biomaterials, and soft matter. Following
the success of the first workshop on Living Interfaces held in Alexandria, VA in
December 2018, the theme of this workshop, Square-Table 2 (ST2), is on
Programmable Interfaces. Despite significant growth over the years in the areas
of synthetic biology and biomaterials / soft matter as independent subjects,
there exists relatively untapped potential to harness synthetic biology for
design and synthesis of novel biomaterials. Synthetic biology promises to design
new functionality in natural cells (both microbial or mammalian cells) as well
as constructing de novo systems from the bottom-up. Biomaterials, whether
chemically synthesized, engineered, or naturally secreted by cells may have a
range of biotechnology and biomedical applications. The myriad of biomaterials
in the natural world, arisen from evolution and natural selection, provides a
rich testbed for understanding biomaterials / soft matter design. Combined with
the ability of synthetic biology approaches to program desirable biological
outputs, the timing to explore the programmable interface of synthetic biology
and biomaterials is fitting. Square-Table 1 (ST1) identified a need for
computational capabilities to analyze materials composition-property
relationship in this space and ST2 will attempt to enrich the continuing
discussion at this interface by also bringing in computational
modelers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.