* 1939716
* FAI: Towards Fairness in Deep Neural Networks with Learning Interpretation
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Chaitanya Lakkimsetti, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 509,211.00

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great successes in a wide range of
applications such as computer vision and natural language processing.
Unfortunately, inherent discrimination widely exists in DNNs towards minority
subgroups. To facilitate fairness in deep learning, this project is to tackle
the challenging problem of algorithmic discrimination in designing, evaluating,
as well as deploying DNN systems. The successful outcome of this project will
lead to advances in providing theoretical understandings and practical
algorithms to enable fairness in complicated deep learning models and
predictions. The education program that integrates machine learning, industrial
statistics, and social sciences is to train students with data analytics
technologies in information systems, to attract members of underrepresented
groups to pursue careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
project is to systematically investigate and facilitate fairness in deep neural
networks by leveraging the interpretability of key elements in a machine
learning life-cycle including modeling, data preparation and feature
engineering. Specifically, the proposed frameworks uncover the intrinsic
properties of fairness in deep learning from the following aspects. Auxiliary
training objectives are designed to regularize the augmented local
interpretation to promote the fairness of classical DNN architectures. Data
construction and data augmentation approaches are developed towards
reconstructing a fair dataset for DNN training. Through identifying sensitive
features in applications, domain knowledge is extracted and reinforcement
learning is further developed to optimize the model fairness under realistic
constraints. Finally, the proposed research innovations could be embedded in DNN
based real systems, such as medical diagnosis and recommender systems, with
concrete solutions and evaluation measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.