* 1939832
* Workshop: 2019 CSCW Doctoral Consortium at the  2019 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work &amp; Social Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Shaowen Bardzell, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2020
* USD 20,020.00

This is funding to support participation by about 13 U.S. graduate students in
the Doctoral Colloquium workshop held in conjunction with the 2019 ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW
2019), which will be held in Austin, TX, USA on November 9-13, 2019. The annual
CSCW conference is a leading international forum for the presentation and
discussion of research, design and practice of collaboration, collaborative
systems and social computing. The goals of the workshop are to provide feedback
and advice on current research and future careers to students who are nearing
graduation; to foster creativity, communication, and collaboration across
diverse topics of interest in CSCW; and to build a cohort of leading student
social computing researchers. The organizers will make a particular effort to
reach students from groups traditionally underrepresented in CSCW (and more
broadly computer and information science and engineering) in order to broaden
the impact of the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will take place
November 9-10, 2019 with follow-up events during the conference's main technical
program. Participants will be recruited with a wide net, with an emphasis on
broadening participation and diversity of institutions, topics, and fields
(including but not limited to from a variety of fields such as computer
science/engineering, information science, psychology, cognitive science, and
social psychology). The format includes oral and poster presentations by student
attendees, a hands-on breakout session, a panel discussion, and an informal
dinner and one-on-one conversations with mentors. This format enables students
to share and receive feedback on their research while learning from senior and
junior researchers in the field. Workshop participants will also gain knowledge
of current research conducted by their colleagues, awareness of diverse
interdisciplinary methodologies, and an understanding of emerging themes in
CSCW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.