* 1939399
* LTREB Renewal: Instability, contingency, and global change in a terrestrial food chain
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Rolf Peterson, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 03/31/2025
* USD 474,003.00

Isle Royale National Park is an island inhabited by wolves and moose, studied
continuously for the past six decades. Recently, the wolf population collapsed
to near extinction and the National Park Service responded by relocating
mainland wolves to the island. One goal of this research is to test a long-
standing idea in ecology that population fluctuations are driven by random
events (such as extreme climate events and outbreaks of disease) more so than by
predictable patterns such as the availability of food or mortalities due to
predation. Knowing which influence is stronger – random events or predictable
patterns – has important consequences for ecology and conservation. A second
goal of this research is premised on the idea that relationships between
carnivores and herbivores are indirectly affected by herbivores’ relationship
with the plants they eat. Plants naturally produce chemicals (in varying
amounts) that are unpalatable to herbivores and help the most fit plants from
being overbrowsed. This research aims to understand how those herbivore-plant
relationships reach up the food chain to affect carnivores. The research team
will be involved with educational outreach, public engagement, and innovative
art-science collaborations, focused on species of broad public
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of the research is to test the
Historical Contingency Hypothesis: population dynamics are largely the result of
a series of random events characterized by (i) legacy effects that are
comparable in length to the waiting time between such events and (ii) the
disparate nature of individual random events. This goal will be achieved through
analysis of field data with recently developed statistical methods. Support for
this hypothesis could explain why ecological surprises are common, why
ecologists are better at explaining the past than forecasting the future, and
why populations tend to exhibit weak density dependence over longer periods of
time. The second goal is to test the hypothesis that predation and the chemical
ecology of herbivory have comparably strong influences on food chains. Recent
theory indicates the hypothesis is plausible, and an empirical test of this
requires a system like Isle Royale, where the influence of predation is well-
documented. The test involves parameterizing a “toxin-dependent functional
response” by quantifying how plant secondary compounds influence foraging by
moose within and between foraging patches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.