* 1939964
* Evaluating the causes of protracted explosive eruptions at Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Jessica Warren, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2024
* USD 310,595.00

In the past 2,500 years, Kilauea Volcano (Hawaii) has had several centuries-long
periods of dominantly explosive eruptive activity. After the after the 2018
caldera collapse, there were large lava flow outpourings at the East Rift Zone
and a shift to explosive behavior. Researchers see the connection between those
events as a trend that occurred in the past and may repeat. Work will include
olivine geochemistry and diffusion chronometry to address three questions: 1)
what is the role crustal versus mantle inputs in the transition to an explosive
phase at Kilauea? 2) what is the effect of caldera collapse on the system on the
plumbing feeding subsequent eruptions? 3) over what time scale does the
transition from effusive to dominantly explosive eruptions take place? This
project will provide an early career researcher with experience managing and
running a large research project at an academic institution. Exercises will be
developed on effusive vs. explosive eruptions for use during K-12 classroom
sessions through the non-profit program Skype a Scientist, bringing STEM
enrichment to schools across the country. This project will emphasize advancing
scientific understanding of explosive volcanic eruptions to better evaluate
hazard potentials for this type of eruptive behavior. Finally, these data will
inform on pre-eruptive warning signs for future explosive eruptions in Hawaii,
further developing the potential for geochemical methods to be used as
monitoring and predictive tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Repeated patterns in
mineral and lava geochemistry from 1500 C.E. to present suggest that explosive
periods are controlled by fundamentally different crustal processes than
effusive periods and are intimately linked to cycles of basaltic caldera
collapse. This project will investigate the causes of protracted explosive
volcanism at Kilauea by examining the geochemistry of lavas and tephra from the
Uwekahuna Ash, a 1200-year period of explosive activity. Mineral compositions
and zoning patterns will be used to determine the timescales of magma mixing and
storage. Glass major and trace element geochemistry will be used to characterize
mantle source composition, partial melting, and the flux of magma into the
volcanic system. Combined with existing datasets for eruptions spanning
1500-present day, these analyses will be used to look for – and evaluate the
causes of – repeating patterns in the geochemical record over the past 2,500
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.