* 1939901
* Nonlinear Thermomechanics of Accretion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Arash Yavari, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2024
* USD 351,004.00

This research program will focus on formulating a thermo-mechanical theory of
accretion (surface growth). Accretion is the growth of a deformable solid by the
gradual addition of material on its boundary, for e.g., additive manufacturing.
Additive manufacturing, such as 3D printing, is unarguably a central part of
what seems to be a revolutionary era in manufacturing and it is playing an ever
increasing role in our everyday lives. It has already found many applications
ranging from hobbyist art to precise manufacturing in various industries such as
mechanical, aerospace, and medical. Despite its tremendous potential and
commercial success, many challenges have yet to be overcome before additive
manufacturing can be fully integrated in industry. From a mechanics point of
view, understanding and being able to predict and control the residual stresses
(or internal forces) is crucial in order to tailor and design an accretion
process in such a way that the manufactured piece meets the required properties
in its working conditions. The research program will be complemented by
establishing an educational and outreach program based on curriculum
development, and K-12 and underrepresented minority outreach through an
educational outreach center at Georgia Tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature and
engineering many objects/structures are built gradually by adding material on
the boundary of an existing object that is in motion. Examples of accretion
processes in nature are the growth of biological tissues and crystals, the
build-up of volcanic and sedimentary rocks, of ice structures, the formation of
planets, etc. Examples in technological applications are additive manufacturing
(3D printing), metal solidification, the build-up of concrete structures in
successive layers, and the deposition of thin films. The goal of this research
program is to formulate the nonlinear coupled diffusion-thermo-mechanics of
elastic bodies that grow as a result of addition of new material on their
boundary while deforming at the same time. There are four immediate questions
that any mechanical/mathematical model of accretion should be able to answer: i)
What is the state of deformation and stresses during a process of accretion? ii)
At the end of the accretion process and after removing the external loads, what
is the state of internal stresses (residual stresses) in the body? iii) Now this
accreted structure is put under service loads. How can one analyze such a
structure? iv) How should an accretion process be designed in order to build
structures with the desired distribution of residual stresses, and the optimum
stiffness under service loads? The research program aims to formulate a
nonlinear theory of accretion mechanics that would enable one to answer these
questions. In this project, a new theory of accretion will be developed that
accounts for finite strains without any symmetry assumptions using a
differential geometry approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.