* 1939423
* OPUS: CRS: Comparative life history of microbes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Steven Frank, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 253,913.00

This project studies the characteristics of bacteria and other microbes, such as
yeast. In recent years, scientists have made great advances in describing how
microbes grow on different kinds of food and how they compete with each other.
Scientists have also described the many ways in which microbes affect the health
of humans and other organisms. However, scientists understand much less about
why different microbes have come to be so different in the ways in which they
feed, compete with each other, and influence the health of other organisms. The
goal of this project is to study the processes in nature that have shaped
microbial characteristics. Such understanding from the new research will lead to
specific predictions about how microbes are expected to differ when in habitats
that have not previously been studied. Those predictions can be tested by the
many microbiologists working on these problems, leading to better scientific
insight, to more efficient response to challenges, and to improved management of
resources. The new work will also provide insight into how human activities will
likely alter the biology of these microbial organisms that so strongly affect
the environment and the health of ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will synthesize the investigatorâ€™s past theoretical work on fitness and past
applications to microbes with the novel challenges posed by recent empirical
advances. The project will deliver a series of synthesis articles on microbial
life history. Each article will unify the conceptual framework for fitness and
evolutionary process with the specific empirical challenges for microbial
traits. Individual articles will focus on topics such as metabolism,
siderophores, quorum sensing, cross feeding, and exodigestion. The comparative
predictions of this synthesis will motivate the next generation of empirical
studies to advance the topic beyond its current
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.