* 1939265
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Growing Computer Science Education as a Discipline: Pathways to PhDs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Alan Peterfreund, SageFox Consulting Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2022
* USD 169,857.00

Purdue University, in collaboration with SageFox Consulting Group LLC, proposes
an exploratory project to study career pathways for PhD students in Computer
Science (CS) Education and the support needed to ensure the success of the
students. As K-12 schools rapidly adopt new CS curricula, and undergraduate CS
enrollments skyrocket, CS Education (CSE) research is increasingly called upon
to guide decisions on curricula and pedagogy. To grow CSE as an academic
discipline, new collaborations between CS and Education departments are crucial
in the preparation of future CSE researchers with respect to courses, graduate
programs, mentoring for students and faculty, and joint research efforts. At the
institutional level this may be manifested by computer scientists and educators
developing new joint degree programs and faculty appointments. At the national
level, this may require new forms of infrastructure supportive of those on
campuses where critical mass or resources are limited.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify (1) career pathways and
support, training, and mentoring needs for graduate students in CSE research,
and (2) academic models that can support graduate students engaged in CSE
research, at the institutional and national levels. The effort will start by
identifying individuals and programs at academic institutions with active CSE
research projects. Based on the feedback and assessment of community surveys and
interviews, including CSE graduate students and their advisers, the project will
build a Connected Learning Community (CLC) with the goal of connecting,
empowering, and mentoring education and computing graduate students. Prototyping
the CLC will also serve as a vehicle for better understanding the needs of the
CSE graduate students and developing new pathways to support
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.