* 1939862
* Three Decades of DIMACS: The Journey Continues
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2020
* USD 49,875.00

In 2019, both DIMACS (the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical
Computer Science) and the National Science Foundation's Science and Technology
Centers program celebrate thirty years of operation and thirty years of defining
and shaping modern research. In today's dynamic research landscape, thirty years
is a remarkable milestone, and one that this project proposes to commemorate
with a major conference, "Three Decades of DIMACS: The Journey Continues," that
looks to the future as it honors the past when DIMACS was one of the original
class of NSF Science and Technology Centers (STCs). The conference will explore
future directions of traditional DIMACS topics and highlight emerging topics of
growing importance. The conference will consider broad questions such as: What
is the future of theoretical computer science? What are new challenges for
algorithms? For discrete mathematics? How do they tie to applications areas? How
do they connect to data science? To AI and machine learning? To privacy and
fairness? Finally, the role of centers is changing in a world with instant
communication, data everywhere, and disciplines increasingly merged to address
fundamental problems of great variety. The conference will explore the
implications for DIMACS, STCs, and other centers of various types. The planned
program includes many women and underrepresented minorities as speakers and
panelists and will highlight innovative programs for broadening participation in
computer science and mathematics that may serve as models elsewhere. The program
also features discussions of how to educate students to work across disciplinary
boundaries and operate in a world where science has become an international
activity and the nature of work will change in the age of intelligent machines.
It features teachers describing their experiences with innovative education
programs and materials that integrate mathematical and computational methods
with science content for high school classrooms. Such programs hold promise for
building a future workforce that is able to cross disciplinary boundaries and
harness the power of computing to address future challenges. Presentations will
also address current research that has global societal importance in areas such
as sustainability and climate change, epidemiology, homeland security, privacy,
and aspects of socially responsible algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will look to the future with presentations describing ongoing
research and emphasizing important challenges and questions that will propel us
into the next decade. It will emphasize important themes in computer science
theory such as complexity and machine learning (particularly deep learning), as
well as the socio-technical challenges, such as privacy and fairness, that arise
in a world with increasingly intelligent machines and ubiquitous data. The
conference will explore applications in robotics enabled by theory from
statistical physics, computational challenges in ecology and related social
sciences in the face of climate change, as well as new capabilities in
healthcare made possible by advances from computational biology and mathematical
epidemiology. Presentations will also look at current and future research
directions in traditional DIMACS areas, such as discrete mathematics,
optimization, and statistics and their central role in harnessing the data
revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.