* 1939961
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 International Symposium on Networks-on-Chip (NOCS2019)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Paul Bogdan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 09/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This travel grant provides support for up to 15 US-based students to attend the
13th ACM/IEEE 2019 International Symposium on Networks-on-Chip (NOCS2019), to be
held in New York City, October 17-18, 2019. For over 10 years, NOCS has been a
forum for innovative research in networks-on-chip (NoC) architectures. The event
is dedicated to interdisciplinary research on on-chip, package-scale, chip-to-
chip, and data center rack-scale communication technology, architecture, design
methods, applications and systems, the NOCS 2019 will bring together scientists
and engineers, as well as the best and brightest of the PhD candidates, working
on NoC innovations and applications from inter-related research communities,
including discrete optimization and algorithms, computer architecture,
networking, circuits and systems, packaging, embedded systems, and design
automation. The goal of NOCS 2019 and this travel grant is to advance the
science of network design by bringing together researchers from across the
computer engineering community and to foster cross disciplinary approaches that
address shared research challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This travel
grant will enable career development and learning opportunities for US-based
and/or US citizen graduate students. Attending the NOCS conference could
significantly contribute to the career path of students interested in system-
level and network design challenges. Students have the opportunity to discuss
leading edge research with world-class researchers in science of network design,
as well as help them establish connections and mentoring relationships that will
serve them well during their research careers. This project aims at increasing
the participation of students from underrepresented groups and those from
smaller institutions of education and provide them with equal
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.