* 1939224
* Collaborative Strategies for Successful Large-Scale, Distributed Science and Engineering Projects
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 119,201.00

Large-scale, innovative science and engineering requires collaboration across
geographically-distributed, multidisciplinary teams; however, it is very
difficult for projects to maintain intellectual cohesion, tight coordination,
and integration necessary to manage scalable "virtual" work that is distributed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to help teams to succeed -
maximizing efficiency, effectiveness, and innovativeness. This proposal is to
develop the capacity for leaders of Centers, Institutes, Labs and other
collaborations to plan and pursue transformative research agendas in order to
truly create breakthroughs in smart and connected health, cyberphysical systems,
smart cities, cybersecurity, big data, environmental sustainability, and across
the domains of basic research. Training in design and management of such
collaborations will be provided and tools and techniques will be developed. This
work will draw on lessons learned from organization science to develop a
customized curriculum to help large-scale science and engineering teams
effectively and efficiently collaborate at this scale. Using the developed
materials, the first of a series of workshops targeting potential principal
investigators interested in large-scale Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE)-related projects will be conducted in the fall of
2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.