* 1939338
* Travel Grant to the 26th International Congress of Entomology and Post-Conference Synthesis Workshop; July 19-24, 2020; Helsinki, Finland
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Shannon Murphy, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Steven Dudgeon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,940.00

Insects are one of the most diverse groups of organisms on Earth, and yet they
appear to be under threat from human-caused environmental disturbances. It is
imperative that we understand how these environmental changes affect
interactions between insect species, especially because insects provide
essential services to humans (e.g. pollination of our major food crops,
decomposition of dead matter). Scientists from around the world who are studying
questions related to how environmental change affects insects will meet in
Helsinki, Finland in July 2020 at the 26th International Congress of Entomology
(also called the ICE meeting). The researchers are organizing a symposium at ICE
with scientists who study how environmental change affects insect food webs and
will provide travel awards to graduate students and post-docs, including
underrepresented groups in science. Thus, this project will help to increase
diversity of early- and mid-career scientists at the ICE meeting and will thus
ensure that a diversity of views are represented in ongoing investigations into
how global change affects natural ecosystems. Further, this project will
facilitate the professional development and collaboration opportunities for
scientists from underrepresented groups in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global
environmental change appears to be affecting insect communities worldwide.
Insect communities form food webs and interactions with other species, including
predators, greatly affect those species. How the strength of selection from
these interactions will be altered by environmental change is unknown. Species
interactions drive population abundances and community diversity; thus,
understanding the impacts of global change on population dynamics, ecological
communities, biodiversity, and ecosystem processes requires a multi-trophic
perspective. Insights will be gained into how insect food webs are affected by
global environmental change from the symposium. After the meeting, the
researchers will convene a workshop to synthesize the current understanding and
propose solutions for the impact of global change on
insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.