* 1939343
* Group travel proposal for "Perspectives in Comparative Genomics &amp; Evolution," Bethesda, Maryland, August 15-16, 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Claudio Mello, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 65,452.00

Non-Technical Paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal funds travel for a group of
NSF-invited genomics researchers to attend the "Perspectives in Comparative
Genomics &amp; Evolution" meeting being jointly organized by NIH-NHGRI/USDA/NSF
that will take place Aug. 15-16, 2019 at the Marriott North Bethesda. This
meeting will address growing opportunities as well as challenges in the fields
of Evolutionary and Comparative Genomics. It includes presentations and
discussions about the genomes of humans, traditional and non-traditional lab
organisms, and agricultural and wild species, as well as how their comparative
study can help scientists to devise strategies that can better impact human
health, agriculture and conservation practices. Invited speakers are recognized
authorities and emerging scientists who are applying cutting-edge genomics and
bioinformatics tools to address a broad range of fundamental questions in
evolutionary genomics. This interagency conference is intended to identify
effective strategies that can broaden the impact of comparative genomics
research by targeting research efforts that impact basic, applied, and health
focused systems. Speakers and attendees are being invited paying close attention
to balanced representation of gender and seniority level, as well as the need to
cover the broadest possible theme range. Among the expected outcomes of this
conference will be the production of one or more white papers, as well as an
interagency position statement. These documents will be shared with the general
scientific community, outside stakeholders, as well as program officers in each
of the participating federal agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;The explosive growth of available genomic data and related
resources for a broad range of species, including humans, model organisms,
species of agricultural relevance, and wildlife species, has created
opportunities to better understand basic principles of comparative genomics and
evolution, as well as potential applications to health, agriculture, and
conservation. Challenges include the need to develop methods that can handle
vast amounts of data, assurances for high quality of genomes and feature
annotations, and the development of effective computational and bioinformatics
approaches that take into account phylogenetic principles. This meeting will
address these needs by bringing together experts with diverse backgrounds,
expertise, and perspectives in comparative genomics. The format includes series
of short talks on key themes, as well as extensive follow-up discussions and
targeted breakout sessions, maximizing the open exchange of novel approaches and
emerging solutions to shared problems. Expected outcomes include identifying
areas of synergy, current gaps in knowledge and resources, as well as defining
areas of relevance to the NIH/NHGRI for understanding human health and disease.
Partnerships with the USDA and NSF will place further emphasis on the relevance
of species that are of agricultural and economic relevance, as well as the
pressing need for genomics research on wildlife species. Overall, the planned
in-depth discussions will help to identify aspects of comparative genomics that
should be at the "forefront" of this burgeoning field, meeting the demands of a
range of stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the
Enabling Discovery throughout GEnomic (EDGE) Program and the Plant Genome
Research Program (PGRP) in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and
the Infrastructure Innovation for Biological Research (IIBR) Program in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.