* 1939533
* SBIR Phase I: Open hardware and software platform to enable configuration and control of IoT devices for people with disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* John Banks, Bansen Labs LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2020
* USD 249,702.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to improve the access of people with disabilities to the
growing ecosystem of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies, thus improving their
ability to be independent, connect with others, seek and retain education and
employment, and contribute to society both economically and socially. In
particular, nearly 20 million US citizens live with disabilities affecting upper
limb movement, thus impacting their ability to configure and control devices
around the home. This project aims to develop an open platform that allows these
consumers customized control of their home devices, using assistive input
controls such as adaptive joysticks, sip-and-puff inputs, chin switches, or eye
gaze, as well as off-the-shelf consumer input devices such as trackpads or
mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project would advance the consumer
Internet of Things (IoT) landscape by enabling end user programmability for IoT
applications, giving end users (non-programmers) the ability to modify, control,
and automate their devices and services. Our system will draw on a newly
patented device control architecture with novel customizability and intuitive
access to non-programmers. The use cases supported by the platform would
previously have required engineers to spend days or weeks of dedicated time
building custom solutions for users; instead, the platform will make these use
cases available to non-technical users on a wide scale without requiring custom
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.