* 1939195
* 2nd International Conference on Microbiome Engineering; December 2-4, 2019; Boston, MA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Gabriel Levesque-Tremblay, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 25,230.00

The purpose of this award is to support US-based students and postdoctoral
associates and young professionals who will attend the 2nd International
Conference on Microbiome Engineering to be held in Boston, in December 2019. The
conference explores the importance and applications of microbiome engineering
and will bring together leaders and experts from cutting edge fields of
microbiome engineering to discuss progress and needs to develop research,
technology, and innovation. The chairs and organizing committee of the 2nd
International Conference on Microbiome Engineering are experts and leaders in
their fields.&lt;br/&gt;The field of pharmaceutical design and microbiome
engineering is growing rapidly and needs collaboration between the professionals
and young researchers in biomedical science and engineering. This conference
will provide a venue for scientific presentations from a diverse group of
researchers; encourage active participation by graduate and undergraduate
researchers who represent the future of the field; bring scientists and
engineers together to provide an atmosphere and venue to discuss their
disciplines and approaches, motivate new research into barriers limiting the
development of microbiome modeling and engineering and will have a particular
focus on females and scientists from underrepresented groups. Peer reviewed
conference proceedings will be published on the AIChE
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.