* 1939219
* Development and Implementation of a Semiconductor Workforce Certificate Program Based on a Unified Advanced Manufacturing Competency Model
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Robert Geer, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 7,207,573.00

Based on a 2018 survey, the global industry standards association for the
electronics manufacturing industry (SEMI, semi.org) discovered that more than
85% of corporate respondents identified a lack of a qualified workforce as a top
strategic challenge. With rapid growth in areas such as the Internet of Things,
artificial intelligence, quantum computing, autonomous vehicles, smart medical
devices, and 5G, the need for a skilled technical workforce will only increase.
Addressing this need requires an integrated approach to attract students to STEM
careers and to provide the education and career pathways that link students,
education programs, and employers as an ecosystem rather than as individual
parts. To address this need, this project will develop and pilot an industry-
wide Semiconductor Workforce Certification Program based on an innovative
Unified Competency Model that leverages the U. S. Department of Labor competency
model. A multi-level, Semiconductor Technician Certificate will be developed and
offered by SEMI as part of its strategic 'SEMI Works' initiative. This program
will be developed by SEMI and the Northeast Advanced Technological Education
Center (NEATEC) and piloted at 16 technician education programs at two-year and
four-year colleges, technical high school programs, and with newly transitioned
veterans at Fort Drum, NY. The pilot program will then be expanded to Oregon and
North Carolina. It is estimated that, by the conclusion of the project, nearly
400 students will have earned a SEMI Semiconductor Technician Certification. The
approach is expected to create a new, intrinsically flexible and updateable
competency model applicable to a wide range of technician skillsets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop: 1) a Unified Advanced
Manufacturing Competency Model and a Semiconductor Manufacturing Sub-Sector
Competency Model, transforming the existing U. S. Department of Labor-ETA
Advanced Manufacturing Competency model by adding a proficiency and relevance
scale (0-4) for each competency; 2) a SEMI Certification model for technician
education programs; and 3) a Proficiency-driven Academic Alignment Program that
will review partner technician education programs and translate course and
program learning outcomes to a Competency Profile format for skill gap/match
analysis with SEMI Technician certification programs. This effort will create a
transferrable academic review and alignment process for any U.S. academic
institution to obtain a SEMI Semiconductor Workforce Certification for its
technician education programs. Project outcomes will include the first-ever
industry-wide semiconductor technician certification program, and an automated
web-based SEMI Certification portal that will be maintained and updated by SEMI.
The portal will build, sustain, compare, and update the Unified Advanced
Manufacturing Competency Model for certified academic programs and provide an
automated pathway for certification updates. The portal will also provide tools
that guide workforce strategies for employers, technician education programs,
and individual job seekers. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.