* 1939809
* Turbulent mixing between a shock-accelerated vortex ring and its surroundings
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Riccardo Bonazza, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 319,930.00

When a shock wave propagates through a region occupied by different gases, it
generates gas motions at the wave boundary that lead to mixing at much higher
rates than would have occurred in the absence of the shock wave. Phenomena of
this kind can occur in a category of jet engines designed to operate at
extremely high speeds that are much higher than those used in conventional jet
transport. The study of these kinds of flows is generally very challenging
because flow properties such as velocity, local gas composition, and temperature
vary in space and time in very complicated ways. This research project will
study a simple version of this type of flow. The researchers will study the
response of a vortex ring to impulsive acceleration. By the nature of the vortex
ring flow field, this initial condition should contain a much more coherent,
well organized, predictable and measurable vorticity field than that of the jet
engine. The results will form a highly refined building block database which
could be used to develop a predictive capability for the more complicated
version of these flows. Graduate and undergraduate students will be heavily
involved in the research, with members of underrepresented minorities recruited
through different programs already existing on campus. This project also will
provide education in and exposure to state-of-the-art technologies and some of
the most current challenges in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The turbulent mixing induced by the interaction of a
planar shock wave with a vortex ring consisting of a gas different than its
surroundings will be investigated using planar laser induced fluorescence (PLIF)
and particle image velocimetry (PIV). The goal of the project is to measure some
of the most relevant flow properties, including the concentrations of the two
gas species and their velocities everywhere within the region where the gases
mix. This objective will be pursued in two different ways: 1) measurements will
be made at discrete instants in time, with very high spatial resolution, and 2)
measurements will be carried out with lesser spatial resolution but using an
imaging system that will allow to collect entire concentration fields at a rate
of up to 20,000 fields per second.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.