* 1939128
* EAGER:  DynaMo:  A novel computational workflow for dynamic monographs and revisionary systematics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Felipe Zapata, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 08/31/2022
* USD 279,967.00

Taxonomic monographs combine information about the appearance, occurrence,
genealogical relationships, and classification of organisms and provide methods
for their identification. This baseline information is critical for
understanding the diversity of life and helps inform other biological research
questions. Current taxonomic monographs suffer from being static documents that
do not provide an efficient means of accessing or analyzing the underlying data.
This project will develop a linked set of computational tools (DynaMo) to
produce a dynamic monograph that streamlines the workflow, integrates specimen-
based data, and facilitates analysis of these data. Despite being in the early
stages of development DynaMo shows immense potential to transform how taxonomic
monographs are generated, analyzed and presented. The project will train a post-
doctoral researcher and undergraduates, including members of underrepresented
groups, in systematic biology, bioinformatics, and software development. Two
workshops on dynamic monographs and quantitative taxonomy will help train the
broader systematics community. The resulting DynaMo software, and all data
generated by the project, will be made freely available through public databases
and repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While other areas of systematics have
adopted modern approaches, the production of taxonomic monographs has been
hindered by the lack of efficient computational tools to efficiently integrate
and update the large data sets and complex analyses that underly monographic
research. This project will develop the digital infrastructure (DynaMo) to
enable systematists to document and interact with all the data management and
analysis tools needed to produce a monograph and help make monographic methods
and analyses more transparent, reproducible, and extendable. The digital
infrastructure underpinning this workflow will be a generic relational database
that stores all primary biodiversity data as well as intermediate resources for
faster retrieval. The data stored in the database will be integrated and
analyzed via modular pipelines. This database will be continuously updated as
new data and results become available and the analysis pipelines will
automatically generate new results whenever the underlying data in the database
change. The results of analyses, interactive visualizations, raw data, and text
will be machine-readable and accessible via a dynamic monograph, an online
document that is perpetually up-to-date because it provides an interface to the
underlying specimen-based database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.