* 1939291
* EAGER: Open Infrastructure to Reduce Burden on Researchers and Federal Agencies
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Golam Choudhury, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2021
* USD 247,601.00

Johns Hopkins University, in partnership with six other institutions, proposes
to design a set of recommendations, use cases, specifications, and workflows
that will transform the deposit of manuscripts into federal agency repositories,
thereby reducing burden on researchers, universities, and federal agencies. This
early exploratory research undertakes to develop solutions for issues that arise
when projects are multi-institution, federal agency workflows are vastly
different, and the integrity of information is critical. As research becomes
increasingly convergent, there is a major risk of an increasingly complex
environment for investigators, universities, and funding agencies. By binding
grants or award data to primary research objects such as articles, data, or
software, the proposed research represents an important step toward data
analytics on researcher and university productivity and collaboration. The
proposed work has the potential to positively impact every university that
receives federal funding and every federal funding agency with a public access
compliance policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An early implementation of the PI's
Public Access Submission System (PASS) system has been shown to work with the
NIH PubMed Central. But scaling beyond PubMedCentral requires exploratory
research such as to establish the logic for simultaneous submission of a
publication to multiple federal grant repositories and institution repositories.
Research questions include how a third-party applications such as the PASS
system, manage cross-institutional grants data, identities, and deposit
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.