* 1939835
* Dynamic Electromechanical Fracture of Ferroelectric Ceramics: A Full-Field Approach to Crack Tip Energetics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Leslie Lamberson, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2020
* USD 185,556.00

This project will perform experiments under impact-type loading conditions on
two of the most widely used ferroelectric ceramics, in order to further develop
dynamic ferroelectric fracture theory. Ferroelectric ceramics have widespread
use in advanced technological applications and are considered smart materials
due to their ability to provide an electrical signal when given a mechanical
load. By exploiting this unique electromechanical effect, these materials can
function as sensors and actuators, and are found in a broad spectrum of
industrial and civil systems including: transportation fuel injectors,
structural health monitoring devices, rocket engines and microvalves, to name a
few. One of the main issues with these materials is that they are brittle, and
are susceptible to failure from cracking, or fracture. While there is a great
deal of theory to help describe how these materials may fracture under well-
known loading conditions, very little experimental data and fracture analysis
exists that explore ferroelectric ceramic fracture under impact-type loading
conditions. The newly gained knowledge will help engineers and designers
understand how these smart materials break under complex dynamic loading
conditions, which will in turn be used to exploit the smart electromechanical
effect to mitigate damage, and consequently increase robustness and
functionality in real applications. The faculty member will also host an
experimental mechanics learning experience at Drexel's Introduce a Girl to
Engineering Day and train undergraduate research scholars.

The goal of this research is to determine the anisotropic, dynamic
electromechanical response of ferroelectric ceramics under transient, mixed-mode
loading conditions using full-field experimental measurement techniques. This
goal will be achieved emphasizing experimental investigation, supported by
existing dynamic fracture and piezoelectric field theory, finite element
modeling and microscopy. Impact fracture experiments will be conducted on poled
and unpoled, doped and undoped lead zicronate titanate (PZT), and barium
titanate (BaTiO3) with varying electrical and mechanical boundary conditions.
Full-field deformation measurements during tests from high-speed imaging will be
used to extend a hybrid experimental-computational analysis that extracts
relevant crack tip energetics to include coupled electromechanical response and
explore meaningful fracture criterion for these unique electromechanical
materials. To date, the theoretical fundamentals of linear piezoelectric
fracture mechanics have been successfully established, as have important
analytical aspects of electromechanical crack tip fields and the role of
electric crack face boundary conditions. At the same time, no body of dynamic
fracture experiments is available to corroborate with the existing theory and
challenge the physical basis (or lack thereof) of the analytical assumptions.
The outcome of the experiments and analysis in this work will fill that existing
knowledge gap.