* 1939279
* Conference and National Summits to Develop a Guide to Accelerating Public Access to Research Data at Academic Institutions
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Robert Samors, Association of American Universities
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 03/31/2022
* USD 191,486.00

The Association of American Universities (AAU) and the Association of Public and
Land-grant Universities (APLU) propose to broaden and deepen awareness and
understanding of public access issues across the academic research community.
The conference will capitalize on the experiences of "early adopter"
institutions and leading stakeholder groups in the open science community; the
organizers will develop and broadly disseminate a Guide to assist institutions
conducting research in creating and implementing public access policies and
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The steps to achieving the objectives are
through 1) developing a framework and strategic plan to guide the long-term
engagement necessary to accelerate public access to research data; 2) convening
a conference of the prior NSF-funded public access workshop participants to
review the plan and prepare for discussions on shared solutions; 3) convening a
second conference that brings together early adopters with less engaged
institutions and stakeholders (e.g., funders, scientific and professional
societies, publishers) to increase understanding of public access and develop
content for a Guide to accelerating public access to research data at academic
institutions; 4) creating working groups of institutions and stakeholders to
explore unresolved challenges; 5) holding a follow-up event to incorporate the
working group recommendations into a final Guide; and 6) disseminating the Guide
to the higher education research community through a strategic education
campaign to reach key leadership communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.