* 1939463
* EAGER: (ST1) Collaborative Research: Exploring the emergence of peptide-based compartments through iterative machine learning, molecular modeling, and cell-free protein synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Andrew Ferguson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 149,902.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The cell is the fundamental building block of
all living things. The materials within the cell are separated and protected
from the environment by the cell membrane that is composed of molecules derived
from fatty acids. These molecules function well under relatively benign natural
conditions, such as in water at room temperature and pressure. Under harsh
environments, such as extreme temperatures and pressures prevalent in industrial
processes, these molecules are unstable therefore making it difficult to deploy
cells within such environments. Furthermore, it is difficult to engineer natural
membrane molecules with new functions such as the ability to sense their
environment or bind particular surfaces or target molecules. It is the primary
goal of this work to discover and synthesize a new class of molecules based on
proteins as an alternative 'chassis' material for synthetic cell membranes that
have improved mechanical and chemical stability and can be engineered to endow
the membrane with new functions. Profs. Ferguson and Liu combine fast
experimental synthesis and testing with computer simulations and artificial
intelligence tools to search for new synthetic membranes with the ability to
survive in harsh environments and the capacity to assemble synthetic cells
together into synthetic tissues. By combining experiment and computation within
a virtuous cycle, wherein computation guides experiment and experiment informs
computational modeling, massive savings in labor, time, and resources are
realized compared to traditional trial-and-improvement experimentation. In the
course of this work, Profs. Ferguson and Liu provide research opportunities for
post-doctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and high-school trainees, incorporate
the outcomes of the research into classes that they teach, and engage in
outreach activities through a Girls in Science and Engineering summer camp,
Detroit Area Pre-College Engineering Program, and University of Chicago After
School Matters summer internship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this work is to discover novel peptidic
biomaterials as an alternative "chassis" material for synthetic cells. While
biology has settled on using lipid bilayer membrane as the material for
compartmentalizing cytoplasm and for membrane-bound organelles, polypeptides
offer an alternative biomaterial that can establish peptidic microcompartments
with improved mechanical and chemical stability and the capacity for additional
engineered biological function. Peptidic chassis materials offer unique
advantages compared to lipid and polymersome membrane materials in terms of
biocompatibility, chemical and mechanical stability, and capacity for additional
functionalization that make them extremely desirable for applications in
biomedicine, drug delivery, biosensing, and deployment in non-natural
environments. The discovery of peptide sequences capable of spontaneous self-
assembly into solute-filled microcompartments with desired materials properties
is frustrated by the vast size of the protein sequence search space that makes
exhaustive exploration intractable and Edisonian trial-and-improvement
inefficient. In this work, we establish an integrated data-driven modeling and
high-throughput cell-free synthesis platform to rapidly traverse sequence space.
In a tightly integrated feedback loop between theory and modeling, we employ an
'active learning' paradigm to extract information from experimental data, guide
rational traversal of the vast peptide sequence space, and optimally deploy
experimental resources. Completion of this work will lead to the discovery of
highly sought-after peptide-based synthetic cell 'chassis materials' that are
more robust to harsh environments and which have complementary binding
functionality to enable self-organization of the synthetic cells into synthetic
tissues. In the course of this work, Profs. Ferguson and Liu offer research
opportunities for high-school and undergraduate students to provide exposure to
scientific research and improve representation in the STEM pipeline, train
graduate and post-doctoral trainees in integrated computational and experimental
research, incorporate the scientific outcomes in course materials, and engage in
outreach activities through a Girls in Science and Engineering summer camp,
Detroit Area Pre-College Engineering Program, and University of Chicago After
School Matters summer internship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.