* 1939249
* HDR: DIRSE-IL:  Collaborative Research: Harnessing data advances in systems biology to design a biological 3D printer: the synthetic coral
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Jinkyu (JK) Yang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 358,816.00

Corals are important natural resources that are key to the ocean's vast
biodiversity and provide economic, cultural, and scientific benefits. As a
result of human activities, locally and globally, coral reefs are declining
rapidly. The complexity of corals makes conserving and restoring reefs very
challenging. Corals are made up of thousands of different organisms, including
the animal host and the algae, bacteria, viruses, and fungi that coexist as a
so-called holobiont. Thus, corals are more like cities than individual animals,
as they provide factories, housing, restaurants, nurseries, and more for an
entire ecosystem. This project brings together experts in computer science,
materials science, and biology to harness the data revolution in biology with
machine learning to study how corals grow and function, when viewed as if they
were manufacturing sites in the ocean. The study will focus on three key coral
capabilities: (1) they create calcium carbonate skeletons that provide 3D
structures for diverse sea life to live in, (2) they can heal damage to their
tissues, and, (3) they live with the other organisms in a process referred to as
symbiosis. Through these remarkable abilities, corals can 'print' resources for
themselves and hundreds of thousands of other species, just like a 3D printer.
The goal of this project is to understand these processes well enough to control
them in the lab. This project may allow finding new ways to help coral survival,
by deciphering the reasons why certain conditions damage them and find ways of
repairing them. Furthermore, by synthetically growing corals, new types of
materials may be identified for manufacturing. This project offers an
opportunity to educate a diverse scientific workforce and the public by creating
and disseminating the outcomes of a convergent research environment and will
train postdoctoral researchers, graduate, and undergraduate students. Results of
this research will be made available to the broader scientific community through
web interfaces, peer-reviewed publications and workshops/conferences and shared
with the public through outreach activities online, at schools, and public
aquariums.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through convergence of three disciplines,
computer science, material science and biology, this project will provide a
data-driven framework and toolset to learn from, control, engineer, and
manufacture a combined form of living material, the 'synthetic coral', thereby
opening new avenues for material synthesis and manufacturing. The research
methodology will offer new analytical approaches to identify and quantify the
parameters that govern coral growth and foster innovative new tools for
controlling their growth. To understand the key functions of coral biology of
biomineralization, wound healing, and symbiosis, this research will : (1)
harness and analyze large amounts of coral '-omics' data to decipher critical
molecules and their interactions for the aforementioned key functions, (2)
experimentally validate the resulting predictions in coral individuals and cell
lines, (3) manipulate the material properties of the calcium carbonate
structures of the coral individuals and cell lines, and (4) test the biological
and physical interactions in a network model of the 'synthetic coral'. This
project develops and integrates fundamental building blocks that are essential
for an integrated computational and experimental validation system.
Specifically, using machine learning, diverse data will be harnessed to identify
physical conditions (e.g., surface characteristics), environmental conditions
(e.g., temperature, pH), and key biological constituents (e.g., small molecule
ligands and proteins encoded in the DNA) that are correlated to key structural
and functional properties of the coral holobiont. These predicted conditions and
molecules will be verified experimentally by perturbing individual coral nodes
in a network of a 3D printed array of intact corals or their constituent cells
and measuring their effects on the network of interactions and resulting
structures. The results from this prediction-validation cycle will then be
transferred back as input to manufacture novel adaptive materials fully
embracing the organic/inorganic interface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR)
Big Idea activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.