* 1939512
* Marine Seismology Symposium 2020
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Anne Tr√©hu, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 148,921.00

Oceans and other water bodies cover over 70% of Earth's surface, shrouding
critical geologic regimes, natural resource deposits, and ecosystems. Obtaining
a deeper understanding of the processes occurring on Earth requires unique
strategies and innovative technologies, as well as strong collaborations across
the shoreline, between scientific disciplines, and through international and
industry partnerships. To address this priority, a two-day, science-focused
symposium will be convened uniting the seismological and marine geoscience
community. The symposium will enable scientists and program managers to share
exciting new science results, discuss future directions and key scientific
questions, promote and empower early career scientists by showcasing their work
and providing networking opportunities, and communicate changes to critical
marine seismic infrastructure so that research can be successfully planned,
funded, and conducted using existing and evolving tools. This symposium is
critical for maintaining the health of the marine seismic research community and
will facilitate progress toward better understanding of frontier science topics
such as the processes related to geohazards like megathrust earthquakes,
tsunamis, undersea landslides, and volcanic eruptions as well as the processes
that control the formation and evolution of ocean basins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University National Oceanographic
Laboratory System-Marine Seismic Research Oversight Committee (UNOLS-MSROC) and
the Ocean Bottom Seismograph Instrument Pool Oversight Committee identified a
priority to organize a symposium for the seismological and marine geoscience
community. This symposium will accomplish the following goals: 1) Showcase
research in marine seismology using new technology to achieve innovative
observational datasets with an emphasis on open-access and interdisciplinary or
international projects. 2) Reach out to seismology subject-matter experts in
international, industry, terrestrial, defense, and extra-terrestrial
environments to enhance cross-community interactions, leveraging of resources,
and collaborations. 3) Facilitate networking and promote brainstorming of new
ideas between seismologists at all stages in their careers. 4) Lower barriers to
access marine seismology facilities in the non-seismology marine science and
onshore seismological communities by providing information on marine seismic
facilities and promoting collaborations with marine seismologists. 5) Expand
community knowledge of seismic data management and sharable resources. 6) Allow
for a broader seismology community, including new scientists, industry, and
international participants, and incorporate discussions of topics of common
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.