* 1939173
* Conference to Explore the Impact of Future of Work Issues on Technician Education in Florida
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Richard Gilbert, FLORIDAMAKES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

This project will convene manufacturers and community colleges within the state
of Florida to address critical Future of Work issues and the expected skills gap
for the skilled technical workforce. Two questions will be addressed at the
conference: What new technologies are expected to impact technicians? And, what
do colleges in Florida need to do to begin to address these Future of Work
issues? The outcomes of the conference will demonstrate a model that can be
implemented nationally to systemically strengthen connections between the
Advanced Technology Education community, with its focus on technician education
excellence, and the Manufacturing Extension Partnership, with its focus on
manufacturing excellence for small- and medium-sized manufacturers. The project
will also place manufacturers and community college technician education
programs in a stronger position to build the partnerships needed to respond to
expected Future of Work impacts on the advanced technological
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: provide participants with a
pre-conference list of the Florida Department of Education Standards and
Benchmarks that address advanced manufacturing skills; inform participants of
the Digital Factory Floor assessment results from Manufacturing times Digital
(MxD) Manufacturing USA Institute; conduct the conference to identify
technologies in Floridaâ€™s small- to medium-sized manufacturers that directly
contribute technician skills gaps in Florida; deliver a report of conference
findings to all stakeholders; and administer, analyze and disseminate a post-
conference Impact on Participants survey. The Florida Manufacturing Extension
Partnership, Florida Makes, the Florida Engineering Technology Forum (supported
by the Florida Advanced Technology Center), and the Florida Department of
Education will work together to implement project recommendations. This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.