* 1939324
* Fifth International Colloquium on Nonlinear Dynamics and Control of Deep Drilling Systems; College Park, Maryland; 1-3 June 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Balakumar Balachandran, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2022
* USD 47,559.00

This grant will provide 40 attendees, several of whom are from under-represented
groups, the opportunity to participate in the Fifth International Colloquium on
Nonlinear Dynamics and Control of Deep Drilling Systems, in College Park,
Maryland, 1-3 June 2020, where they will attend technical presentations and
participate in a panel session on the future of deep drilling. The lecture sets
will focus on the following emerging topics in deep drilling systems: modeling
of drill strings through analysis, experiments, and computations, nonlinear
dynamics of drill strings, and the control of drill strings. The participants
will address challenges arising in the context of stick-slip dynamics, nonlinear
modeling of directional drilling, state-dependent delay effects, and control
schemes based on partial differential systems. Discussions will be undertaken on
the problems faced in the field and developments that can be pursued to address
them, as well as current and future directions associated with horizontal
drilling and deep water drilling. The colloquium will serve as an opportunity to
expose graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and junior faculty to
complex problems involving nonlinear dynamics and nonlinear control, as well as
approaches and methodologies used in the deep drilling systems
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This colloquium could provide ways in which
modeling, nonlinear dynamics, and nonlinear control can be used to tackle
challenges faced in practice, beyond the considered application of deep drilling
systems. Examples of other areas include those that involve flexible rotors and
other distributed parameter systems, and manufacturing. In addition to 30
technical experts, 10 students, post-doctoral researchers, and junior faculty
members, in particular, minorities and underrepresented groups, will be invited
to participate in this colloquium to introduce them to the field as well as
encourage their participation in future efforts. This colloquium is expected to
be an exceptional learning experience for them. Furthermore, this colloquium can
serve as a template for future colloquia and workshops involving academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.