* 1939979
* CoPe EAGER: Development of a Drone-Based Coastal Change Monitoring Program through Citizen Science Partnership and Capacity Building
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Erin Bunting, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The severity of coastal hazards (e.g. erosion) requires better data and
quantitative assessments to understand the physical changes to coastlines, their
causes, and rates of change, and to develop evidence-based hazard mitigation
strategies and policies. To address this need, this grant will conduct a pilot
program (IC-CREAM): Interdisciplinary Citizen-based Coastal REmote Sensing for
Adaptative Management) to test hypotheses about the feasibility and scientific
value of a citizen-science approach to creating a localized, repeat aerial image
database on coastal processes in the Great Lakes. The intellectual merit of this
cross-disciplinary, mixed methods project will make several scientific
advancements relevant to the fields of remote sensing, GIScience, coastal
science, geomorphology, and geography. Using citizen-operated drones is a new
approach to collecting remotely sensed high-resolution time series imagery about
landscape change and processes. Citizen science monitoring with drones and
smartphones will allow for the documentation of the impacts of coastal change
across a broader geographic region than is currently possible. New and better
data generated during this project is critical for improving modeling and
assessments of coastal change, and for engaging communities on the topic of
coastal resilience because the citizen-science collaboration offers a new way to
get communities involved in developing sustainable coastal management
strategies. Training graduate and undergraduate students in coastal
geomorphology, remote sensing, and community engagement will be key component of
this grant. Students participating in this project will develop field and
laboratory skills associated with drone operations as well as strong
communication skills through their participation in the community engagement
workshops and on-going support and coordination with the citizen
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will train a team of citizen
scientists composed of practitioners and community stakeholders to collect
repeat aerial imagery, via an unoccupied aerial system (UAS), of coastal sites
in six communities along Lakes Michigan, Huron, and Superior to document erosion
and accretion associated with fluctuating water levels, storms, and human
interventions. The long-term goal is to compile a database of localized, repeat
imagery of coastal areas across the Great Lakes region to understand their
physical changes, root causes of these physical changes, and the associated
environmental, social, and economic impacts. This project will evaluate: (1)
whether properly trained and supervised community-member citizen scientists can
generate high quality data across a broad spatial scale that contributes to
scientific research on local and regional coastal processes and (2) whether
engaging community stakeholders in rigorous scientific investigations improves
the public?s understanding of coastal processes and hazards enhances the
capacity for proactive decision-making. Citizen scientists will be trained on
the basics of UAS operation, data collection, and FAA regulations in order to
pass the FAA part 107 exam and become certified remote pilots. They will then
collect repeat aerial imagery of beaches, bluffs, and dunes (seasonal and
before/after storms). Images will be processed using structure-from-motion
photogrammetry into digital surface models (DSMs). These DSMs, along with the
aerial images, will be analyzed to quantify coastal geomorphic change. Results
will be shared with the citizen scientists who will assist the research team in
communicating the findings publicly. Interviews and surveys will be conducted
with citizen scientists and community stakeholders to evaluate whether the
coupled researcher/citizen scientist approach is beneficial for educating the
public on coastal change / hazards as well as assisting in making informed
coastal management decisions. This project will be the first step towards
developing a collaborative and coordinated researcher and stakeholder network
focused on coastal hazards in the Great Lakes and will be a model for other
coastal regions nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.