* 1939000
* RUI: Quantifying the effects of wildfire burning on 10Be concentrations in river sand - A study of the 2018 Woolsey Fire, Santa Monica Mountains, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Eric Portenga, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 12/31/2023
* USD 221,014.00

The rates at which landscapes evolve over hundreds to thousands of years –
geological erosion rates – provide important information about landscape
stability, rates of sediment erosion or movement, seismic motion on faults, and
the magnitude of human-caused erosion above background geological erosion.
Exactly how geological erosion rates are affected by short-lived but large-
magnitude erosive events such as floods, hurricanes, earthquakes, landslides,
and wildfires remain poorly understood. This project focuses on the Woolsey
Fire, which burned through ~100,000 acres of the Santa Monica Mountains,
southern California, in November 2018. The Woolsey fire provides a unique
opportunity to understand how a short-duration, large-magnitude fire disrupts
and changes geological erosion rates owing to an existing dataset of pre-fire
erosion rates determined in 2016. Through this project, three undergraduate
research students will receive personalized training in Earth science research,
analyze real-world data for senior theses, and learn how Earth’s surface changes
in response to wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geological erosion rates have
been determined for thousands of rivers around the world by measuring the
concentration of 10-beryllium (10Be) in quartz river sand. Measured 10Be
concentrations are only produced in Earth’s near-surface and are thus sensitive
to or diluted by short-lived deep-erosion events such as gully erosion,
landslides, and debris flows, all of which are common following wildfires. The
effect of post-fire erosion on measured 10Be concentrations is largely unknown
because it is rare to have existing 10Be data from rivers that are subsequently
affected by severe burning. This project benefits from a 10Be dataset collected
from seven rivers draining the Santa Monica Mountains in 2016, two years prior
to the 2018 Woolsey Fire. Four of these rivers were completely burned by the
fire, providing the unique opportunity to (1) quantify how much measured 10Be
concentrations in river sand have changed as a result of wildfire-caused erosion
in burned catchments and (2) quantify the reproducibility of 10Be concentrations
in unburned catchments. This project will have a clear and beneficial impact for
the growing number of scientists who use 10Be data in their work because it
serves to provide one of the first long-term, systematically-collected 10Be
replicate sample sets in a steep, semiarid, fire-prone landscape. Because 10Be-
derived erosion rates are used to contextualize modern human-induced sediment
runoff, map seismic activity in tectonically-active regions, and assess
landscape stability over geologically-meaningful timescales, this work will
broadly benefit a wide range of professionals who rely on geomorphologists’
ability to produce accurate and informative interpretations of sediment
transport and landscape evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.