* 1939356
* SBIR Phase I:  A WEARABLE PATCH TO MEASURE KEY BREASTFEEDING METRICS
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Hooman Hafezi, MAY & MEADOW, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I Project is to measure the
most critical metrics associated with breastfeeding in real time, namely milk
volume and suck patterns. Exclusive breastfeeding in the first six months of
life is highly recommended. While U.S. breastfeeding initiation rates exceed
80%, only 25% of women are able to reach the six-month goal. The leading cause
of premature breastfeeding cessation is maternal anxiety about milk supply
exacerbated by the absence of an accurate, inexpensive, and convenient means to
assess infant milk intake. The current standard-of-care, weighing an infant
before and after feeding, requires an expensive clinical scale to detect a 1-2%
weight change, trained staff, tight swaddling of the infant, careful operation,
and regular calibration. Even then, it’s still a tedious exercise and thus does
not provide a quality representative measure of daily milk intake. There is
therefore a need for a “thermometer for breastfeeding” – an accurate, easy-to-
use device to be used for multiple feedings in both clinical and home settings.
The technology developed in this project can be used for rapid identification
and intervention for infants at high risk of feeding
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop and validate the
accuracy of a low-cost wearable patch measuring milk volume and suck patterns in
real time. The patch operates by detecting changes in the shape and electrical
properties of the breast and can be used for 1-12 feedings per day. Data are
reported to a mobile app for tracking and analysis, as well as integration with
other key metrics of infant feeding and growth. Several patch configurations
will be built and tested to optimize the design and analysis algorithm. The
design with highest accuracy will be further validated in a larger study
involving breastfeeding mother-infant dyads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.