* 1939275
* CoPe EAGER: Nearshore Extreme Events Reconnaissance (NEER) Association
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Steve Elgar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Nearshore regions, where ocean and estuarine processes interact with terrestrial
processes and the built environment, are vital to national security, the
economy, transportation, and recreation. However, coastal communities are at
risk from major storms, as highlighted by recent Hurricanes Irene (2011), Sandy
(2012), Matthew (2016), Harvey (2017), Irma (2017), Maria (2017), Florence
(2018), and Michael (2018). Coastal-storm-related economic losses have increased
substantially, largely owing to increases in population and development in
hazardous coastal areas. As the frequency of intense storms increases,
communities, infrastructure, ecosystems, and habitat will be under increasing
threat from storm impacts. Despite the importance of coastal regions, there are
few field observations during large storms. Major storms develop rapidly, and
reconnaissance teams must mobilize quickly to obtain pre-storm site
characterization and to deploy instruments to collect valuable perishable
measurements during the storm. The flexibility to form the broad,
interdisciplinary science teams needed to address system hypotheses is not
available through traditional NSF programs. The Nearshore Extreme Events
Reconnaissance (NEER) Association established under this EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) will enable coordination and deployment of multi-
disciplinary researchers to collect perishable data needed to learn from storm-
induced coastal disasters. The resulting observations will be useful to the
science and engineering community to understand and predict the intertwined
responses of the natural system, the built environment, and the socio-economic
structures to impacts of extreme storms, leading to improved coastal management
strategies and reduced risks. The NEER Association will entrain and train new
members, including students and postdocs, ensuring a growing community of
coastal-storm researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The national Nearshore Extreme
Events Reconnaissance (NEER) Association will (i) build a network of academic,
federal, and industry scientists and practitioners, (ii) coordinate and deploy
interdisciplinary storm response teams, (iii) provide logistical support for
field teams, and (iv) promote broad dissemination of the resulting data and
findings. The NEER members will develop a database of potential field sites and
emergency management contacts, and will entrain their local communities to
determine key regional issues. When a storm is imminent, field team members will
be selected to obtain data that will be used to address interdisciplinary
questions relevant to the impacted region and the storm characteristics. These
teams will conduct site characterization before and after extreme storms, and
will collect measurements during storms that can be used to develop new concepts
about the nearshore system. By working together across traditionally disparate
disciplines, this community of academic, agency, and industry researchers will
integrate diverse perspectives, methods, and goals, leading to development of
new long-term collaborations and facilitating co-development of tools and
integration of understanding of the nearshore system. The NEER Association will
participate in the NSF-funded CONVERGE Leadership Corps and will coordinate with
other NSF-supported Extreme Events Reconnaissance groups (EERs), including the
Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering (ISEEER), Geotechnical and Structural
Engineering (GEER and StEER, respectively), Operations and Systems Engineering
(OSEER), and Social Science (SSEER) efforts. Instrumentation needs will be
coordinated with the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) RAPID Facility, and communications and data dissemination
will be facilitated in collaboration with the NHERI cyber-infrastructure
DesignSafe-CI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.