* 1939140
* Phase-II IUCRC Texas Tech University: Center for Cloud and Autonomic Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Susan Mengel, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/28/2025
* USD 978,707.00

In this project, Texas Tech University will extend the previously successful
industry-driven research program of the Cloud and Autonomic Computing (CAC)
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) as part of the NSF IUCRC
program. The CAC Center currently comprises participants from two principal
academic institutions, Texas Tech University (TTU) and the University of Arizona
(UA), as well as two affiliate sites associated with TTU: the University of
North Texas and Texas State University, and two international sites associated
with UA: Universidad de Sonora, Mexico and American University of Malta. The
mission of the NSF CAC Center across all participating sites is to conduct
research and development activities that advance the knowledge of how to design
and engineer highly distributed (cloud) and highly automated (autonomic)
computing systems for practical applications with stakeholders including
industry, federal agencies, and academia together. This grant will extend the
IUCRC research of the CAC at TTU from Phase I to Phase
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TTU site of the NSF CAC focuses on advances in
algorithms, methods, standards, and tools for cloud and highly automated
computing systems. The Phase-II program of CAC@TTU site will continue research
and development in areas including: 1) code development and Application
Programming Interface (API) design for data acquisition, procedural, and
workflow control; 2) high-performance data analytics and visualization in the
cloud and autonomic computing settings; 3) improvements to practical
applications of methods that use these and other cloud and autonomic computing
techniques and methods; 4) standards implementations and design for cloud
software and underlying infrastructure; and 5) applications of the above to data
center control based in both industry and academic arenas. The CAC@TTU site will
pursue these overall themes while remaining open to new and emerging
opportunities that relate to the needs of current and future industry members or
that come up through pursuit of the program of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding for this project plays a key role in
facilitating and promoting research collaboration among stakeholders including
industry, federal agencies, and academia. This project will also train a broadly
inclusive and globally competitive science workforce for the nation by
integrating the latest development and advanced knowledge into mentoring and
educational activities. Texas Tech University is a Hispanic-Serving Institution,
and the Phase-II CAC@TTU effort will leverage its experience in Phase I to carry
out research and development activities to have broader impacts, including
targeted efforts to integrate hands-on learning experiences for historically
under-represented population groups, actively engaging undergraduate students in
research programs, and organizing community activities such as workshops and
conferences. These activities will also be coordinated with the overall CAC
center program of broader engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Phase-II CAC@TTU
site will distribute portions of its output through GitHub repositories
(https://github.com/nsfcac) and websites including https://nsfcac.org/,
http://cac.ttu.edu/, and https://discl.cs.ttu.edu/ for public releases of
software, data, and results. The project members will provide industry
motivation, expertise, and materials to facilitate research and development
progress. The websites and repositories will be maintained for three years past
the project completion date, and principal investigators will strive to maintain
the associated output software products that remain in use as long as
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.