* 1939936
* Combinatorics in Hyperbolic Geometry and Exporting Teichmuller Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Tarik Aougab, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 121,340.00

The principal investigator plans a research program for studying Teichmuller
theory, a fundamentally important topic in geometry, by way of its connections
and interactions with several other mathematical disciplines. Central to the
fields of geometry and topology is the study of surfaces, for example the
surface of a spherical solid like a planet, or the surface of a donut or of a
more complicated three dimensional solid. A key objective in Teichmuller theory
is to understand all possible geometric forms that a fixed type of surface can
admit. For example, an astrophysicist might be interested in cataloging all
possible topographies of a hypothetical planet. The possibilities are countless:
there could be hilly or mountainous terrains, highlands, valleys of varying
elevations, and so forth. Miraculously, Teichmuller theory gives a way to
package the entire plethora of possible topographies into one geometric object
which can then be studied. The practical applications of Teichmuller theory and
of its mathematical relatives abound, from computer visualization and graphics
design, to evolutionary biology and genetics, and to many other important
disciplines in between.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical detail, the
principal investigator proposes a three part plan for studying Teichmuller and
hyperbolic geometry, the mapping class group, and more general classes of
finitely generated groups and metric spaces. First, the PI plans to develop
dynamical and combinatorial tools for studying the Teichmuller space, the
mapping class group, and hyperbolic 3-manifolds, and to use these tools to
analyze fundamental questions at the intersection of combinatorics and dynamics,
such as lattice point counting problems, and the study of hyperbolic 3-manifolds
from a combinatorial perspective. For example, the PI plans to demonstrate
relationships between the curve complex of a surface S and the geometry of a
hyperbolic 3-manifold fibering over S, in such a way that is sensitive to the
topology of the underlying surface S. Next, the PI will generalize and extend
these tools to other groups and spaces, such as the outer automorphism group of
the free group and the Outer space; for instance, the PI will initiate a study
of metrics on moduli spaces of graphs that are inspired by the Weil-Petersson
metric on Teichmuller space. Finally, the PI plans to pose analogs of counting
and other types of dynamical problems in a wider class of groups and of spaces,
and use the generalized tools to attack these questions in their respective
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.