* 1939076
* CNS:  CORE:  Small: iLORE: Computer Systems Performance Integrated Lineage Repository
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Kirk Cameron, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Since the dawn of computing, the world has tracked system performance. Yet,
computer system performance data is still primarily siloed by benchmark, system,
or system component. The thesis of this work is that most modern computing
systems (and their corresponding performance) share a common ancestry. Moreover,
this project marks the first scientific effort to catalog the lineage of
computer system performance over time, namely, iLORE. iLORE will enable
knowledge discovery and further understanding of the impact of computing
innovations on transformative technologies, the knowledge-based economy, and
societal change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iLORE is an online, public repository
enabling anyone to study correlations between computer system evolution and
other transformative changes in the social and scientific disciplines. In this
project, iLORE is being used to: 1) determine the influence of historical,
transformative computer system performance designs on current technologies; 2)
identify the confluence of innovation in computer system performance that led to
the creation of knowledge-based economies (e.g., new industries such as cloud
computing services); and 3) explore the juxtaposition of computer system
performance evolution and societal phenomenon (e.g., decreases of women in
computing since the 1970's, events surrounding the Arab spring since
2010).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves faculty, graduate students, and
more than a dozen undergraduates including 50% women and 20% from
underrepresented groups. The investigators are mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students year-round to create an inclusive, experiential learning
environment that encourages risk taking and rewards contributors. All students
are given opportunities to attend and present their research findings at highly
selective international conferences. Research findings are also integrated in
coursework taught by the researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.