* 1939018
* Continuous, Large-scale Manufacturing of Functionalized Silver Nanowire Transparent Conducting Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* James Smay, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2023
* USD 355,739.00

This research aims to discover a new technique for the economical manufacture of
silver nanowire transparent conductive films for the Internet of Nano Things.
The Internet of Nano Things promises to connect a new generation of sensors,
transducers, data processors and communication devices for a smart and connected
world. A vital component of all nanodevices is transparent conductive films,
generally made of silver nanowires. Current manufacture of silver nanowires is
costly as it involves multi-step batch production. This award investigates a new
approach for large-scale manufacture of silver nanowires with direct coupling
with a three-dimensional printing system for patterning of transparent
conducting films. The reduced cost of transparent conducting films and print-on-
demand silver nanowires hasten the adoption of devices for the Internet of Nano
Things, which contributes to the U.S. economy and prosperity. This research
combines aspects of manufacturing, material science, nanotechnology, chemistry,
and engineering. Students actively participate in research thus achieving
engineering expertise in advanced manufacturing, which is important to U.S.
industry. Undergraduate and graduate students, particularly from under-
represented groups, are encouraged to participate in research and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the reaction conditions and
mechanisms in a continuous reactor to produce silver nanowire (AgNW)-based
conductive inks that can be continuously printed onto flexible substrates to
create transparent conducting films (TCFs) for the Internet of Nano Things
(IoNT). The current batch production of AgNWs involves the costly steps of
selective separation and concentration of the desired AgNWs. In addition, AgNWs
are prone to oxidation in harsh environments. This project studies a
millifluidic system for the manufacture of monodispersed AgNWs with controllable
length and aspect ratio and sufficient concentration for high performance TCFs.
The millifluidic reactor is connected to a 3D printer for continuous manufacture
and printing of AgNW-based TCFs with a reduction in cost while maintaining high
print quality. In-situ monitoring of the millifluidic synthesis by X-ray
absorption spectroscopy provides fundamental understanding of the reaction
mechanisms. Mechanistic knowledge of the chemical reactions helps to achieve
control over the aspect ratio and yield of the AgNWs. The AgNWs are modified
using Pd nanoparticles via the galvanic replacement of Ag with Pd cations to
achieve stability against oxidation. This research advances AgNW TCFs that are
low cost, environmentally stable, with flexible/stretchable characteristics
needed in applications such as IoNT devices with high potential for advancing
the field of flexible electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Advanced Manufacturing Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.