* 1939163
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Knowledge Convergence and Divergence in Team Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Susan Simkins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 287,640.00

Leveraging knowledge resources is one of the hallmarks of successful teams. Team
members with diverse expertise and an awareness of "who knows what" perform
better than teams with less diverse perspectives. Since 2013, the National
Science Foundation's SaTC program has piloted groups of "high risk-high reward"
EAGER projects to encourage early collaborations between computer and
information scientists and behavioral, social, and economic scientists towards
improving innovation and effectiveness in SaTC research. The current research
will review the experiences of researchers and the outcomes of their projects to
better understand that initiative. The project will also allow for insights into
how interdisciplinary teams manage the inherent tension between knowledge
convergence and divergence. Converging when diverging is needed or diverging
when converging is needed mishandles team resources, impairing team processes
and performance. Therefore, unlocking the simultaneous influences of knowledge
convergence and divergence is central to improving team effectiveness as well as
advancing team research in the decades to come. Because NSF and other granting
agencies increasingly require team members to represent different disciplines,
it is urgent to discover the benefits, limitations, and objective outcomes of
promoting collaboration across NSF's directorates. As such, this research has
the potential to improve the effectiveness of SaTC, and more generally, science
teams, thereby fostering scientific breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How
should knowledge convergence and divergence in teams be balanced to maximize
performance, innovation, and member satisfaction? The objectives of this
research are to 1) conceptually integrate the previously independent areas of
team research that have focused either on knowledge convergence or knowledge
divergence 2) create new methods to assess the balance (or lack of balance)
between knowledge convergence and divergence in teams, and 3) begin to assess
the simultaneous effect of knowledge convergence and divergence on team
effectiveness. These objectives are fittingly explored in the context of nearly
100 SaTC NSF-funded, cross-disciplinary teams. The first phase of the project
involves interviews with members of a subset of interdisciplinary teams to
develop metrics to assess the balance of knowledge convergence and divergence.
The second phase involves surveys of past and currently funded team members to
measure the simultaneous effect of knowledge convergence and divergence on
objective outcomes. Outcome metrics assess, from publicly-available data,
whether the projects were productive and whether investigators co-published and
continued their cross-disciplinary collaboration. Together, these qualitative
and quantitative studies advance the rapidly growing science of team science
literature which has relied mostly on descriptive and archival research rather
than primary data collection. Students will be involved in all phases of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.