* 1939132
* Phase II IUCRC University of Pennsylvania: Center for Robots &amp; Sensors for the Human Well-Being
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* R. Vijay Kumar, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/28/2023
* USD 206,434.00

The NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) on Robots and
Sensors for Human Well-Being (ROSE-HUB) Phase II will play a leadership role in
nurturing and acceler-ating the deployment of robotics and intelligent sensor
technologies in a wide range of application domains key to the national economy,
e.g., transportation, energy, logistics, manufacturing, and infrastructure and
the well-being of the society, e.g., in healthcare. The ROSE-HUB center will
facilitate center university researchers to work with partners from industry,
government, other universities, and non-profit organizations to seek solutions
to critical real-world challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Penn ROSE-HUB site
will leverage advances in computer vision, aerial and marine autono-mous
vehicles, sensing, and artificial intelligence to develop novel robotic and
sensing systems for environmental monitoring and mapping. Targeted applications
include the improvement of agricultural yields and land management, inspection
and health monitoring of critical infrastruc-ture GPS denied locations, water
quality monitoring in major waterways, and assessment of work progress in
construction sites. The systems will be developed to balance operation timeli-
ness, cost, and the accuracy of the environmental representation. These
activities will result in novel robotic and sensing systems aimed at aerial and
marine applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center research will focus on
applications including physical/mental health, robots and sensor systems to
assist humans, innovative robot designs for monitoring and data collection,
precision agriculture, digitization of construction processes, intelligent
transportation systems, etc. Re-search will impact: a) industrial members by
inserting research into product pipelines, b) re-searchers by exploring new
ideas and application domains, c) students by providing hands-on experience and
future employment potential, and d) academic curricula. Additionally, annual
technology days will attract middle school students from underrepresented groups
to engineer-ing, and outreach programs to local K-16 institutions will encourage
pursuit of engineering educa-tion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create
hardware and software and collect experimental data from fixed and mo-bile
robots, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), and sensors. A database for data
management and dissemination will be established. The software components
include: (i) system framework software (e.g., low-level software that operates
electro-mechanical systems, i.e., robots, UAVs, etc.), (ii) software for
planning, control, sensing, and learning algorithms, (iii) software for demon-
stration testbeds and prototypes. The data retention period is five years after
the conclusion of the award. The data will be released as it becomes available
to the http://rosehubiucrc.github.io site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.