* 1939024
* EAGER: Bone Intrinsic Toughening by Stress Whitening is a Fundamental Molecular Mechanism of Collagen I
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Randy Carney, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

Bone, tendon, ligament, and cartilage carry large forces. The soft parts of the
tissues are fibrous molecules (mostly collagens) that are suited for this role.
The underlying idea of this research project is that collagen has a molecular-
level mechanism that helps these tissues to be strong and tough. A property of
normal, tough bone under tension is that it "whitens" just before it breaks. In
contrast, brittle bone doesn't whiten noticeably before it breaks. Previous
research has shown that whitening results from changes to the collagen molecules
in bone. The hypothesis of this EArly-concept Grant For Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project is that as these molecules are stretched it results in
dehydration that creates strong attachments between the molecules, making them
whiter and also postponing breakage. It is theorized that the cause of the
dehydration is the same mechanism (called "spinodal decomposition") that is
common in polymer solutions, where stretching a solution causes the dissolved
polymer to separate into a separate, solid form. The mechanical result is that
the fibers in the tissue change from being relatively distributed, flexible, and
tough to being dense, stiff, and strong until the tension is released. Whitening
is a way to protect the tissue from breaking that, if missing, will result in a
brittle bone. Fibrous tissues are found in animals that range from sponges to
elephants. Demonstrating existence of an underlying molecular-level, dynamic,
mechanical toughening mechanism could help in understanding load support in many
animals. It also could explain some bone diseases. If mechanical dehydration
explains part of collagen toughness, the knowledge could guide future medical
research to make bone tougher as we age. Results of this research will be
included in courses on Skeletal Tissue Mechanics and Biomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Whitening was previously attributed to light scattering caused by
microcracking in the mineral component of bone, but research from the PI's
laboratory has demonstrated that whitening is a property of the collagenous
matrix. Review of connective tissue and polymer mechanics literature indicates
that the likely mechanism for whitening is tensile stress-induced dehydration of
the collagen molecules, referred to as crystallization. This may be caused by
extensional strain-dependent spinodal decomposition of the collagen-
extracellular fluid solution. There are two research goals. The first is to
determine whether stress- and solvent- whitening are dehydration effects. The
second is to investigate whether partial dehydration by lateral compression of
the collagen fibrils, via non-penetrating osmotic pressure using high molecular
weight polyethylene glycol solutions has any of the following effects: a)
decreases the strain needed to cause whitening; b) decreases both rupture strain
and modulus of rupture (indicating a more brittle tissue); c) increases modulus
and ultimate stress; and, finally, d) if the (decreased) strain-to-whitening
after compression will predict the same ultimate stress (and other mechanical
properties) as for an uncompressed specimen in a solvent of lower Hansen's
coefficient that has the same strain-to-whitening. The lateral packing of the
collagen molecules and other changes in molecular configuration during
mechanical testing of decalcified bone specimens will be monitored using real-
time Raman spectroscopy. Raman spectra correlated with lateral molecular packing
are expected to show step-wise changes when tension reaches a critical
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.