* 1939890
* Makerspace-Guided Equitable Student Success in Developmental Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Julia Betts, Portland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 04/30/2023
* USD 299,935.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by studying how college
makerspaces might increase student retention and success in developmental
mathematics courses. The project will partner with a community group, the Wind
&amp; Oar Boat School, to develop activities that are culturally relevant, self-
directed, and put students at the center of cooperative group-based learning.
The College and community partners will work together to design, implement, and
test a 36-hour inquiry-based co-curricular course in a college makerspace. The
course will align basic mathematics principles that are taught in a
developmental mathematics course with specific activities related to building a
wooden boat. Nationwide, 60% of community college students require developmental
mathematics, suggesting that many are not prepared for the college-level
mathematics required for STEM degree programs. Furthermore, only one-third of
students in developmental mathematics courses move on to college-level courses
within six years and many end up dropping out of college completely. Project
activities are expected to engage all students, including students from groups
that are underrepresented in STEM. It is also expected that the activities will
increase student success in math and retention in college. This project is
designed to generate new knowledge about how makerspaces can increase equitable
access to STEM education. It will also explore whether engaging students in
these spaces improves their STEM identity and self-efficacy. The project design
is intended to build competencies such as critical thinking, the view that
failure is a natural step toward success, and the understanding that academic
ability can be improved. It is expected that this approach can be adopted by
other two-year colleges and other makerspaces that intend to expand access to
all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new interventions
and approaches that transform learning for diverse student groups, particularly
those in developmental mathematics courses. Eight 36-hour makerspace co-
curricular activities will be developed and implemented in conjunction with
Introductory Algebra II. Four of the eight activities will span two years. The
project team will adapt the Dimensions of Success Observation Tool to measure
overall student success and examine whether the project activities ameliorate
specific barriers for underrepresented students working in makerspace
environments. Three research questions will be examined: 1) To what extent do
activities that align fundamental mathematics principles with makerspace
competencies increase student learning in mathematics? 2) To what extent do
project activities increase student learning? 3) Does the use of makerspaces
attract other mathematics educators to reform their teaching practice? A mixed-
methods research design will assess the effectiveness of the project in
achieving its goals and identify unexpected outcomes. Student-level data to be
collected includes demographics, course success metrics, instances of future
STEM course enrollments, and surveys regarding students' experiences with the
intervention, perceptions of STEM identity, and self-reported identities
regarding URM definitions. Surveys will be distributed to both the intervention
participants and a control group. External evaluators will observe students
during the activities to understand their engagement with activities and will do
exit interviews to capture students' reflection on the overall experience. This
project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources, which supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.