* 1939226
* NSFDEB-NERC: Collaborative research: Plant chemistry and its impact on diversification and habitat of plants adapted to extreme environments
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Samuel Brockington, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 01/31/2024
* USD 482,198.00

Plants produce diverse chemical compounds, including pigments for attracting
pollinators and toxins for deterring herbivores. These chemical compounds are
often unique to certain plant parts in different plant groups. This project
seeks to understand the evolution of plant-derived chemical compounds and how
these compounds promote plant diversity. To address these questions, the project
will focus on the plants within the Caryophyllales, a group that includes cacti
and many alpine and arctic plants known for extraordinary adaptations to warm,
dry, or cold environments. Many Caryophyllales species produce unusually large
amounts of diverse compounds derived from the amino acid tyrosine. Due to
inherent biochemical trade-offs, the production of these tyrosine-derived
compounds may come at the expense of other compounds derived from the amino acid
phenylalanine. We will study the balance of the production of these two amino
acids and its effect on the production of myriad compounds important in UV
shielding, pollination, and herbivore deterrence. The work will inform the
biotechnological production of natural plant pigments and will help to elucidate
biosynthetic pathways of a number of high-value plant-derived chemicals with
pharmaceutical value. The collaborative US-UK team will provide
multidisciplinary training opportunities for students and post-doctoral scholars
in genetic and biochemical methods in an evolutionary context. Workshops at
professional society meetings, a K-12 summer camp module, and multiple public
outreach modules will bring these concepts to the public and highlight the
relationship between biodiversity and high-value plant chemical compounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will perform an extensive survey to establish
the occurrence and distribution of key tyrosine- and phenylalanine-derived
metabolites in 600 species across Caryophyllales; examine the association of
these tyrosine-derived metabolic traits with organismal adaptation and
diversification patterns; and determine the evolutionary genetic mechanisms
responsible for the biosynthesis of these metabolites. New tools will be
developed to model the hierarchical nature of metabolite evolution and will be
made available to the broader community of scientists. This project will
comprehensively describe the extent of tyrosine-enriched metabolism in
Caryophyllales, define the degree to which these metabolites are associated with
organismal diversification patterns across Caryophyllales, and resolve the
evolutionary assembly of the genetic pathways underlying complex tyrosine-
derived metabolic traits. This award was co-funded by the Systematics and
Biodiversity Science Cluster in the Division of Environmental Biology and the
Integrative Ecological Physiology Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.