* 1939594
* Workshop on Electroorganic Chemistry: from Synthesis to Chemical Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Gerardine Botte, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 96,000.00

With support from the Division of Chemistry and the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems Division, Jean-Philippe Tessonnier of Iowa
State University, Gerardine Botte of Ohio University, and Song Lin of Cornell
University lead efforts to organize a workshop to address challenges in the
broad field of organic electrosynthesis. Recent research by the chemistry
community has revealed new opportunities to synthesize organic molecules by
electrochemical means rather than by conventional thermal reactions that rely on
non-renewable fossil carbon feedstocks. The project supports a workshop that
will bring together experts from the chemistry, materials science, and
engineering communities to identify the state of the field and identify
opportunities for collaborative and convergent research across the various
communities to advance understanding and application of electrochemistry for the
manufacture of organic molecules important to a broad range of industries. The
workshop is held in Alexandria, Virginia in February of 2020, and includes about
50 participants representing academic institutions, industry, and the national
laboratories. The workshop participants include a diverse group of attendees
including students, early-career researchers, and senior-level technical
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical synthesis and chemical processing
of organic materials into high-value products is a growing research area given
the facile integration of electrochemistry with electricity generated from
sustainable sources such as photovoltaic devices, wind turbines, and
hydroelectric power. The trend toward and likely eventual elimination of fossil
carbon (coal, petroleum, natural gas) as a raw material will require replacement
with oxidized forms of carbon (biomass, CO2). Conversion of these oxidized raw
materials in turn will require inexpensive and sustainable reducing equivalents
- something that does not exist today, and that electrochemistry can ideally
address. Electrochemistry and electrocatalysis provide unique opportunities for
increasing conversion efficiencies and for synthesizing new molecules that are
not accessible thermochemically or photochemically. Simultaneously, the
engineering community is increasingly recognizing research opportunities for
electrochemistry to streamline biocatalysis and chemocatalysis in biorefineries,
and to manufacture chemicals from regional- and community-scale quantities of
agricultural waste. Opportunities also exist for discovery and manufacturing of
pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals. Many of these efforts remain exploratory, as
a fundamental understanding of the elementary processes involved in these
transformations is still lacking. Concerted efforts in synthetic chemistry,
electrochemistry, materials science, heterogeneous catalysis, and computational
science are needed to harness the transformative knowledge required to develop
this technology, push its implementation in industry, and create new value
chains. To this end, the workshop brings together experts to identify the state
of the field and identify opportunities for collaborative and convergent
research across the various communities to advance understanding and application
of electrochemistry for the manufacture of a broad range of organic molecules in
processes that utilize renewable feedstocks and sustainable energy. Student
attendance at the workshop is supported by a separate grant from the Department
of Energy Office of Basic Energy Science. Workshop proceedings are published in
a prominent technical journal providing broad dissemination of outcomes to the
technical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.