* 1939236
* Closed-Loop Sensing and Actuation for Gastrointestinal Capsule Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Reza Ghodssi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Minimally invasive medical devices are in high demand due to their unprecedented
potential in achieving detection and treatment of diseases at early stages with
reduced burden to the patient. Ingestible capsule systems have received
significant attention as autonomous medical vehicles for minimally invasive
gastrointestinal (GI) tract interventions. Recent advancements have demonstrated
a variety of functions including GI imaging, gas sensing, lesion biopsy, and
drug release, paving the way for capsule systems to detect and subsequently
treat/monitor chronic GI-associated pathologies such as inflammatory bowel
disease (e.g. Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis). However, few systems have
demonstrated feedback-driven intervention in response to sensor signals due to
challenges inherent in developing robust sensor technologies capable of
operating in the GI environment and the requirements for compact actuators to
apply such interventions. The small form factor and power requirements for
ingestible systems amplify these challenges. In response, this work will develop
an ingestible capsule utilizing closed-loop operation for anchoring microdarts
into the GI mucosa triggered by a sensor signal. The sensors will be aimed at
detecting an inflammatory disease state with the actuator releasing medication
laden darts to treat the condition. With regard to intellectual merit, this
integrated capsule system will enable effective detection, intervention, or
further surveillance of GI pathologies. The feedback-driven system integration
will provide a technological platform to develop next-generation GI-resident
medical devices to meet the growing demand for targeted personalized and non-
invasive therapies. The broader impact of this project lies in the goal of
expanding the horizon of minimally invasive diagnostics and therapeutics to
improve public accessibility, as it will lead to improved efficacy of clinical
diagnosis and treatment, provide a better quality of life for patients, and
reduce costs associated with more invasive procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
effort can be broken down in to three specific aims: 1) Development of
microdart-loaded thermomechanical spring actuators for targeted GI diagnostics
and treatment. Thermally-released silicon springs will be implemented to propel
mounted microdarts into the GI mucosa. Biomimetic tissue-anchoring structures
designed on the microdarts will facilitate attachment to the GI tract wall. The
darts will be fabricated with both microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)
techniques and high precision 3D lithography. The MEMS based actuators can be
batch fabricated and possess a compact form factor facilitating their
integration with other system components. 2) Systems integration of sensor-
enabled GI tract-targeting capsules. The feedback-driven system will be
developed by integrating both targeting microsensors and drug-releasing
components into a single capsule. A pH-sensitive coating will allow region-
specific capsule activation. An onboard capacitive sensor will detect local
targets, such as inflammatory markers, and individually trigger spring actuators
to deploy drug-eluting or sensor-integrated microdarts for extended therapy or
long-term monitoring, respectively. The spring actuators, microdarts,
electronics, and power source will be integrated into a capsule-shaped package
with designated openings for interaction with the GI tract wall. 3) In vitro
model design and system validation. The delivery, actuation, and anchoring
mechanisms of the capsule systems will be tested in a simulated benchtop model.
Several different benchtop models will be pursued, including one made from
synthetic tissue that can mimic peristalsis of the GI tract and another simple
model that uses animal intestines with tubing to inject solutions for simulating
GI secretions. Instrumentation such as a camera or a pH and temperature probe
will be used with the benchtop models. The proposed silicon-based actuator will
advance the development of compact batch-fabricated actuators and augmentation
of their capabilities by leveraging two-photon 3-D printing technology and
creative etching methods to demonstrated biomimetic structures. The region-
specific targeting based on pH-sensitive coatings will build on previous work
examining the role of pH sensitive polymers for ingestible capsule
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.