* 1939004
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 IEEE International Conference on Green and Sustainable Computing (IEEE IGSC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Mahdi Nikdast, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports student travel support to the International Green and
Sustainable Computing Conference (IGSC), a leading conference in this area. The
conference will enable researchers and students to the study and practice of
using computing resources efficiently, which in turn can impact a spectrum of
economic, ecological, and social objectives. Green computing has become an
established interdisciplinary research area spanning across the fields of
computer science and engineering, electrical engineering, and other engineering
disciplines. With these funds, 20 travel grants will be provided to students who
may otherwise not be able to attend IGSC and take advantage of the available
learning and networking opportunities in the newly evolving research area of
green computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This provides the students the opportunity
to:&lt;br/&gt;o Interact with top researchers in their research
domain;&lt;br/&gt;o Learn, listen, and exchange ideas with other students
working in their research domain to build future collaborations;&lt;br/&gt;o
Learn what is considered state-of-the-art in Green and Sustainable Computing;
and&lt;br/&gt;o Attend topic specific workshops held in conjunction (which are
not yet finalized), but from experience, they should be excellent and
meaningful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A very solid and dedicated recruitment strategy
is presented on attracting and supporting women and under-represented minority
students to attend the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.