* 1939368
* FAI: Fairness-Aware Algorithms for Network Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Abdol Esfahanian, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 375,842.00

As society becomes increasingly reliant on artificial intelligence (AI)
technology, there have been growing concerns whether the decisions generated by
the AI systems may lead to discriminatory actions against certain protected
groups in the population. These concerns have brought increasing scrutiny into
the issue of fairness in AI systems and their underlying machine learning
algorithms. To overcome this challenge, the overarching goal of this project is
to develop fairness-aware algorithms that can maintain the high utility of
decisions generated by the AI systems without discriminating against particular
subgroups of the population. Specifically, this research will address
fundamental issues of fairness in algorithms that utilize network data in their
decision making. Successful completion of this project will not only produce
novel algorithms for researchers, but also tools that can help practitioners
assess the level of inequality present in social networking platforms. The
undergraduate and graduate students who participate in the project will be
trained to conduct cutting edge research in AI and network science. The
investigators will also seek collaborative partnership with research scientists
from the industry to apply the developed methods in order to expand their social
impact beyond the academic community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research fills a
major gap in current research on fairness in AI, which has primarily focused on
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data. There are still questions
remain whether the existing methods are effective when applied to network data.
In particular, the link structure of the network often contains information
about the protected attributes (e.g., gender, race, or sexual orientation), and
thus, must be taken into consideration in the design of fairness-aware machine
learning algorithms. To address this issue, the objectives of this project are
two-fold: (1) To develop metrics for assessing fairness in network learning
algorithms and (2) To design, implement, and evaluate network learning
algorithms that consider the tradeoff between fairness and utility of the models
for various network analysis tasks and applications (including community
detection and link prediction). The innovative methods developed in this project
will be a step forward towards bridging the gap between current understanding of
fairness in i.i.d. data and its application to network
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.