* 1939528
* Density Functional Theory of Electronic Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* John Perdew, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Chemistry contribute funds to this award that supports theoretical
research, computation, and education to develop more accurate computer modeling
of molecules, chemicals, and materials. To do this, the PI will focus on the
“glue” that binds one atom to another to form molecules and materials: the
exchange-correlation energy. In this research, the PI will develop even more
accurate approximations for this “glue” that still permit efficient simulation
on computers.&lt;br/&gt;Kohn-Sham density functional theory is widely used in
physics, chemistry, and materials science to predict what atoms, molecules, and
materials can exist and with what properties. Starting from the first principles
of quantum mechanics, this theory constructs the ground-state energy and
electron density of a many-electron system from an auxiliary system of non-
interacting electrons including the contribution from the "glue", facilitating
practical computation. The exact exchange-correlation energy must be
approximated. Widely predictive approximations should themselves be based upon
first principles, and be accurate enough to predict the small energy differences
between competing states in complex materials and systems. The strategy of this
project is to achieve more accurate but computable general-purpose
approximations by incorporating more of the mathematical properties of the exact
universal density functional for the exchange-correlation energy, i.e., by
satisfying more exact constraints, by fitting to more appropriate systems in
which the approximation can be either exact or highly accurate, and by carefully
testing and validating the new approximations over a wide range of systems.
&lt;br/&gt;Long-term practical benefits to society could include new medicines,
chemicals, materials or devices. This research program educates graduate
students and more advanced researchers as developers, validators, and users of
density functional and electronic structure theory. It will furthermore engage
undergraduates and high-school students in the excitement of scientific
discovery. The PI will also work with TUteach students and administrators along
with other interested individuals in Temple Physics, to organize an annual High
School Physics Day at Temple which would be focused on invited high school
physics teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division
of Materials Research and the Division of Chemistry contribute funds to this
award that supports theoretical research, computation, and education to develop
more accurate and predictive density functionals for the exchange-correlation
energy, while retaining the advantage of relative computational efficiency.
These functionals will be designed to satisfy the known exact constraints on the
exact functional. &lt;br/&gt;A smoother and more perfected version of the SCAN
(strongly constrained and appropriately normed) meta-generalized gradient
approximation will be developed, using as appropriate norms not only the uniform
electron gas but also many real atoms. Also, the PI aims to continue developing
a generalized Perdew-Zunger self-interaction correction to the improved SCAN
that should be exact for all one-electron densities without losing accuracy for
many-electron densities. These advanced functionals will be tested on the many
systems for which SCAN has succeeded, including liquid water, structural energy
differences in solids, artificial molecules, and the high-temperature
superconducting materials, and on the few for which it is known to fail, such as
some bulk transition metals and alloys, as well as on additional complex or
strongly-correlated systems. &lt;br/&gt;Improvements to long-range van der Waals
corrections, and a self-interaction correction to the random phase
approximation, will also be made and validated. Understanding what makes a
functional predictive should guide the burgeoning effort to develop density
functional approximations by machine learning. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the proposal is that many known mathematical properties of the exact
functional should make the resulting approximate functionals widely and
accurately predictive, at reasonable computational cost, and thus make them
useful for many applications, not only for the simpler molecules and materials
for which density functionals are already reliable, but also for the more
complex or strongly-correlated ones. In particular improved functionals are
critically needed for high-throughput searches for new materials with desired
properties. The small energy differences between different states can make a
complex material easy to switch under human control from one state and
functionality to another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.