* 1939288
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: The Future of Privacy Technology-Inaugural Conference of the Privacy Tech Alliance
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2020
* Jules Polonetsky, FPF Education and Innovation Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Chaitanya Baru
* 07/31/2020
* USD 37,847.00

The Future of Privacy Forum (FPF) will organize meetings and conduct a survey of
industry stakeholders to help develop a long-term vision for the "future of
privacy." Through these activities, the FPF seeks to jump-start a thriving
collaborative community that will purposefully integrates knowledge and
expertise from multiple disciplines and sectors in order to balance the
requirements of data governance and individual privacy, through privacy-
protecting technology. The pairing of industry experts and practitioners with
academic researchers in this area?using the NSF Convergence Accelerator approach
--will help contribute to the development of systems and products to help
society realize the benefits of networked information technology without
sacrificing privacy and individual rights. The results of this project will help
shape the agenda of both research and practice to achieve this
outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the centrality of data to modern
organizations and to society, data governance is a key contemporary business and
societal problem that needs to be addressed. The need and demand for addressing
data privacy issues reaches across every sphere of work, whether in business and
industry, government, higher education, non-profits, or civil society
organizations. All organizations, regardless of their size, will require
solutions that enable them to embed privacy and data protection in their
operation and provide access to tools that help safeguard personal data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the impact of data-intensive technologies increases and
the pace of innovation accelerates, the resultant privacy risks from more
extensive collection and processing of personal data also increase. As the data
ecosystem and regulatory requirements grow more complex, organizations are
urgently seeking ways to comply with the law and ensure all necessary data
protections for their customers, clients and constituents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical, organizational, and logistical complexity
of modern-day data governance, along with the pressing need to protect and
respect individual privacy rights, constitute a ?grand challenge problem?. The
FPF will investigate the possibility of a ?privacy technology track? for NSF?s
Convergence Accelerator, to promote industry and academic collaborations on
technical solutions and transition to practice to protect privacy. The project
includes the following activities: design of a survey to industry privacy
leaders to provide input on future of privacy technology as relates to their
business and policy needs and objectives; administering a survey to industry
privacy leaders at meetings; and preparation of a report that will provide a
summary and analysis of the industry response, identifying research as well as
business opportunities, to fill gaps in the current privacy technology landscape
and recommended action(s) that can be taken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.