* 1939568
* Conference Proposal: The 2nd National Symposium to Build HBCU Research Capacity through Collaborative Partnerships with STEM Advocates and Policymakers
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Mercy Mugo, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,868.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The second Congressional Black Caucus Foundation's Annual
Legislative Conference (ALC) Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU)
Research Action Practice (RAP) Symposium will build on prior work to expand the
influence of HBCUs on decision making with respect to national priorities for
underrepresented students in STEM. Since 2018, The Quality Education for
Minorities (QEM) Network has actively participated in the NSF INCLUDES Program
and has conducted original research on HBCU STEM production. Using collective
impact as a paradigm to facilitate knowledge generation and synthesis across
professional sectors, this symposium will advance innovative strategies to
foster social change. QEM brings nearly 29 years of leadership in STEM
initiatives and conferences with the HBCU community. This conference builds on
research that uses organizational learning theory and focus group research to
understand the process through which HBCUs acquire knowledge and translate
knowledge into dynamic capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;The
symposium will elevate research and institutional partnerships to advance STEM
policy and decision making, and build collaborations with industry leaders,
elected officials and decision makers. Giving research at HBCUs greater leverage
to impact social change will contribute to national efforts to grow and
diversify the STEM workforce. Though a small segment of our Nation's colleges,
HBCUs disproportionately graduate African American STEM degree recipients. The
conference's dissemination strategies will catalyze HBCU researchers and
decision makers to collaborate to support the Nation's goal of a diversified
STEM workforce. An expected outcome of the conference is a research-action-
policy plan that will share what works in building a community of practice
between HBCU researchers, social advocates and decision
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.