* 1939864
* Interplay of Topological Order and Symmetry In and Out of Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Lukasz Fidkowski, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 337,334.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on exotic low temperature states of condensed matter systems. Although
quantum mechanics describes the behavior of matter at the microscopic level,
quantum mechanical effects are typically not visible at the macroscopic scale.
In the 1980s a new class of so-called `topologically ordered' states was
discovered in studying the quantum Hall effect in which electrons are confined
in a plane between two semiconductors and placed in a high magnetic field
perpendicular to the plane. The quantum Hall states show quantum effects that
are felt at the macroscopic scale. These include the emergence of particle like
behavior that carries only a fraction of the electron charge and channels which
only allow charge to flow in one direction.&lt;br/&gt;To gain a better
understanding of what kinds of new states of electrons can be realized in
materials and how they can be detected experimentally, the PI and collaborators
will combine methods from theoretical condensed matter physics and the field of
quantum information theory which is comprised of ideas from information theory,
quantum mechanics, mathematics, and computer science. Quantum information theory
provides a useful way to think about aspect of computing and information
transmission involving the manipulation of quantum mechanical states.
&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the education of a graduate student at the
frontiers of modern theoretical condensed matter physics. Furthermore, the PI
will continue to develop a graduate level course that incorporates new material
from quantum information theory in addition to standard condensed matter field
theory. In addition, the work may have an additional positive impact in that
condensed matter ideas may potentially lead to advances in quantum information
and quantum computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education on the combined effects of
symmetry and topology in strongly correlated many-body quantum systems. Such
strongly correlated systems can realize zero-temperature phases of matter beyond
the standard Ginzburg-Landau-Wilson symmetry breaking paradigm. These can have
intrinsic topological order and support fractionalized `anyon' excitations, or
they can be symmetry protected.&lt;br/&gt;A large portion of this project will
be to classify phases of matter which exhibit intrinsic topological order,
symmetry-protected features, or both. This will include both equilibrium zero
temperature gapped quantum phases and many-body localized (MBL) out of
equilibrium systems. Specific areas of focus include: 1) classifying fermionic
symmetry protected phases and understanding the strongly correlated topological
surface states they can exhibit, 2) extracting universal properties of
topological and symmetry protected phases from commuting projector lattice
Hamiltonians and understanding the conditions under which such commuting
projector Hamiltonians exist, and 3) classifying topological phases in
periodically driven (Floquet) MBL quantum systems. The PI will use analytical
tools, such as quantum field theory and exactly solvable models, to prove the
existence of gapped phases, and will also use mathematical methods, such as
topological quantum field theory and algebraic topology, to study and
potentially rule out putative patterns of topological order. The PI will develop
new quantum-information theoretic tools to address these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to develop fundamental
understanding of topological order in and out of equilibrium. In particular, the
problem of classifying topological order in non-equilibrium MBL systems is not
necessarily amenable to the same field theory techniques as is the equilibrium
case, but can be usefully addressed with quantum information theory methods. The
PI will build on ongoing work with collaborators within the quantum information
community to develop such methods, which recent results indicate will be useful
for both the physics and quantum information
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.