* 1939019
* Population Growth and Human Behavioral Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Robert Kelly, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 94,377.00

Robert Kelly and his research team will investigate the relationships between
environmental change and human population growth and decline on human behavior
over a 12,000-year period in northwest Wyoming. With its ability to study long
spans of time, archaeology is uniquely positioned to study, as in a laboratory,
the impact of these two crucial variables on human societies. In doing so, this
research helps determine if environmental change, including both long-term
trends and short-term fluctuations, or human population density individually are
sufficient to produce change in human behavior, or if the greatest change is
produced by their combined effect. Given that world population will reach 11
billion by AD 2100, and on-going environmental changes, planning for the future
should make use of the best laboratory available, deep human and environmental
history. Three graduate students will assist in this analysis and use the site’s
data for their dissertations. Continuing a long tradition, Kelly will use the
site’s analysis in public lectures to discuss the impact of environment and
population on human behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs existing
data, e.g., pollen cores from nearby lakes and a regional database of
radiocarbon dates, to reconstruct environment and regional human population. The
project’s main contribution is analysis of evidence of human behavioral change
based on data recovered from an archaeological site, Alm Shelter, recently
excavated by Kelly and his team in Wyoming’s Bighorn Mountains. Alm Shelter
provides a 12,000-year record of human use, and, lying beneath an overhanging
cliff, is dry and thus provides excellent preservation of organic materials.
Often, the layers of earth that comprise a site have been disturbed, with
artifacts moved about by burrowing animals or human activities such as digging
pits. Thinking of an archaeological site as a book that one reads from the
bottom up, such disturbances move paragraphs – artifacts and bones – from one
chapter to another, making the book difficult to read. But that is not the case
at Alm Shelter; this site’s layers are intact and accumulated at a slow rate
that remained constant over time. This permits a unique analysis. Archaeologists
use a statistical method known as an “age-depth model” to assign an age-range to
artifacts based on their depth. Given this site’s careful excavation, a tight
age-range can be assigned to literally every single artifact, bone, and other
item recovered from the site. This allows a new analytical approach, one where
the changing abundances of artifacts and other remains can be examined as
distributions of age-ranges. These distributions can then be statistically
analyzed to determine when different kinds of artifacts, such as projectile
points, or different kinds of animal remains are changing in sync and how those
changes relate to the known environmental and human population changes of the
region’s past. Using artifacts, and discarded plant and animal remains as
evidence of past human behavior, this analysis provides a way to examine how
behavior changed in relation to environmental changes and human population
density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.