* 1939380
* CRII:CSR: Enabling High-Performance Deep Learning Computing System via Software and Hardware Co-Optimized Reconfiguration
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Chenchen Liu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2023
* USD 174,700.00

Deep learning (DL) technology has much success in today's artificial
intelligence (AI) applications. However, executions of DL algorithms consume
much computational and energy resources because of the large-scale data and
complex computation models. The project addresses this challenge with a hardware
and software co-optimization strategy. A high-performance deep learning system
is enabled with the capability to select automatically the best parameter
configurations of advanced algorithms based on the hardware architecture of the
computing system.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to solve a fundamental
challenge of a DL based computing system where intensive computations are
introduced while the computing resources and the real-time budget are limited.
Task 1 proposes an algorithm-driven DL computing system configuration based on a
full parameter deep learning compression and a hardware-friendly algorithm
deployment. Task 2 investigates an architecture-driven DL computing system
configuration based on DL computation performance profiling and modeling on
various hardware architectures. The success of the project paves the design
foundation of a DL based intelligence system by considering the constraints of
data, algorithm, and hardware platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
provides benefit to computational intelligence (CI), embedded systems, mobile
intelligence, machine learning, and computing architecture. The project will
further promote software and hardware co-development towards highly efficient
intelligence systems for real-world artificial intelligence applications. The
project will also benefit a wide range of communities by means of seminar
broadcasts, a short course program, and children and high-school programs. The
education plan will enhance existing curricula and pedagogy by integrating
interdisciplinary modules with innovative teaching practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the project, including data and
experiments results, will be distributed in the form of journal articles,
conference proceedings, workshops, invited presentations and student thesis. The
results related with developed curriculum will also be published in appropriate
education conferences. The simulators built for validation and simulation code
will also be available to the public. Copies of these papers, presentations,
models, simulation codes and course notes will be placed on a research page
(http://if-lab.org/awards/crii2018) associated with this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.