* 1939006
* EAGER: Theory and Practice of Risk-Informed Cyber Insurance Policies: Risk Dependency, Risk Aggregation, and Active Threat Landscape
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Mingyan Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2022
* USD 215,997.00

This project aims to tackle some of the most significant challenges facing the
design and adoption of risk-informed cyber insurance policies; these challenges
include cyber risk interdependence, correlated risk and value-at-risk, and a
fast-changing threat landscape. The research has the potential to bring about a
paradigm shift in the design of cyber insurance policies so that they are used
as effective economic and incentive mechanisms consistent with cyber risk
realities; in doing so it also introduces new ways of thinking about
cybersecurity in a holistic, risk management context. Consequently, the research
has a direct impact on the current practice by cyber insurance carriers and thus
the potential to dramatically change the status quo. It has broader impacts on
public policy and incentive mechanism design aimed at encouraging the adoption
of better cybersecurity frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda
focuses on challenges including risk interdependence, correlated risk and value-
at-risk, and a fast-changing threat landscape, and is organized into four thrust
areas. The first is on risk-informed insurance policies, which is focused on
establishing a solid theoretical foundation for a new family of cyber insurance
policies by using contract theory and the modeling of dependent risks. The
second is on the modeling of correlated risk and risk aggregation, aimed at
quantifying the aggregated risk of a portfolio of insurance policies, by using
the notion of conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) developed in the financial
engineering field. The third is on the development of a set of stress test
benchmarks, with the goal of standardizing how insurance policies should be
evaluated in terms of their risk exposure. The fourth is on technology
transition and adoption efforts, which includes the education of insurance
practitioners, building partnerships and identifying early adopters of our
methods as pilots. The research has the potential to bring about a paradigm
shift in the design of cyber insurance policies so that they are used as
effective economic and incentive mechanisms matched with cyber risk realities,
and in introducing new ways of thinking about cybersecurity in a holistic, risk
management context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.