* 1939511
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Landscape Carbon Sequestration for Atmospheric Recovery (LCSAR)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Lucas Silva, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 80,610.00

This project will organize and host a workshop to expand collaboration between
stakeholders in academia, industry, and community sectors to develop natural
solutions to recovering carbon from the atmosphere and sequestering it in
terrestrial ecosystems. The planned title is Landscape Carbon Sequestration for
Atmospheric Recovery (LCSAR) workshop which will be held in fall 2019 at the
University of Oregon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The event will be designed to
stimulate the development of new tools to quantify and accelerate CO2 drawdown
through natural climate solutions by catalyzing data integration in alignment
with industry and land stewardship needs across forestry, farming, ranching, and
wetlands/blue carbon sectors. Research has established that conservation,
restoration, and management that increase carbon storage across forests,
wetlands, grasslands, agriculture and developed lands, can mitigate impacts of
CO2 build up in the Earth's atmosphere. However, critical gaps remain in
translating this knowledge to implementation. To advance the natural CO2
sequestration solutions that are sought, public and private-sector land stewards
require more detailed recommendations, including cost-benefit analyses,
protocols, and technologies that can precisely synthesize data to help
prioritize opportunities that are most likely to maximize investment returns.
The planned workshop has the potential to accelerate innovation and convergence
between private and public sectors to provide carbon drawdown while achieving
co-benefits for economic well-being, biodiversity and natural resource
conservation. Outcomes may include new prototypes and platform ideas to catalyze
investments toward carbon sequestering landscape-based
enterprises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LCSAR workshop will convene leaders from
business, science, the public sector, and key non-profits to assess and
synthesize these needs, including: (i) academic experts in carbon sequestration,
land systems, and social sciences, (ii) industry stakeholders in forestry,
agriculture, livestock, and development (iii) federal, tribal, state, and local
land management agencies, (iv) land trusts and private landowners, and (v)
technology companies and software engineers engaged in developing non-
proprietary knowledge infrastructures. The removal of CO2 from the atmosphere is
limited by laws of physics and ecological processes. Natural rates of net carbon
uptake are slow compared to the rates and amounts of carbon dioxide released by
anthropogenic activity. Emerging scientific data show the need for development
and coordination of strategies to address a national need to remove meaningful
quantities of CO2 from the atmosphere to the land. The LCSAR workshop will
stimulate the use of existing data from NSF-funded networks and other landscape-
based research efforts to create an actionable set of protocols and deliverables
envisioned via robust multi-institutional
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.