* 1939523
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-Line of Sight Geolocation Using Massive MIMO Antenna Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Joseph Farkas, SIGNAL PROCESSING TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2020
* USD 224,749.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to pinpoint a mobile device with greater accuracy to
aid in emergency situations. The technology will focus on improving geolocation
accuracy of mobile devices in rich scattering environments, where current
technology suffers significant degradation. In some situations, the location
accuracy in these degraded environments results in first responders unable to
locate the emergency sufficiently fast, costing lives. The geolocation
technology uses the large antenna arrays expected with the onset of 5G and
leveraging the attendant rich scattering environments to enhance the location
accuracy of current techniques. This level of geolocation accuracy will lead to
many new commercial applications, such as augmented reality and autonomous
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will prove the technical feasibility of the non-line of
sight geolocation technology. There are multiple aspects of this project well-
grounded theoretically, but requiring demonstration as well as research in
algorithms to both improve the performance of the solution and decrease the
necessary processing power. The first area of research is RF phenomenology of:
1) the ability to rely on far-field models; and 2) clustered multipath models.
The second research area is deconstructing a multipath channel to its individual
ray components accurately enough to represent the true electromagnetic
reflections, then using that derived information for geolocation. The goal of
this project is to advance the technology to proof-of-concept demonstration of
both the RF phenomenology and the non-line of sight geolocation algorithms. This
will be accomplished through algorithm development in simulation environments
and further validated with over-the-air experimentation. It is expected that RF
phenomenology models will be refined in this process and fed back into the
simulation environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.