* 1939079
* Planning IUCRC at University of Delaware: Center for Heirarchical Emergent Materials (CHEM)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Norman Wagner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

The Center for Hierarchical Emergent Materials (CHEM) will couple academic
researchers with expertise in chemical synthesis, rheology, morphology,
simulation, and modeling; with industrial manufactures of paints, pigments,
printed electronics, biomedical devices, consumer products, tires and elastomers
to develop a new approach to the design, simulation, and modeling of emergent
multi-hierarchical structures that impact engineered properties. Academic
researchers have been adept at the construction of molecular to nanoscale
architectures for targeted self-assembly. Industrial researchers, on the other
hand, have been equally adept at the manipulation of manufacturing and
application/use conditions to control emergent structures that govern features
like gloss, haze, biocompatibility, electrical and ionic conductivity, and
toughness in engineered materials like paint, reinforced elastomers, inks,
healthcare products and plastics. An example might be phenomena that occur when
paint is processed, stored, applied, and dried. During this process pigment
nano-aggregates and agglomerates may breakup, reform, and finally produce an
emergent network structure that spans atomic to macroscopic scales in a complex
multi-structural hierarchy. Often the multi-hierarchies have time dependence to
their structural maturation and performance, i.e. "4D materials". This is the
case as an ink dries on paper developing a multi-hierarchical structure that
interacts with light. Similar structural hierarchies are produced in tire
manufacturing and lead to a dynamic hierarchy, coupled to the structural
hierarchy, important to road performance. Such complex emergent systems can only
be studied by a team of academic researchers in close interaction with their
industrial partners who can take advantage of the technology which is developed.
Finding parallel approaches in divergent fields, the center will leverage
existing synthetic, processing and simulation approaches in application to new
fields, for instance, taking advantage of knowledge or emergence of structure in
reinforced elastomers to produce new nanocomposite solid electrolytes for
lithium batteries. An undergraduate research program (REU) focusing on
minorities, the handicapped, and women will be associated with the Center, with
students integrated across the three campuses and industrial partners for
research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Hierarchical Emergent
Materials (CHEM) assembles a team of twelve world leaders in research from three
universities, the University of Michigan, the University of Cincinnati and the
University of Delaware. The center will be organized in three thrusts: I.
Disordered Structural Hierarchies including reinforced elastomers, synthetic
skin, and pigments; II. Ordered Structural Hierarchies including semi-
crystalline materials and synthetic approaches to self-assembly; and III.
Surfactants and Coacervates including worm-like micelles, coacervates, and
biometric assembly. The goal of the Center for Hierarchical Materials (CHEM) is
to address chemical and biological products and processes where chemical and
nanoscale manipulation and processing lead to the emergence of complex
hierarchical structures with direct impact on performance. These products are
extremely common across a range of industries, yet have not been studied in a
coherent, interdisciplinary manner, making full use of technical and scientific
expertise and advances. The impact of the center will be in new predictive
simulations and models, new approaches garnered partly by borrowing concepts
across the different disciplines of application, new products and processes that
take advantage of scientific understanding of these dynamic emergent materials.
The University of Delaware has several unique analysis capabilities that will
facilitate the research of faculty, students, and industrial partners who
participate in CHEM. These the Center for Advanced Microscopy (CAMM) and
Microanalysis and the Advanced Materials Characterization Laboratory (AMCL) in
the Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering Laboratory (ISE-Lab). UD is also
home to the Center for Neutron Science (CNS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.