* 1939060
* Geoscience Education Infrastructure Planning Meeting; Northfield, Minnesota - November 2019
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Cathryn Manduca, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2021
* USD 46,812.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The Nation recognizes the need to improve STEM education to
meet the workforce needs of the 21st century, increase the scientific literacy
of its citizens and communities, and improve participation by groups currently
underrepresented in the sciences. These challenges are particularly acute in the
geosciences where: workforce need is predicted to grow; geoscientific literacy
is foundational for an effective response to natural hazards, environmental
challenges, and resources needs; and diversity lags behind other science
disciplines. The cyberinfrastructure and community support infrastructure
provided by SERC and NAGT play a key role in supporting geoscience educators and
the geoscience education research communities in improving geoscience education
and increasing equitable access to learning opportunities. This workshop will
support the evolution of this community infrastructure, maximizing its utility
and reach in meeting these challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;A
workshop will be held to consider the infrastructure needs of the geoscience
education community and make recommendations for future infrastructure
development. A broadly representative group of 30 geoscience educators and
geoscience education researchers will be assembled for a two-day meeting at
Carleton College. Meeting attendees will review the infrastructure support
currently provided to the&lt;br/&gt;geoscience education community by the
Science Education Resource Center (SERC) including its collaborations with the
National Association of Geoscience Teachers (NAGT) and make recommendations
focused on four areas:&lt;br/&gt;1. Strengthening existing infrastructure
elements including the underpinning cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;2. Bringing
the infrastructure into wider use, including addressing any barriers to use by
different&lt;br/&gt;elements of the community.&lt;br/&gt;3. Additions to the
infrastructure that would enhance use including within geoscience
education&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;4. Use of the infrastructure to support
improvements in diversity, equity, and inclusion in
geoscience&lt;br/&gt;education and geoscience education research.&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop recommendations will be shared broadly with the community through a
dedicated website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.