* 1939841
* CoPe: Collaborative Research: EAGER: An analysis of the impacts of sea-level change related flooding on commuting patterns and neighborhood gentrification.
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Mathew Hauer, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 09/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This research investigates how tidal flooding ("nuisance" flooding) related to
sea-level change impacts commuting patterns and how this differentially affects
residents of coastal communities. Commuting patterns vary in the extent to which
they are affected by nuisance flooding because of variation in topography and
other geographic variables. This project provides an estimate of the
differential impact of sea-level change related flooding on communities with
different socio-economic levels by considering how flooding impacts employment
access. The investigators will develop a predictive model to assess how this
differential impact might evolve as flooding increases. Tools developed in the
project can improve the welfare of people living in coastal cities by
identifying road segments, locales, and demographic groups vulnerable to sea-
level change related flooding. The tools will advance national prosperity by
helping cities determine which neighborhoods and business areas are likely to be
impacted by impediments to commuters. Although this project focuses on Miami,
use of publicly available data and models ensures that the approach will serve
the national interest by being easily replicable for other U.S.
municipalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of five activities
that develop a methodology for predicting how road obstruction from sea-level
change related flooding affects commuting patterns, demographics, and the
economic vitality of coastal communities. The first activity is the analysis of
tidal gauge and elevation data to establish how increased flooding over the last
decade contributes to road inundation. The second combines this data with home
and workplace location information and travel time algorithms to estimate the
effect of inundation on commuting times. The third adds socio-economic data to
the existing analysis to determine whether marginalized populations have been
disproportionately affected by flooding. The fourth activity takes advantage of
changes over time to establish a relationship between road obstruction and the
spatial allocation of workers' homes and destinations. Specifically, the project
determines how adjustments in commuting times alter neighborhood demographic
composition and how this may affect gentrification. The research also identifies
whether areas that are sources of employment are affected by flood risk. The
fifth activity is forward looking, projecting how increases in sea-level change
related flooding are likely to affect different demographic groups under current
and projected population levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.