* 1939289
* EAGER: Intrinsically Ferromagnetic Functional Cellulose Nanocrystals in Confinement
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Mohan Srinivasarao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/28/2023
* USD 262,478.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nano-structured cellulose or "nanocellulose" is
readily produced through the breakdown of cellulose fibers, which are ubiquitous
in our surroundings. One form of nanocellulose, namely, cellulose nanocrystals
(CNCs), are high aspect ratio, highly crystalline materials, whose mechanical
properties have made them attractive candidates for a wide range of applications
including polymer composites and personal care products. The high aspect ratio
of CNCs imparts them with the ability to self-assemble into liquid crystalline
(LC) phases which provide opportunities for the development of new sensors and
optical technologies. This proposal explores the design and development of a
class of functionalized CNCs, namely CNCs uniformly functionalized with earth
abundant magnetic materials which will lead to the development of ferromagnetic
alternatives. Low-cost, ferromagnetic materials based upon sustainable bio-
derived materials could transform the world in which we live, creating
opportunities for new optical devices that could be manipulated in the presence
of magnetic fields, impacting technologies ranging from sensors to optical
signaling and transmission. The proposed research provides opportunities for the
integration of research and education in technologies of societal significance.
In addition, students engaged in the program will be exposed to a
multidisciplinary experience at the intersection of chemical engineering,
materials science, materials chemistry and materials physics. The student
participants will be cross-trained and where necessary will further expand their
knowledge and experience through relevant additional
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The propensity
of cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) to organize into liquid crystalline structures
offers opportunities for the design of entirely new classes of sustainable
materials that exhibit phenomena that may enable new classes of optical devices.
Functional CNCs, in particular, offer opportunities for creating not only new
classes of optical devices, but also magneto-optical devices. This project will
explore the design of functionalized, intrinsically magnetic CNCs whose
structure could be influenced by the presence of electrical and/or magnetic
fields. It is proposed that a thin conformal layer of metals such as Ni, Cr, and
Fe on the surface of the biomaterial will lead to creation of a cholesteric
phase, which will provide a demonstration of an ordered fluid possessing
spontaneous magnetization in the absence of an external magnetic field. Such a
discovery will create entirely new research directions and opportunities for
technology development. In an effort to understand and exploit the range of
opportunities, ferromagnetic cholesteric liquid crystals will be created and the
coupling between the magnetic moment and director of the chiral nematic phase
will be investigated. In addition, the self-assembly of the functional CNCs in
confined geometries, specifically spherical and cylindrical geometries will be
interrogated. These studies will be combined with investigations into
confinement of the liquid crystalline phase in thermoresponsive, spherical
microgel particles. The proposed investigation will afford new, sustainable
advanced optical technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.