* 1939955
* SBIR Phase I:  Fabrication of Vertical Junction GaN FET Devices via Pulsed Laser Annealing Process
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Richard Brown, JR2J, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2021
* USD 224,878.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be the creation of a more efficient power grid by enabling smaller
increased efficiency power converter circuits and units. Additionally, more
efficient power converters will enable greater efficiency in the manufacturing
and electric vehicle industries, as well as a more efficient power grid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will investigate the use of a pulsed
excimer laser annealing (PLA) technique to activate implanted dopants and repair
implant induced damage in GaN films grown on GaN substrates for the fabrication
of vertically conducting, high voltage field effect transistors. The ultimate
goals of this Phase I project are to develop viable prototypes for an
enhancement mode vertically conducting field effect transistor using the PLA
technique. The key application of these devices will be in switched mode power
supplies, which can be made smaller than current state of practice since
vertical GaN devices will be associated with smaller parasitics. The development
of a scalable prototype vertical gallium nitride (GaN) vertical Field Effect
Transistors (FETs) will open a path toward scaled production and
commercialization of higher breakdown devices will lead to smaller, more
efficient power supplies and converter end products in the power electronics
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.