* 1939505
* Collaborative Research: Biology-guided neural networks for discovering phenotypic traits
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Ali Maga, Seattle Children's Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 592,152.00

Unlike genetic data, the traits of organisms such as their visible features, are
not available in databases for analysis. The lack of machine-readable trait data
has slowed progress on four grand challenge problems in biology: predicting the
genes that generate traits, understanding the patterns of evolution, predicting
the effects of ecological change, and species identification. This project will
use advances in machine learning and machine-readable biological knowledge to
create a new method to automatically identify traits from images of organisms.
Images of organisms are widely available, and this new method could be used to
rapidly harvest traits that could be used to solve the grand challenges in
biology. Large image collections and corresponding digital data from fishes will
be used in this study because of the extensive resources available for these
organisms. The new machine learning model can be generalized to other
disciplines that have similar machine-readable knowledge, and it will help in
explaining the results of artificial intelligence, thus advancing the field of
computer science. The new method stands to benefit society in application to
areas such as agriculture or medicine, where trait discovery from images is
critical in disease diagnosis. The project will support the education of
students and postdocs in biology, computer science, and information science. It
will disseminate its findings through workshops, presentations, publications,
and open access to data and code that it produces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will leverage advances in state-of-the-art machine learning to develop a
novel class of artificial neural networks that can exploit the machine readable
and predictive knowledge about biology that is available in the form of
phylogenies and anatomy ontologies. These biology-guided neural networks are
expected to automatically detect and predict traits from specimen images, with
little training data. Image-based trait data derived from this work will enable
progress in gene-phenotype mapping to novel traits and understanding patterns of
evolution. The resulting machine learning model can be generalized to other
disciplines that have formally structured knowledge, and will contribute to
advances in computer science by going beyond black-box learning and making
important advances toward Explainable Artificial Intelligence. It may be
extended to applied areas, such as agriculture or the biomedical domain. The
research will be piloted using teleost fishes because of many high-quality data
resources (digital images, evolutionary trees, anatomy ontology). Methods for
automated metadata quality assessment and provenance tracking will be developed
in the course of this project to ensure the results and processes are
verifiable, replicable and reusable. These will broadly impact the many domains
that will adopt machine learning as a way to make discoveries from images. This
convergent research will accelerate scientific discovery across the biological
sciences and computer science by harnessing the data revolution in conjunction
with biological knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the
National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity, and is jointly supported by the HDR and the Division of Biological
Infrastructure within the NSF Directorate of Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.