* 1939393
* Peer Treatment across the Transition to Kindergarten: A test of Biological Sensitivity to Context Theory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Dianna Murray-Close, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 426,713.00

Understanding successful transitions to kindergarten is a critical task that has
clear implications for children’s well-being. Early adverse experiences appear
to interfere with children’s school readiness. However, research has largely
ignored a critical environmental context – the peer group – in the development
of school readiness during the transition to kindergarten. This project is among
the first to examine how both positive and negative peer treatment relate to
multiple indicators of school readiness (i.e., academic skills, social skills,
planning and controlling behavior), and in turn, later school functioning. In
addition, this project is among the first to examine whether children that are
more biologically reactive to their environment are more strongly affected by
both negative and positive peer experiences. Many children begin kindergarten
without the appropriate skills needed to succeed; this project will examine how
the peer group may be shaping school readiness during this important transition,
and which children are most strongly affected by this critical environmental
context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is a multi-method, short-term
longitudinal study using psychophysiological and behavioral measures in a sample
of 4-5-year-old children attending preschool and making the transition to
kindergarten. A diverse sample of 160 children will be assessed at three time
points. The key objectives are to examine how peer treatment during preschool
impacts school readiness, and in turn, kindergarten school functioning. In
addition, the project will investigate whether peer experiences are most
impactful among physiologically reactive youth. This work has the potential to
highlight factors that promote adaptive school readiness and positive academic
and social-emotional outcomes in diverse samples of preschoolers. This project
will provide critical training in developmental science for ethnically and
racially diverse graduate and undergraduate research assistants; these formative
experiences have the potential to shape the next generation of scientists.
Moreover, the proposed project has the potential to impact a significant portion
of children, families, and schools within society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.