* 1939063
* EAGER: NSF-BSF: Quorum Biosensing Using Magnetic Field-Activated Molecular Machines
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Evgeny Katz, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2023
* USD 186,912.00

Communication of bacterial cells to each other, called quorum sensing, is an
important mechanism to control their population. By "talking" to each other with
chemical signals, bacterial cells can decide if the present conditions are
favorable for their multiplication and formation of biofilms. Detection and
inhibition of the quorum sensing provides novel possibilities for treating
bacterial infections with theranostics (combination of diagnostics and therapy).
This EAGER project addresses fundamental aspects of the quorum sensing analysis
and its inhibition based on a nano-technological approach using molecular
"machines" assembled on magnetic nanoparticles and activated at a distance with
an external magnetic field. Success will open future biomedical applications and
other potential applications in environmental studies (e.g., for the analysis
and enhancement of water remediation efficiency) and homeland security (such as
preventing bioterrorism).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quorum sensing is a mechanism of
gene regulation triggered by small molecules sensed by bacteria in order to
control the density of bacterial population depending on available resources.
Disruption of this mechanism using small molecules is a novel strategy to combat
pathogenic bacteria. The importance and advantage of identifying such potential
drugs is that by signaling bacteria with "disinformation", bacteria are not
threatened, hence have no incentive to develop resistance to the drug (unlike
with conventional antibiotics). Thus, these drugs are expected to be in the
forefront of antibacterial treatments, when antibiotics could not be used
anymore. The proposed research program will make use of a novel class of
Magnetic Field-activated Molecular Machines that will be developed within the
project framework. These new machines will be used as unique biosensor devices
that will enter the cells and will report (upon magnetic stimulation) on the
concentration of different genes in their transcribed form (mRNA) that are in
charge of sensing between bacteria. The reporting signal will be fluorescent and
will be quantified. The fluorescent signal will be an indication of the
quantities of mRNA molecules that exist in the cells. This approach can be taken
both for the quantification of multiple genes, but also for the screening of
potential drugs (out of potential drug libraries) that inhibit the sensing of
small molecules between bacteria. Since in vivo quantification of mRNA is
considered a realistic representation of the state of cells at a given time
point, this approach can be expected to be highly productive in the analysis of
quorum sensing in bacteria and then its inhibition. The expected results will
include novel quorum sensing inhibitors that may be used as new antibacterial
reagents to fight Pseudomonas aeruginosa related infections (in the future other
bacterial infections). Specific objectives include: (i) a proof of concept that
the molecular machines described can enter bacterial cells and detect mRNAs,
(ii) specific detection of mRNAs and their quantification, (iii) biosensing of
low concentrations of mRNAs upon down regulation of quorum sensing in the
presence of inhibitors, (iv) and the use of these molecular machines in high-
throughput screens of quorum sensing inhibitors operating as novel anti-
bacterial drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.