* 1939559
* EAGER:  Explaining species coexistence from first principles of ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Caroline Farrior, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2024
* USD 398,623.00

The coexistence of species has long fascinated ecologists. It seems reasonable
to think that one species should be better at functioning in the environment
than others and become dominant, however, this is not always the case in nature.
Plant species commonly coexist in natural systems in large numbers, and this
diversity contributes to many important ecosystem services, including soil
retention, the pollination of nearby crops, and carbon storage. Our ability to
predict species coexistence is limited. Many theories have been developed to
explain why plant species might coexist under the particular circumstances we
find them in, but none is able to predict that coexistence directly from first
principles of ecology, i.e. the fundamental mechanisms that govern ecosystem
function universally. In order to predict how ecosystems around the globe will
react to, and thus further affect, environmental variability, we need to
understand them on this fundamental level. New theoretical models will be
developed, and will rely on expanded first principles of ecology. The research
will result in the training of graduate students as well as a postdoctoral
researcher in mathematical ecology. Additionally, the research will engage and
train high school teachers in hypothesis testing and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the
role of three specific mechanisms in generating species coexistence:
successional dynamics (the changing environment due to regrowth of a plant
community that follows a disturbance event), plant-herbivore interactions (the
co-evolution of plants and their natural enemies), and limitations to
evolutionary optimization (the reality of small sample sizes and changing
environments that keep plants from evolving into the perfect species for a
specific environment). The research will build simple models of plant
interactions with one another and their environment. This will incorporate only
assumptions that reflect the first principles of ecology: (1) that individual
growth rates and population sizes are generally limited by resources, (2) that
there is variation in the input rate of resources to environments, (3) that
species depend on other trophic levels, driven in their own right by strong
positive biological feedbacks, (4) that there are hard physical and/or
physiological constraints on species, and (5) that individuals that have more
offspring than their neighbors better resemble the traits of individuals in
future generations (individual-based competition or evolution by natural
selection). The research will test whether and how species coexistence may arise
from these principles. Specific predictions of coexistence will be compared with
data wherever possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.