* 1939334
* PAWR Platform AERPAW: Aerial Experimentation and Research Platform for Advanced Wireless
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Tommaso Melodia, Northeastern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Murat Torlak
* 08/31/2024
* USD 10,894,403.00

This project will create a city-scale platform for advanced wireless research to
be deployed over the period 2019 - 2024 in Raleigh, North Carolina. The
platform, called AERPAW: Aerial Experimentation and Research Platform for
Advanced Wireless, will focus on new use cases for advanced wireless
technologies that are emerging in the unmanned aerial systems (UAS) space. While
most UAS operations presently require visual line-of-sight (VLOS) between a
pilot and the drone, cellular networks and advanced wireless technologies will
enable beyond-VLOS and autonomous UAS operations, unleashing three-dimensional
mobility for UAS. In this project, a world-leading team of researchers will
create a national center of excellence to provide fundamental knowledge and a
vital national testbed focused on this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AERPAW will
be a one-of-its-kind aerial wireless experimentation platform and a proving
ground and technological enabler for emerging innovations, including package
delivery platforms and urban air mobility. It will accelerate development,
verification, and testing of transformative advances and breakthroughs in
telecommunications, transportation, infrastructure monitoring, agriculture, and
public safety, among others. AERPAW will bring new business use cases enabled by
UAS and Internet of Things (IoT) technologies and will become a long-term
national asset for decades to come. The data collected from AERPAW will be an
invaluable resource for educators, and graduate/undergraduate students across
the nation. Summer workshops, short-term and long-term student design
challenges, as well as remote laboratories will spearhead new approaches to
engage and educate students at all levels as well as the local and national
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team is led by researchers at
North Carolina State University (NCSU) along with researchers participating from
Mississippi State University and Wireless Research Center of North Carolina.
With oversight from the Platforms for Advanced Wireless Research (PAWR) Project
Office, this team will design, deploy, operate, and sustain AERPAW. AERPAW will
have two major goals: 1) to accelerate the integration of UAS into the national
air-space; and 2) to enable new advanced wireless features for UAS platforms,
including flying base stations for hot spot wireless connectivity. The team will
design, deploy, and operate a revolutionary UAS experimentation platform to
support advanced research on 5G wireless systems and beyond, in addition to
supporting experiments on mobility-as-a-service. AERPAW will provide accessible
ground and aerial wireless nodes for users, the possibility for users to bring
their own nodes or network components, automated experiment
specification/execution, as well as data provisioning/management. Information on
the access to this PAWR platform is available on
https://www.advancedwireless.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.