* 1939050
* Phase II IUCRC at University of Central Florida: Center for Multi-functional Integrated System Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Jiann-Shiun Yuan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2025
* USD 552,000.00

The broader impacts of the Multi-functional Integrated System Technology (MIST)
Center are to develop the hardware technologies necessary to propel the next
generation of smart systems. The center focuses on translating novel materials,
devices, and manufacturing processes into multi-functional integrated systems
via collaboration with industry and government partners. The MIST Center targets
pre-competitive research along the entire stack from emerging materials,
electron, magnetic, acoustic, photonic, microelectromechanical, and photonic
devices, to circuits and architecture needed to tackle complex challenges in
developing the hardware underlying the Internet of Things (IoT). The Center
trains the next generation of graduate students versed in the center's
precompetitive research, actively recruits and mentors participants from
underrepresented groups in science and engineering, and fosters public-private
research networks across multiple academic, industrial, and government
organizations. The UCF Site will expand a STEM- and diversity-focused
undergraduate effort including Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) and
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET), as well as interacting with industry
partners through graduate student internships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed MIST Industry University Cooperative Research Center will be structured
around five technology thrust areas – sensing, computing, wireless, power, and
integration – to drive system technologies such as wearable devices, IoT
systems, sensor networks, and "mist computing", bringing computing hardware to
the sensor node and is the logical progression of the IoT ecosystem beyond cloud
computing and fog computing. The MIST center will address specific technology
challenges such as high-speed communication; self-powered, edge-of-the-node
sensing; energy-efficient, low-power computing; advanced networking; and system
integration. The UCF Site will focus on interdisciplinary research including
power semiconductor devices, 3D through glass via (TGV) reliability, 5G radio
frequency circuits, silicon nanowire and chemical sensors, and optical devices
for LiDAR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.