* 1939889
* Articulating Complex Science: The Case of Sea Level Rise; Washington, District Columbia; Spring or Fall 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Jay Austin, Environmental Law Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2022
* USD 79,992.00

This project uses funds to convene a 1.5-day interdisciplinary workshop in
Washington, D.C. at which scientists, lawyers, and journalists will explore
differing approaches to articulating a complex science topic, such as sea level
rise, within the cultural norms of their professions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this workshop are to: (1) identify and facilitate communication
strategies that effectively convey the science of sea level rise and inform
policy and legal discussions; (2) help legal experts and policymakers gain
better understanding of the science of sea level rise; and (3) highlight the
challenges in understanding and communicating the uncertainties of the science
of sea level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop uses sea-level rise as a
case study because the topic is scientifically complex and is the basis for
discussions in the larger civil society regarding cause, effect, mitigation, and
adaptation. These discussions necessarily involve scientists, engineers,
planners, policy makers, attorneys, and journalists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Workshop conveners will develop discussion materials for use at the Workshop and
disseminate these materials, along with discussion outcomes,
afterwards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.