* 1939038
* Planning IUCRC at University of Cincinnati: Center for Hierarchical Emergent Materials (CHEM)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Gregory Beaucage, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

The Center for Hierarchical Emergent Materials (CHEM) will couple academic
researchers with expertise in chemical synthesis, rheology, morphology,
simulation, and modeling; with industrial manufactures of paints, pigments,
printed electronics, biomedical devices, consumer products, tires and elastomers
to develop a new approach to the design, simulation, and modeling of emergent
multi-hierarchical structures that impact engineered properties. Academic
researchers have been adept at the construction of molecular to nanoscale
architectures for targeted self-assembly. Industrial researchers, on the other
hand, have been equally adept at the manipulation of manufacturing and
application/use conditions to control emergent structures that govern features
like gloss, haze, biocompatibility, electrical and ionic conductivity, and
toughness in engineered materials like paint, reinforced elastomers, inks,
healthcare products and plastics. An example might be phenomena that occur when
paint is processed, stored, applied, and dried. During this process pigment
nano-aggregates and agglomerates may breakup, reform, and finally produce an
emergent network structure that spans atomic to macroscopic scales in a complex
multi-structural hierarchy. Often the multi-hierarchies have time dependence to
their structural maturation and performance, i.e. "4D materials". This is the
case as an ink dries on paper developing a multi-hierarchical structure that
interacts with light. Similar structural hierarchies are produced in tire
manufacturing and lead to a dynamic hierarchy, coupled to the structural
hierarchy, important to road performance. Such complex emergent systems can only
be studied by a team of academic researchers in close interaction with their
industrial partners who can take advantage of the technology which is developed.
Finding parallel approaches in divergent fields, the center will leverage
existing synthetic, processing and simulation approaches in application to new
fields, for instance, taking advantage of knowledge or emergence of structure in
reinforced elastomers to produce new nanocomposite solid electrolytes for
lithium batteries. An undergraduate research program (REU) focusing on
minorities, the handicapped, and women will be associated with the Center, with
students integrated across the three campuses and industrial partners for
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of the Center for Hierarchical
Materials (CHEM) is to address mostly chemical and biological products and
processes where chemical and nanoscale manipulation and processing lead to the
emergence of complex hierarchical structures with direct impact on performance.
These products are extremely common across a range of industries, yet have not
been studied in a coherent, interdisciplinary manner, making full use of
technical and scientific expertise and advances. The scope of the center is in
areas where rheology, structure, simulation, and modeling can yield insight and
discovery for complex emergent structures such as in paint, inks, reinforced
elastomers, complex personal health care products, polymer compounds,
heterogeneous catalysts, and printed electronics to name a few areas. All of
these areas rely on chemical and nano-scale engineering followed by processing
that lead to the emergence of nano-to micron-scale multi-hierarchical structures
tied directly to engineering properties. The impact of the center will be in new
predictive simulations and models, new approaches garnered partly by borrowing
concepts across the different disciplines of application, new products and
processes that take advantage of scientific understanding of these dynamic
emergent materials. The Center for Hierarchical Emergent Materials (CHEM)
assembles a team of researchers from three universities, the University of
Michigan, the University of Cincinnati and the University of Delaware. The
center will be organized in three thrusts: I. Disordered Structural Hierarchies
including reinforced elastomers, synthetic skin, and pigments; II. Ordered
Structural Hierarchies including semi-crystalline materials and synthetic
approaches to self-assembly; and III. Surfactants and Coacervates including
worm-like micelles, coacervates, and biometric
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.