* 1939502
* Littoral Greening: A Workshop to Understand the Drivers of Attached Filamentous Algal Blooms in Pristine Lakes; October, 2019 Lake Tahoe (CA-NV, USA)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Yvonne Vadeboncoeur, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 47,896.00

A puzzling pattern of coastal degradation has been observed in pristine, high
water quality lakes around the world, including Lake Tahoe in the USA, Lakes
Wakitipu and Taup&amp;#333; in New Zealand, and Lake Baikal in Russia. The
nearshore and bottom edges of lakes are greening even though the watersheds in
which these lakes reside have relatively low disturbance and the lakes are low
in nutrients. Initial observations suggest the greening is from excessive growth
of algae and bacteria that are now having consequences for the ecology of these
lakes and the people that rely on them. So why are these algal blooms now common
in lakes with high water quality? They are likely a result of many factors that
are now interacting in new ways as environmental changes progress. This workshop
brings together experts from a many science disciplines to discuss these changes
and identify key questions that must be answered to explain why lakes with good
water quality are suddenly changing. The organizers will recruit
underrepresented members in science to engage in the topic and create a summary
paper of the workshop findings in a publication that is accessible to the public
via the internet. A special science session within at least one international
science meeting will be created to engage scientists and managers of lake
systems to continue discussions on this topic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the
first workshop to address this emerging issue in ecosystem science. The primary
workshop goals are to develop conceptual models to explain why usually
inconspicuous filamentous algae are suddenly proliferating to nuisance levels in
the nearshore-bottom of lakes. The conceptual models will be developed through
discussions around basic research questions that highlight the potential
mechanisms contributing to filamentous algae growth including but not limited to
1) How do climatically-induced changes in physical conditions affect nutrient
and sediment dynamics in the nearshore zone? 2) Are remote lakes experiencing
increased nutrient loading from anthropogenic groundwater pollution? 3) What is
the role of animal grazers and changing biological communities in contributing
to bottom algae growth? 4) Do moderate increases in nutrient availability
associated with lakeshore development and atmospheric loading favor the growth
of filamentous green algae and cyanobacteria? A series of premeetings via video
conference will occur prior to the in-person meeting to maximize discussions and
development of the conceptual models and answers to the key questions identified
for this emerging issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.