* 1939067
* CAREER: Organizational Capacity and Capacity Building for Cyberinfrastructure Diffusion
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Kerk Kee, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 241,926.00

The vision behind advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI) is that its development,
acquisition, and provision will transform science and engineering in the 21st
century. However, CI diffusion is full of challenges, because the adoption of
the material objects also requires the adoption of a set of related behavioral
practices and philosophical ideologies. Most critically, CI-enabled virtual
organizations (VOs) often lack the full range of organizational capacity to
effectively integrate and support the complex web of objects, practices, and
ideologies as a holistic innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines
the various manifestations of CI related objects, practices, and ideologies, and
the ways they support CI implementation in scientific VOs. Using grounded theory
analysis of interviews and factor analysis of survey data, this project will
develop and validate a robust framework/measure of organizational capacity for
CI diffusion. The project's empirical focus will be the NSF-funded Extreme
Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE; https://www.xsede.org/), a
nationwide network of distributed high-performance computing resources.
Interviews and surveys will solicit input from domain scientists, computational
technologists, and supercomputer center administrators (across e-science
projects, institutions, and disciplines) who have experience with adopting and
using CI tools within the XSEDE ecosystem. The project will generate a series of
capacity building strategies to help VOs increase the organizational capacity
necessary to fully adopt CI. Findings will help NSF and other federal agencies
to improve existing and future CI investments. This project may also have
implications for open-source and commercial technologies that harness big data
for complex simulations, modeling, and visualization analysis.