* 1939086
* Darwinism from Artificial Genomes
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Steven Benner, Foundation for Applied Molecular Evolution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,374,132.00

A decade ago, NASA commissioned the National Academy to survey what was known
about the limits of life, develop a general theory of life, and suggest ways
that alien life might be found in the cosmos. The Academy recommended that
synthetic biology be a tool to address such big questions in life science.
Synthetic biology goes beyond descriptive biology, which investigates only the
one example of life that the natural history on earth has given us. This project
implements synthetic biology to examine the plausibility of alternatives to DNA,
which is the primary unit of heredity of life on earth. This project also
emphasizes a public outreach effort and the training of early career scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel synthetic chemical system that supports Darwinian
evolution will be delivered through this project, which fits the MCB emphasis on
"synthetic biology…capturing the power of mechanistic, quantitative, and
evolutionary approaches". The "alien" Darwinian biopolymer will have four
informational building blocks (PZBS, hypothesized as an optimal number), a
polyelectrolyte backbone (hypothesized necessary for Darwinism), and inter-
heterocycle hydrogen bonding (hypothesized required for directionality) in the
transfer of genetic information as standard GACT DNA does. This will be the
first example of a Darwinian system that does not include any natural building
blocks. Further, PZBS DNA adds "skinny" and "fat" pairing to Watson-Crick size-
complementary pairing, informational structures and functionality unavailable to
standard GACT DNA. PZBS DNA will be synthesized chemically and characterized.
Polymerases to support PZBS biopolymers amplification will be evolved by
compartmentalized self-replication. For sequencing, a transliteration technique
to sequence GACTPZ six-letter DNA will be used; creative re-purposing of this
will sequence PZBS DNA. PZBS libraries will then be placed under selection
pressure to evolve functional PZBS molecules. Crystallography will be applied
throughout to advance nucleic acid theory as the PZBS system is
advanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.