* 1939262
* Workshop on Research Themes in Quantum Information in the United States and Europe
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Kenneth Brown, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 02/29/2020
* USD 38,880.00

Quantum information science is revolutionizing the way we approach both
computation and basic science. The U.S. and Europe both have strong quantum
information science programs. Historically, the programs have been distributed
with small group investigators following their own research themes. Recently, a
more organized, strategic approach to quantum information science has arisen.
The European Union in 2018 started the Europe-wide Quantum Flagship project. The
U.S. recently adopted the National Quantum Initiative to coordinate national
quantum research efforts. Both initiatives identified key research themes in
quantum networking, quantum metrology and sensing, and quantum computation and
simulation. They have also prioritized training and education of students to
work in this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging the synergies of these
strategic efforts, this award supports a U.S.-Europe workshop on research themes
in quantum information in Washington, DC in September 2019. The workshop will
bring together prominent researchers from around Europe and the U.S. to two days
of intensive discussion on three key intellectual areas: quantum networking,
quantum computation and simulation, and quantum sensing and metrology. The goal
of the meeting is to identify common themes for cooperation, accelerating the
rate of expansion in knowledge in these areas for the mutual benefit of U.S. and
European societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.