* 1939033
* Phase II IUCRC University of Minnesota: Center for Robots and Sensors for the Human Well-being
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Stephen Guy, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/28/2025
* USD 596,000.00

The NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) on Robots and
Sensors for Human Well-Being (ROSE-HUB) Phase II will play a leadership role in
nurturing and accelerating the deployment of robotics and intelligent sensor
technologies in a wide range of application domains key to the national economy,
e.g., transportation, energy, logistics, manufacturing, and infrastructure and
the well-being of the society, e.g., in healthcare. The ROSE-HUB center will
facilitate center university researchers to work with partners from industry,
government, other universities, and non-profit organizations to seek solutions
to critical real-world challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ROSE-HUB center at
the University of Minnesota will build on recent AI/Machine learning
breakthroughs to develop systems and robots with embedded sensors to exhibit
enhanced au-tonomy and intelligence. Particularly, it will focus on large scale
data generation in the domains of agriculture (for maximizing yield and
protecting the environment), medical (for exploring mental disorders and
independent living), construction (for digitizing and assess work progress), and
innovative UAV robot designs exhibiting unique mobility and energy consumption
characteristics. The project is ready to catalyze bold ideas to propel the
nation to new technological advance-ments in the aforementioned application
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center research will focus on applications
including physical/mental health, robots and sensor systems to assist humans,
innovative robot designs for monitoring and data collection, precision
agriculture, digitization of construction processes, intelligent transportation
systems, etc. Re-search will impact: a) industrial members by inserting research
into product pipelines, b) re-searchers by exploring new ideas and application
domains, c) students by providing hands-on experience and future employment
potential, and d) academic curricula. Additionally, annual technology days will
attract middle school students from underrepresented groups to engineer-ing, and
outreach programs to local K-16 institutions will encourage pursuit of
engineering educa-tion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create hardware
and software and collect experimental data from fixed and mo-bile robots,
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), and sensors. A database for data management and
dissemination will be established. The software components include: (i) system
framework software (e.g., low-level software that operates electro-mechanical
systems, i.e., robots, UAVs, etc.), (ii) software for planning, control,
sensing, and learning algorithms, (iii) software for demon-stration testbeds and
prototypes. The data retention period is five years after the conclusion of the
award. The data will be released as it becomes available to the
http://rosehubiucrc.github.io site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.