* 1939986
* Eager: Tuning Performance in Perovskite Thermoelectric Devices with Organic Radical Dopants
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Bryan Boudouris, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 116,258.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectric devices hold great promise for
the future energy landscape. They convert waste heat into usable electricity and
can provide on demand cooling or heating. Despite their potential, the low
efficiency of thermoelectric devices has limited their adoption. Advances in the
properties of materials used in thermoelectric devices are needed to make this
promising technology a reality. The PIs will investigate a new family of
materials for thermoelectric applications: hybrid metal halide perovskites with
organic and inorganic components. Students will receive training in materials
science and engineering. This project will impact the materials science and
electronics communities and inspire future scientists and engineers dedicated to
sustainable energy solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid
metal halide perovskites are low-thermal conductivity materials with clear
benefits in practical, solution-processed thermoelectric devices from a
performance and cost basis. Yet, little effort has been placed in fabricating
thermoelectric devices from perovskite systems. This lack of study and
implementation is mainly due to the key challenge in finding a means by which to
effectively control the charge carrier concentration and electrical conductivity
of the devices through straightforward doping strategies. The conventional
approach to doping that is focused on atomic substitution in the lattice does
not work for halide perovskites due to charge screening and the defect-tolerant
nature of typical perovskite systems. Therefore, a shift in archetype regarding
doping in perovskite devices must be had in order to overcome this key
challenge. This critical opportunity will be addressed by incorporating radical-
containing ligands into the actual perovskite crystal lattice in order to serve
as intramolecular dopants for the thermoelectric devices. This project is based
on the PIs' prior work in manipulating the optoelectronic properties of
perovskite-based devices by incorporating closed-shell organic ligands into the
crystal structures of the materials and previous success of using radical-based
dopants to enhance the performance of polymer thermoelectric devices. Inclusion
of these radical dopants will allow for the ready tuning of the carrier
concentrations and electrical and thermal conductivities associated with the
semiconducting materials through intramolecular means. This project will enable
manipulation of the key structure-property-performance relationships in a novel
class of printed electronic materials, and in doing so, demonstrate high-
performance devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.