* 1939464
* Electrocatalysis at the electrode-electrolyte interface: a combined DFT and classical force-field approach
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Michael Janik, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 368,427.00

Electrochemistry offers a route to manufacturing fuels and chemicals from
renewable or sustainable energy sources such as solar, wind, or hydroelectric
power. The efficiency, rates, and product selectivity of such electrochemical
processes can be further improved by incorporating catalysts into the
electrochemical technology. Although effective, electrocatalytic manufacturing
processes are highly complex, making it difficult to predict the best
combinations of catalytic materials and operating conditions needed for optimal
performance. The project will develop theoretical and mathematical methods to
understand the energetics of electrocatalytic reactions in liquid solvents,
thereby facilitating the search for improved catalysts and manufacturing
processes. The project also involves training of students at various educational
levels and outreach to underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational methods to model electrocatalytic processes
at the electrode/electrolyte interface are essential to guide rational design.
Much progress has been made in theoretical descriptions of surface-bound
reactant and product states, particularly using density functional theory (DFT).
More recently, advances in describing electrocatalytic transition states have
enabled estimates of reaction barriers. However, in these advances the
description of the surrounding electrolyte is comparatively primitive, despite
the evident importance of solvation effects on reaction rates. The project
combines state-of-the-art DFT methods to compute the transition state, with
classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulation methods to compute solvation free
energies. The enabling concept is to treat the DFT transition state described at
the metal/vacuum interface as a molecule, to be inserted into the electrolyte in
the double layer. MD simulation methods have been developed for solvation free
energies of molecules in solution, by computing the thermodynamic work required
to slowly "turn on" the interactions with surrounding fluid. These methods will
be applied to the transition state itself, as well as to the surface-bound
reactants and products. Relatively polar reactants, transition states, and
products should more strongly interact with solvent and electrolyte ions, and
their free energies lowered accordingly, with corresponding effects on reaction
barriers. These important solvation effects on barriers and reaction rates
depend crucially on proper averaging over local arrangements of water molecules
and ions near the surface. Atomistic MD simulations are uniquely suited to
describe and average over these local arrangements. The first reactions to be
studied with the new methods will include electrocatalytic hydrogen oxidation
and propanol reduction, reactions of technical relevance for fuel cells and
biomass electroreduction. The developed approach will be validated against
available experimental data, including solution phase propanol dehydration
barriers, interfacial water structure, double-layer capacitance, hydrogen
oxidation barriers on single-crystal Pt electrodes, and propanol
electroreduction barriers. Both graduate and undergraduate students will develop
and apply the proposed methods, and receive broad education in electrochemistry,
electronic structure, and molecular modeling. Both investigators will continue
their strong record of mentoring undergraduates in research, which together has
resulted in 48 advised undergraduates who have co-authored 22 peer reviewed
publications over the past 5 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.