* 1939915
* CoPe Conference: HuRaCon: Science at the Intersection of Hurricanes and the Populated Coast
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Jamie Kruse, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 09/30/2021
* USD 99,478.00

Despite progress in protecting people and property in the coastal zone,
population pressure and climate change require a concerted effort to protect
ecological systems while supporting prosperity, livelihoods, and community well-
being. Hurricanes impact diverse groups of people differentially. Hurricane
impacts can exacerbate social and economic inequities and the ability of
vulnerable populations to recover. Geophysical, ecological, engineering and
social scientific research that informs policy intended to mitigate hurricane
impacts has the potential to advance the welfare of all populations. This
conference, which is national in scope, will provide a venue for sharing new
knowledge from a broad range of disciplinary and interdisciplinary approaches to
hurricanes, their impacts, and modes of measuring resilience and recovery.
Promoting resilience of these economically and ecologically important coastal
systems in the future will require effective sharing of knowledge across diverse
stakeholder groups with implications for effective decision-making and policy
development. Conference results will be widely disseminated to researchers,
emergency management professionals, government officials, and the public. The
conference will also support the inclusion of undergraduate and graduate
students in STEM related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this two-day
conference, researchers will have the opportunity to share their findings with a
broad audience on a wide range of hurricane related topics such as flooding,
water quality and health, hurricane damage and losses, and disaster recovery.
Diverse stakeholder groups, including local, state, and federal government
officials, city and emergency managers, and community leaders, will be active
participants in the conference communicating their perspective from the
operational forefront of hurricane response and recovery. The goal of HuRaCon is
to promote high quality science through the discussion of research findings,
ways to move forward in developing and implementing solutions based on the
findings, and advance impactful future research. The conference has three main
objectives: 1) foster effective sharing of knowledge and tools derived from
recent hurricane-related research funded by NSF through its RAPID program; 2)
demonstrate the different research methods, perspectives, quantitative, and
qualitative measurements that contribute to a far richer understanding of
hurricanes and their impacts by promoting interdisciplinary collaboration; and
3) emphasize a user-based focus to increase the utility of research findings
through effective communication and dissemination strategies across diverse
stakeholders and potential users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.