* 1939988
* The factors governing daily near-surface air temperature variability over land
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Karen McKinnon, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2024
* USD 619,945.00

Hot and and cold extremes of surface air temperature have a clear association
with atmospheric circulation patterns, for instance the coldest temperatures
over the continental US are associated with the southward flow of air behind the
polar front while summer heat waves are associated with stalled high pressure
systems. But while the influence of atmospheric circulation is evident from
weather maps, the underlying land surface can also affect the severity of hot
and cold events. For instance the maximum surface air temperature during a heat
wave could be lower due to evaporative cooling if the soil is wet, thus soil
moisture could play an important role in limiting the magnitude of temperature
fluctuations. Other surface properties including snow cover, reflectivity, and
surface roughness are thought to influence surface air temperature variability,
but the extent of the influence of these properties is difficult to
quantify.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the effects of atmospheric
circulation and land surface properties on surface air temperature variability,
seeking to determine 1) the fraction of temperature variability that can be
explained by the large-scale atmospheric circulation alone, and how this varies
as a function of location and season; 2) the key pathways through which the land
surface can influence surface air temperature after controlling for the large-
scale atmospheric circulation; and 3) the extent to which the land surface can
modify the magnitude of extreme events, and may allow for subseasonal to
seasonal predictability. The PIs use statistical methods to generate best-fit
surface air temperature patterns based solely on the atmospheric circulation
aloft, then compare the statistics of these circulation-derived temperature
patterns to the actual temperature statistics to identify regions and seasons
where differences in the two imply a strong role for surface properties. This
observational analysis is followed by numerical experiments with a hierarchy of
models to understand the physical mechanisms through which the land surface
affects temperature variations. The model hierarchy includes the Community
Atmosphere Model (CAM) coupled to the Simple Land Interface Model (SLIM), a land
surface model configured to allows direct control of important land surface
properties. Results of sensitivity studies carried out with CAM-SLIM and other
model configurations are applied to the analysis of recent heat waves in North
America, Europe, and Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperature extremes have
numerous effects on human well being through impacts such as mortality, crop
losses, and infrastructure failure. Better understanding of the role played by
land surface properties in determining the severity of these extremes could
prove useful in anticipating their occurrence, and the extent to which their
frequency and intensity may be affected by climate change. The work will also
benefit the broader scientific community through the development and
dissemination of SLIM, which will be made available as part of a public release
of the Community Earth System Model. The project also includes education and
outreach through the Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and
Science (SOARS) program, and supports a graduate student and a postdoctoral
research associate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.