* 1939113
* Planning IUCRC RPI: Cyber SMART at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Boleslaw Szymanski, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 03/31/2022
* USD 14,996.00

The project will undertake activities to launch a new Industry-University
Cooperative Research Center for cyber research, hosted jointly by Georgetown
University, Stevens Institute of Technology, and Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. The vision of the center is to foster multi-disciplinary
collaborations for the revolutionizing roles of cyber security, management,
applications, regulation, and training (Cyber SMART). These collaborations are
necessary for the laws, policies, and regulations to develop and evolve in
tandem with new cyber technological innovations. Cyber SMART brings researchers
from business, computer science, engineering and law from multiple universities
to collaborate with public and private sector affiliates to define the cross-
disciplinary agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber SMART at RPI brings a range of
complementary capabilities to Cyber SMART, integrating RPI’s well-established
strengths in computer science, data sciences, and quantitative finance. The
methodological thrusts at RPI in machine learning/artificial intelligence,
natural language processing, distributed ledger technologies, and network
analytics, will be utilized to support innovations in payments, lending,
financing, insurance, and trading/investing. Cyber SMART at RPI will also
develop innovations in important segments of the real economy, such as, health
care, supply chains, and green finance. Cyber SMART at RPI will conduct research
on developing and evaluating innovations and their applications to support the
regulatory needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber SMART at RPI team is diverse by
ethnicity, gender and discipline, with each member being committed to enhance
student diversity and cross-disciplinary training. Results of the center’s
projects will be integrated into curriculum of departments across RPI to train
students on risks and advances in cyber systems, financial technologies and
applications. Resources at RPI campus and collaborations with professional
organizations will be utilized for developing research experience for
undergraduates, K-12 outreach, and improving minority and gender diversity of
student body. Cyber SMART at RPI will work with industry affiliates to engage
regulators in guiding cyber and FinTech policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
planning grant will support a workshop held at Stevens, jointly with RPI, to
engage with potential industry affiliates of Cyber SMART to explore research
projects of mutual interest. Stevens has proximity to Manhattan and ties with
the financial industry; RPI is equidistant from Boston and New York City, and
has ties with financial and technology industry; Georgetown is in Washington DC,
with proximity to regulators. The workshop will invite participation from banks,
insurers, regulators, exchanges, and FinTech companies. The content generated
from the workshop, such as agenda, presentations, will be permanently hosted at
Stevens’ Hanlon Financial Systems Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.