* 1939189
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Development and Application of Sr Stable Isotopes as a Novel Tracer of Carbonate Through Subduction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Rita Parai, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2023
* USD 38,549.00

Geological processes play an important role in regulating atmospheric oxygen and
carbon, and thus surface temperatures, on timescales of ten million years and
greater. Carbon is transferred from the surface of the Earth into the mantle by
the process of plate subduction, where oceanic plates carrying carbon-rich rocks
and sediments sink into the mantle. During the initial stages of subduction,
some fraction of the carbon in the sinking plate is removed and transported back
to the Earth's surface in the magmas of subduction-zone volcanoes, such as those
of the Pacific Ring of Fire. To account for the mass balance of the carbon
cycle, and to fully understand variations in Earth's climate on geological time
scales, it is therefore necessary to determine how much subducting carbon is
rapidly returned back to Earth's surface, and how much is instead transported
deep into the mantle. Rates of carbon recycling are difficult to measure
directly, however, because carbon dissolved in magmas is sequestered into a
separate vapor phase during magmatic ascent, traversing through the crust and
into the atmosphere at highly variable rates, and via diffuse pathways. As an
alternative to direct measurements of carbon fluxes through subduction zone
volcanoes, geochemical proxies can be used to estimate the amount of carbon that
was initially present in the magmas. This study will incorporate recent advances
in analytical techniques that will use the strontium isotope system as a proxy,
with applications to carbonate recycling in particular. The proposed work aims
to advance understanding of chemical cycling at subduction zones while promoting
teaching, training, and learning. This project involves mentoring of early-
career researchers from under-represented groups in the Earth sciences, as well
as a first-year Master's student. The proposed work also will build new
collaborative relationships among early career faculty members of UMass Amherst
and Washington University in St. Louis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strontium is a
potentially powerful proxy of carbonate recycling though subduction zones
because it is typically present at high abundances in carbonates relative to the
mantle, and because carbonates have distinct stable Sr isotope compositions. The
project team will develop new procedures for the analysis and interpretation of
the Sr stable isotope system among igneous rocks from volcanic arcs by building
a data framework in the Central American Volcanic Arc (CAVA), where there is a
thick layer of subducting sedimentary carbonate, the volcanic rocks and gases
have been extensively measured and characterized by previous studies, and there
is good geochemical evidence for variable carbonate recycling efficiency.
Combined measurements of Sr stable and radiogenic isotope ratios via double-
spike TIMS will provide the ability to accurately estimate the Sr flux from the
subducting carbonate to the volcanic arc, which can in turn be used to estimate
the rates of carbon recycling. If successful, this study will provide novel
constraints on the global carbon cycle, establish &amp;#948;88/86Sr isotope
systematics among subducting components and their associated volcanics, and
provide the basis for further studies of arc geochemical transport.
&amp;#948;88/86Sr values will be combined with radiogenic Sr isotopes to
accurately determine the total carbonate-derived Sr budget of the arc volcanics
and whether these systems can be used to assess the efficiency of, and the
mechanisms that enable, the recycling of subducting carbonate into volcanic
arcs. If the &amp;#948;88/86Sr system at CAVA provides a benchmark on carbon
recycling through volcanic arcs, then these tracers can be used to constrain the
fate of subducted carbonate in other arcs around the world. Once modern-day
stable Sr isotope arc systematics are established, this proxy can also
potentially be used to assess the variability of subducting carbonate in past
eras, providing transformative insight into the variability of the global carbon
cycle throughout Earth's history. The results of the proposed work will be of
interest to the wide geoscience community, including low-temperature
geochemistry and Earth history communities interested in long-term variations in
surface carbon reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.