* 1939987
* Collaborative Research: MEMONET: Understanding memory in neuronal networks through a brain-inspired spin-based artificial intelligence
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Linbing Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 399,859.00

The brain is arguably the most sophisticated and the most efficient
computational machine in the universe. The human brain, for example, comprises
about 100 billion neurons that form an interconnected circuit with well over 100
trillion connections. Understanding how a multitude of brain functions emerge
from the underlying neuronal circuit will give insights into the operating
principles of the brain. In this award, a multidisciplinary team of systems
biologist, computational biologist, material scientist, neuroscientist, and
machine learning expert will work synergistically to leverage the data
revolution in neuroscience to answer a fundamental question: How does the brain
learn, store, and process information? The team will develop and apply advanced
data analysis algorithms to harness the great volume of neuronal data generated
by the latest imaging and molecular profiling technologies, for elucidating the
neuronal circuits driving brain functions. Computer simulations of a spin-
electronic (spintronic) device will further serve as a platform to validate and
emulate important operational characteristics of such neuronal circuits. The
award sets the groundwork for an interdisciplinary data science research and
educational program that will bring a new and powerful paradigm for studying
brain functions as well as for designing transformative brain-inspired devices
for information processing, data storage, computing, and decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a specific focus on an essential
function of the brain: motor-skill learning. This function emerges from the
underlying circuitry of neurons that governs the activities of molecular signal
transmission and neuronal firing. Importantly, the neuronal circuit in a
mammalian brain is highly plastic and dynamic, features that endow animals with
the ability to respond to myriad external stimulations through learning. By
harnessing the latest data revolution in neuronal imaging, single neuron
molecular profiling, spintronic device simulation, network inference, and
machine learning, a team of multidisciplinary investigators will be supported by
this award to investigate the fundamental principle of neuronal circuit rewiring
that drives brain?s learning function. More specifically, the team sets out to
achieve the following specific tasks: (A) Infer learning-induced rewiring of
large-scale neuronal networks from two-photon calcium imaging data through the
development of novel and powerful network inference algorithms; (B) Build
biochemical-based models of neuronal circuits by integrating molecular profiling
with neuron firing and connectome dynamics; and (C) Develop a spintronic
material network model that emulates learning and memory formation by exploiting
the spin dynamics in spintronic materials. The project seeks to lay the
foundation for the creation of an interdisciplinary data-intensive brain-to-
materials initiative that will be applied to understand and emulate the
operational principles of brain neuronal circuits underlying learning,
cognition, memory formation, and other behaviors. The outcomes of the initiative
will have a paramount impact on the society, not only in our understanding of
the brain and its functions, but also in overcoming current bottlenecks of
existing computing architectures. This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.