* 1939994
* CoPe EAGER: Multi-Scale Exploration of Nutrient Cycles and its Socio-Economic Impacts in Coastal Areas
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sven Kranz, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 09/30/2023
* USD 297,900.00

Excessive nutrients in surface and ocean waters cause nutrient pollution, which
is responsible for water quality degradation in more than 60% of coastal rivers,
bays, and seas in the U.S. With a continuous nutrient supply, certain
phytoplankton species can become disproportionately abundant under distinctive
environmental conditions, forming what is commonly known as "red tides". The
economic impacts of red tides in the U.S. are estimated to be at least tens of
million dollars per year. It is imperative to reduce the risk of red tides and
to increase the associated resilience of coastal communities. Research results
of this project will be disseminated to a broad audience in multiple communities
through outreach to the public and by collaborating with researchers,
practitioners, and decision-makers in county, state and federal agencies. This
project will support two undergraduate students and one postdoctoral researcher
who will be recruited from underrepresented groups in science. The PIs will
incorporate the research results into their classroom teaching and curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct innovative
interdisciplinary research across the coastline boundary between terrestrial and
ocean systems and across the disciplinary boundaries between geosciences,
natural, and social sciences. This project will explore the Energy Exascale
Earth System Model (E3SM) for simulating nutrient fluxes from a terrestrial
system to an ocean system and for linking E3SM-simulated nutrient fluxes to red
tide occurrence in support of socio-economic impact assessment. The goal of this
project is to explore whether E3SM can be used as a new software to simulate
nutrient fluxes at multiple scales for estimating red tide development and
persistence and for assessing socio-economic impacts of red tides under various
environmental and management scenarios. Additionally, the research team will
evaluate whether E3SM can be used as a community tool to facilitate coastal
management. The State of Florida has been chosen as the primary study site for
this project, yet the model can be used along the US coastline. E3SM and its
uses for nutrient pollution study and socio-economic impact assessment can be an
emerging software infrastructure for coastal researchers, decision-makers,
practitioners, and stakeholders to address coastal nutrient pollution
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.