* 1939303
* Anoxygenic Photosynthesis in Cyanobacteria
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Trinity Hamilton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 384,891.00

Understanding the evolution of photosynthesis, the process of using light energy
to convert carbon dioxide (CO2) into biomass, remains an outstanding question. A
number of factors confound our ability to trace the evolution of photosynthesis:
associated observed chemical limitations are not clearly defined in genetic
information and horizontal gene transfer (the transfer of genetic information
between microorganisms) hinders phylogenetic approaches. In the absence of
characterized deeply-branching microorganisms, a robust phylogenomic framework,
and undisputed biosignatures in the rock record, facultative anoxygenic
photosynthesis in extant cyanobacteria represents an opportunity to better
understand and constrain the evolution of photosynthesis. In this project, the
investigator will characterize photosynthesis in an emerging model
cyanobacterium, Leptolyngbya sp. strain hensonii, isolated from an anoxic,
sulfide-rich sinkhole. This research will evaluate the genetic response of
Leptolyngbya sp. strain hensonii to the presence of sulfide (which has been
linked to inhibition of oxygenic photosynthesis) and the potential for a
cyanobacterium to express a single photosystem based on environmental
conditions. Collectively, the data will provide insight into the physiology and
potential success of cyanobacteria prior to the evolution of oxygenic
photosynthesis. The study will examine the role of life in the transformation
and evolution of Earth's geochemical cycles and the evolution of photosynthesis,
which is an outstanding question in geobiology. The project will train a
graduate student and an undergraduate student. In addition, the research team
will develop a demonstration for Market Science to broadly disseminate findings
at Farmers' Markets in and around the Twin Cities area of
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to harvest light and fuel cellular
processes through phototrophy is arguably one the most important biological
innovations in Earth history. Yet, understanding the evolution of photosynthesis
remains an outstanding question in geobiology. Oxygenic photosynthesis is often
cited as the most important microbial innovation having tipped the scale from a
reducing early Earth to an oxygenated world that eventually lead to complex
life. However, oxygenic phototrophs use two reaction centers: Photosystem II and
Photosystem I for light-driven oxidation of water to fuel primary productivity.
In extant sunlit environments where low oxygen concentrations and sulfide
persist, some cyanobacteria can use sulfide as the electron donor to photosystem
I, performing anoxygenic photosynthesis. In the absence of characterized deeply-
branching isolates, a robust phylogenomic framework, and irrefutable
biosignatures in the rock record, facultative anoxygenic photosynthesis in
extant cyanobacteria represents a tractable system for examining the evolution
of photosynthesis including the potential for an early evolving one-photosystem
cyanobacterium. The proposed research plan will integrate a set of physiological
studies coupled with systems biology approaches—transcriptomics and
proteomics—to characterize an emerging model cyanobacterium isolated from a
sulfidic, anoxic environment. The following objectives will guide this work: 1)
define the molecular machinery necessary for anoxygenic photosynthesis; 2)
characterize the effects of sulfide on photosystem II during anoxygenic
photosynthesis; 3) determine oxidation kinetics of sulfide during anoxygenic
photosynthesis; 4) examine the enhancement of carbon fixation in the presence of
sulfide. The proposed research will examine the role of life in the
transformation and evolution of Earth's geochemical cycles and the evolution of
photosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.