* 1939894
* I-Corps: Scalable, Highly Efficient Power-generating Windows: the Future of Urban Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Harry Atwater, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project introduces a
disruptive solar power-generating window design capable of generating clean, on-
site, and abundant electricity directly to commercial buildings and homes. While
utility solar energy offers off-site generation to urban centers, up to 10% is
lost simply due to heat dissipation. And with evolving legislature imposing
stricter requirements on building energy codes, power-generating windows offer
to be one of the most promising avenues for attaining net-zero energy levels. We
plan to scale-up our laboratory-level power-window technology through close
industrial partnerships with individual component manufacturers and customer
segments discovered through the I-Corps award. Through initial relationships
with window manufacturers, our beachhead market will service large-scale
commercial projects in Southern California, shifting the energy landscape toward
a future of abundant, clean energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
uses improved luminescent solar concentrator (LSC) technology to create a highly
efficient power-generating window, indistinguishable from large-area windows.
LSCs absorb incident light via nanoscale particles, called luminophores.
Luminophores (e.g. quantum dots) are a class of particles that, when exposed to
a broad range of light, absorb the high energy portion of the spectrum and re-
emit the light again at lower energies - this re-emitted light is known as
photoluminescence (PL). The target quantum dot in our innovation consists of
InAs/InP/ZnSe - a material that absorbs light across the visible spectrum
(400-700nm) and re-emits as PL at wavelengths in the near-infrared (NIR) regime
(900-1000nm). As such, the re-emitted light is visibly transparent and well
designed for a power-generating window. Luminescent Energy power windows employ
an innovation that consists of four fundamental components: (1) a grid of micro-
scale silicon solar cells, (2) a polymer waveguide with (3) embedded
InAs/InP/ZnSe quantum dot luminophores, and (4) selectively reflecting filters
to trap the majority of the photoluminescence generated by the quantum dot
luminophores and enable competitive window U-values. Our design has been
optimized using experimentally-verified modeling tools, and we have begun
fabrication of each of the four device components
independently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.