* 1939012
* Phase  II IUCRC at University of Virginia: Center for Multi-functional Integrated System Technology (MIST)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Avik Ghosh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,291,098.00

The broader impacts of the Multi-functional Integrated System Technology (MIST)
Center are to develop the hardware technologies necessary to propel the next
generation of smart systems. The center focuses on translating novel materials,
devices, and manufacturing processes into multi-functional integrated systems
via collaboration with industry and government partners. The MIST Center targets
pre-competitive research along the entire stack from emerging materials,
electron, magnetic, acoustic, photonic, microelectromechanical, and photonic
devices, to circuits and architecture needed to tackle complex challenges in
developing the hardware underlying the Internet of Things (IoT). The Center
trains the next generation of graduate students versed in the center's
precompetitive research, actively recruits and mentors participants from
underrepresented groups in science and engineering, and fosters public-private
research networks across multiple academic, industrial, and government
organizations. The UVA Site will expand the development of promotional videos,
career fairs for internships in member companies, minority recruitment events,
and its annual “Truck Touch” event as a hands-on discovery station for
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed MIST Industry University Cooperative
Research Center will be structured around five technology thrust areas –
sensing, computing, wireless, power, and integration – to drive system
technologies such as wearable devices, IoT systems, sensor networks, and "mist
computing", bringing computing hardware to the sensor node and is the logical
progression of the IoT ecosystem beyond cloud computing and fog computing. The
MIST center will address specific technology challenges such as high-speed
communication; self-powered, edge-of-the-node sensing; energy-efficient, low-
power computing; advanced networking; and system integration. The UVA Site will
pursue research in low-power electronics for computing, high speed photonics for
sensing, and thermal management for power mitigation, with applications in the
defense sector, such as AI for target tracking, low-power communication for
battlefield-objective-warrior-network technology, and heat- energy propagation
for microbolometer technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.