* 1939111
* A Virtual Organization to Enhance the Use of CISE Community Research Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Jeffrey Alexander, Research Triangle Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 635,006.00

This award funds the creation of a virtual organization to promote sharing and
use of community research infrastructures by Computer and Information Science
and Engineering (CISE) researchers. The project includes development and
operation of a central resource with information about CISE community
infrastructures, including how researchers can use the resources and participate
in community events. The project also includes organizing annual community
meetings for the researchers who are developing and hosting CISE community
research infrastructures. Computing and information science is a rapidly
evolving field that often requires current, state-of-the-art research
infrastructure to conduct quality, significant research. This project fulfills a
long-standing need to provide accurate and timely information about the
community infrastructures collectively as well as individually and help
researchers determine effective ways to conduct their research, particularly in
an environment where there are limited local research resources available to
them. Providing well-designed and managed community research infrastructure is
one method of enabling a broader, diverse CISE research community to collaborate
and participate in compelling research that will move CISE research frontiers
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a platform where
researchers can learn about new resources and participate in community events to
exchange information on research ideas and use of the infrastructures. It builds
a unique "community of practice" focused on CISE research infrastructure. This
will require research and experimentation to determine the most pressing
community needs, to design modes of communications to streamline information
flows, and to create a platform that enables the formation and growth of new
collaborations across the community. This should provide new avenues for CISE
research and research collaborations, particularly those that focus on emerging
technologies and promote opportunities for unique, new research
directions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.