* 1940543
* America's Geoheritage Workshop II: Identifying, Developing, and Preserving America's Natural Legacy
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Aida Sztein, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2021
* USD 80,000.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;This workshop focuses on the importance of natural and cultural
preservation of Geoheritage sites and their societal relevance. The workshop
outlines the increased impetus and framework for geoscientists to identify
geoheritage sites in need of protection for future generations of geoscientists
as well as public enjoyment. Additionally, building a useful framework for site
description will have the following benefits:&lt;br/&gt;1) As geoheritage sites
include both natural and cultural heritage, they provide opportunities for
geoscientists to connect with sister disciplines (i.e. arts, humanities,
history, ethics, and economics); 2) Geoheritage sites will increase the
visibility of the geosciences to the general public; 3) Geoheritage sites make
field studies accessible for teacher preparation and ongoing professional
development and for local K-12 education. These sites support inquiry- and
discovery-based learning; 4) Field instruction is an important component of
undergraduate instruction for both non-majors and majors. Sites developed by
academic institutions close to their campuses/regular field course sites can be
used for educational and outreach purposes for academic coursework, in
partnership with local K-12 coursework, to share with courses from other
academic institutions, and in collaborative informal educational activities with
a variety of stakeholders; and 5) Geoheritage sites are demonstrated drivers of
sustainable economic community development, allowing&lt;br/&gt;for collaborative
development of geoheritage sites by local governments, civic groups (e.g.
chambers of commerce), and contributing geoscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will build on work performed since 2011 by the U.S.
National Committee for Geological Sciences and its Geoheritage and Geoparks
Advisory Group. The goals of the workshop, to be hosted by West Virginia
University (WVU)'s Beckley campus, are to:&lt;br/&gt;-Survey and share current
strategies and approaches to identify, inventory, and characterize geoheritage
sites across America;&lt;br/&gt;-Discuss possible protocols, common terminology,
and "best practices" for documenting and developing geoheritage sites in state
and local settings;&lt;br/&gt;-Consider suggestions for future work to encourage
development of geoheritage sites as appropriate in diverse local and state
settings;&lt;br/&gt;-Create and support a community of geoscientists and
collaborators from the public and private sectors that is dedicated to
contributing to a coordinated campaign to identify and preserve U.S. geoheritage
sites; and&lt;br/&gt;-Explore ways to encourage use of geoheritage sites by
geoscientists, educators, and the general public through a broad suite of
dissemination strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of the workshop will be
disseminated through a summary National Academies proceedings-in brief, an
online comprehensive, annotated bibliography, related websites, listservs,
newsletters, social media outlets, and publications of sponsoring professional
societies to facilitate the development of geoheritage sites by numerous groups
across America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.