* 1940409
* SBIR Phase I:  Harnessing Untapped Food-borne Microbial Diversity to Rationally Engineer Novel Healthy Foods
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Ravi Sheth, IMVELA CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR project is to validate the technical
and commercial viability of developing a novel fermented food to address
underlying mechanisms associated with Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS). IBS is a
highly disruptive and prevalent disease afflicting approximately 32 million
Americans. Technically, the ability to rationally design a novel fermented food
with defined strain content and specific health and nutritional benefits will be
validated for the first time. Commercially, the taste and acceptability for
consumers will also be verified to ensure strong market demand for the product.
If successful, this proposal will more broadly validate a novel platform for
designing rationally fermented foods with a variety of desirable properties,
including improved health and nutritional qualities, more robust preservation,
and targeted removal of specific compounds/toxins. Although the initial disease
target is IBS, there are many other chronic diseases with strong associative
links to the microbiome; these now constitute 90% of U.S. health care spending
(nearly $4 trillion) and present an urgent area for innovation that this
platform could powerfully impact, both domestically and abroad.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a new platform to precisely engineer novel fermented foods with defined
microbial and metabolite content to improve human health. Fermented foods have
great promise to impact the host gut and microbiome through a variety of
established mechanisms, and have the advantage of high, metabolically active
doses of microbes and the ability to deliver multiple strains along with their
associated bioactive metabolites. However, a key technical hurdle is that it is
not currently possible to precisely define the strain and metabolite content of
a fermented food. This proposal addresses this challenge by leveraging recent
advances in microbial strain isolation, genomic characterization and high
throughput screening. First, next-generation strain isolation techniques will be
applied to food-borne microbes to develop a large and deeply characterized
biobank of previously inaccessible microbial strains. The strains will then be
screened for activity on specific host and microbiome mechanisms. Lead strains
will then be formulated into a food at commercial scale, and the presence of the
strains as well as retention of their associated health properties will be
confirmed. Finally, the taste profile will be validated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.