* 1940333
* Molecules in Classical and Quantized Fields: Improving Time-Dependent Density Functional Approximations and Correlated Electron-Ion Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Neepa Maitra, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 434,389.00

Professor Neepa Maitra of Hunter College, City University of New York (CUNY) is
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry. Dr. Maitra and her research group develop
new methods for simulating the behavior of molecules exposed to light.
Understanding and computationally modeling the motion of electrons and ions in
molecules and solids far from their stable, equilibrium states is necessary for
understanding photovoltaic processes, photocatalysis, radiation damage in
biomolecules, nanoscale conductance devices, time-resolved pump-probe
spectroscopies, and the production of compact light sources. Dr. Maitra's group
develops theoretical methods from first-principles for computational simulations
to reliably and efficiently predict these processes. Dr. Maitra organizes mini-
workshops in electronic structure and dynamics open to the wider New York/New
Jersey area. She trains undergraduate and graduate students in cutting-edge
research and uses innovative peer instruction teaching techniques in her
undergraduate classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Maitra and her research group
are developing new methods for the correlated dynamics of electrons, ions, and
photons, in three aims. In one aim, improved functional approximations for time-
dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) in the non-perturbative regime is
derived. This is built on an exact expression for the exchange-correlation
potential. This research moves TDDFT towards use in real-time dynamics as
confidently as DFT is used for ground-state properties. In the second aim,
practical mixed quantum-classical methods based on the exact factorization
approach for correlated electron-ion dynamics in laser fields are being
constructed that include electronic decoherence and wave packet branching from
first-principles. The third area extends exact factorization to light-matter
systems to gain a fundamental understanding of how field quantization can alter
and control chemical reactions, as well as to develop practical mixed quantum-
classical methods for the dynamics and control of molecules in cavities. The
research impacts topical applications where knowledge and understanding beyond
ground-state electronic structure is needed, including photovoltaic design, and
quantum control of electronic and nuclear dynamics by attosecond or femtosecond
laser fields, or by tuning cavity parameters in polaritonic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.