* 1940102
* Workshop: Applications of Machine Learning to Experimental Mechanics and Materials; Arlington, Virginia; 24-25 September 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Ioannis Chasiotis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nakhiah Goulbourne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,981.00

This grant supports a workshop to explore the use of machine learning with
experimental mechanics and materials. The rapid development of new materials
with complex processing and structure, along with the emergence of new and
potent computer-assisted experimental methods for materials and mechanical
characterization have led to challenges in effectively and efficiently analyzing
very large data sets in order to determine the important parameters that control
the overall mechanical behavior. While established and detailed methodologies,
grounded on materials physics and mechanics, serve as the foundation to evaluate
and design new classes of materials with desirable mechanical properties, Data
Science driven approaches for rapid assessment of important problem parameters
could accelerate materials development and facilitate transitions through rapid
processes for identifying structure-mechanical properties relationships from
large experimental and modeling data sets. Such capabilities can impact new and
emerging manufacturing methods, e.g. additive manufacturing, help us to
understand complex processes in biological material systems, and finally
accelerate the design of mechanically robust material systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop aims at connecting mechanicians with
researchers in the Data Sciences field for a dialogue that could open new
avenues in the field of mechanics of materials, with special emphasis on the
application of machine learning to experimental mechanics. It will bring
together researchers who engage in new, multimodal, experimental methods in
mechanics, with early adopters of machine learning tools in the fields of
materials and mechanics, and leaders from the machine learning community. The
workshop aims at developing a long term perspective for the introduction of Data
Science methods to the field of mechanics of materials. Therefore, a specific
aim is to assess the potential and the limitations of machine learning
techniques in providing guidance and enhanced capabilities to quantify the
contribution of the, often numerous and coupled, parameters governing the
mechanics of complex materials and systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.