* 1940394
* SBIR Phase I:  Blockchain Platform for the Secure Distribution of Medicine
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Joshua Ogrey, QCMEDCHAIN LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to empower trading partners and key stakeholders in
the pharmaceutical supply chain with the ability to track provenance,
authenticate medicines, perform targeted recalls, and implement item-level
serialization and aggregation on a cost-effective basis. Currently, the
pharmaceutical supply chain is plagued by outdated legacy systems,
expensive/inefficient product recalls, and counterfeit drugs. The consumption of
counterfeit and substandard medicines claims over a million lives annually,
while diverting between $75 – $200 Billion in sales from the legitimate
pharmaceutical industry. Today, counterfeiters succeed due to a lack of
transparency and security throughout the supply chain. With counterfeiters’
rapid adaption to anti-counterfeiting technology, this research aims to develop
a platform that enables enterprises to reclaim their revenues and consumer trust
with end-to-end visibility through the utilization of blockchain technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
secure, scalable, enterprise-grade blockchain platform designed to advance the
traceability of medicine within the pharmaceutical supply chain. The project
aims to significantly progress the state of the art in serialization and
aggregation, secure/efficient data transmission between trading partners, and
anti-counterfeiting technology. To accomplish these ends, this project will
consist of the design and implementation of proprietary technology consisting of
cutting-edge cryptographic algorithms, blockchain architectures, and smart
contract protocols to prove technical feasibility within the SBIR Phase I
research timeline. This research also aims to establish commercial viability of
the innovation by testing transaction scalability, smart contract security, and
data privacy on the blockchain network. This project will test scalability by
simulating billions of serialized events on the network and benchmarking the
blockchain architectures that significantly exceed the current state of the art
in serialization and track &amp; trace software. The project intends to explore
the viability of smart contracts for automating the verification of transactions
and products moving through the supply chain. Since the security of these smart
contracts is critical to authentic product/transaction verification, the smart
contracts will be tested against adversarial cybersecurity threats and scenarios
with unauthorized user access. This project intends to considerably increase
data privacy within blockchain networks in order to allow users of the platform
the ability to safeguard trade secrets and proprietary knowledge contained
within transaction data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.