* 1940373
* STTR Phase I:  Glycolipids as Inexpensive Solid Supported Ligands for Uranium Remediation
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Raina Maier, GlycoSurf, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2020
* USD 224,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop a green approach to the clean-up and
mitigation of uranium-contaminated solutions. Mining in the Southwest United
States has left thousands of legacy sites with uranium-contaminated soils. These
soils are polluting adjacent water resources that, in turn, pose serious threats
to human and environmental health. One area alone has over 500 abandoned uranium
mining sites, and over 10% of tested water sources exceed national drinking
water standards. Uranium is a challenge for modern mining operations as it is
often present as a contaminant in mineral processing activities targeting other
metals. Uranium must be removed from mining impacted waters to meet social and
regulatory obligations, but despite demand from within the mining and
environmental industries, a technology both specific to uranium and inexpensive
is lacking. This project will develop solutions to realize uranium remediation
at significantly reduced cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes to innovate green, sugar-based glycolipids that meet several
requirements, including: they selectively bind uranium; they are produced using
abundant, inexpensive sugars; and they can be attached to a solid matrix for
water remediation packed-bed reactor systems. Currently, synthesis of
rhamnolipids is too costly because of the high cost and limited availability of
its sugar component, rhamnose. The cost reduction strategy for the new
glycolipids will be synthesis with the inexpensive and abundant sugars glucose,
xylose, and maltose. To bring these molecules to market as commercial
remediation products, the following objectives will be demonstrated: The
molecules' selectivity for uranium will be verified, even in the presence of
competing metal ions. Viable molecules will then be attached to a solid matrix
to demonstrate and characterize uranium sorption in simple solutions. Lastly,
real-world uranium-contaminated solutions from active and legacy mining sites
will be tested to validate the solution. Success of the glycolipid sorbents will
be gauged by their ability to remediate solutions to regulatory
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.