* 1940251
* Fluids and Health 2019 Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Lydia Bourouiba, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support junior US researchers to attend an international
conference titled, "Fluids and Health," which will be held July 23 through
August 2, 2019 at the Cargese Institute for Scientific Studies in Cargese,
Corsica, France. The conference will focus on multiphase and complex flows
applied to problems in infectious disease, including disease and pathogen
transmission, multiscale transport in air and water, spray processes, infection
control and mathematical modeling of disease transmission and containment. The
conference will provide US graduate students, postdoctoral scholars and young
faculty members with opportunities to engage with leaders in multiphase fluid
dynamics and physicians and medical researchers in a unique setting that allows
for exchange between scientists, engineers, and health care
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Fluids and Health" is a new conference that
has been organized by Lydia Bourouiba from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. The goal is to help develop a new community of researchers who will
undertake research into the role fluid dynamics and multiphase processes play in
infectious disease. The product of such research could be improved mechanistic
understandings of pathogen transmission, which would be a significant
improvement over current, mostly empirical knowledge. The lectures will be
delivered by experts that span a broad range of expertise and backgrounds,
including experts from the US Food and Drug Administration, the US Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, the French Institute for Agriculture, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute, the French Society for Hospital Hygiene, as well as
leading US and French academic institutions. In addition, several speakers from
leading US and French companies will make presentations. Thus, this conference
will provide participants with an interdisciplinary international forum to
exchange knowledge and discuss challenges in multiphase flows pertinent to
health problems where fluid dynamics questions are of key
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.