* 1940264
* CoPe Conference: Interoperability and data needs of models for understanding vulnerability of coastal systems to stresses and shocks associated with sea level rise: Miami, 2020
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Sparkle Malone, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 11/30/2022
* USD 99,137.00

Projected environmental changes, including sea level rise and increased
frequency and intensity of storm events, are leading to rapid departures from
past trends. However, the ability to model, predict, and understand the impacts
of these changes is extremely limited. This is especially of great concern for
coastal cities with high population density, valuable properties and tax base,
and extremely vulnerable and underserved communities. This is a complex problem
requiring an integrated approach that accounts for potential physical,
ecological and socioeconomic impacts of projected environmental change.
Therefore, goal of this conference to bring together an interdisciplinary group
of experts to develop an Integrated Environmental Modeling system. A single
model cannot simulate every potential impact, so numerous models have been
developed to address subsets of these effects. Conference participants will
focus on developing an integrated approach by addressing the interoperability of
the various models across social, ecological, and physical factors. The
conference will include a diverse group of participants, with a specific
emphasis on recruiting students and stakeholders from vulnerable, underserved
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results based on model simulations play a
pivotal role in understanding vulnerabilities of both natural and built
environments in coastal regions. Land- based models that simulate flooding due
to sea level rise, storm surge, waves, inland rainfall, and, in some cases,
groundwater levels are maturing. Models for predicting economic losses due to
property damage and service interruptions are also being developed. Discussions
are also underway for how to model human behavior in coastal environments in the
presence of increasing frequency of flooding that is expected from enhanced
stresses and shocks due to projected environmental changes. This Coastlines and
People conference will review the current state of each category of models,
their requirements in terms of spatial and temporal resolution of information
necessary for integrated assessment and, more importantly, develop an
appropriate coastal observation system to test and improve the interoperability
of these models. Conference participants will provide guidance on
interoperability that can serve as a "standard of practice" among the modeling
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.