* 1940304
* Collaborative Research:  WORKSHOP:  Improving Gender Equality in Legislative Studies; Washington, DC - May 2020
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Eleanor Powell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 09/30/2023
* USD 16,626.00

Representation of women in the field of legislative studies is remarkably small:
the proportion of women in the Legislative Studies Section (LSS) of the American
Political Science Association (APSA) is only 22%, third from the bottom in a
recent ranking of APSA sections. To solve the problem of the small numbers of
women studying legislative politics, we have formed a team of scholars and
developed a set of goals and implementation strategies. The first of these is
the “Improving Gender Equality in Legislative Studies Hackathon and
Collaboration Workshop.” The intellectual merit of this workshop focuses on
highlighting the intellectual research contributions of female scholars whose
work is often obscured by their small numbers and building future research
networks and collaborations among scholars whose work is myriad but sometimes
siloed in the field. Greater gender equality in legislative studies has broad
impacts as it makes legislative politics a more attractive field of study for
young scholars in the discipline, brings more diverse perspectives on
legislatures to undergraduate curriculums, and produces more diverse research
that is conveyed to the public through various mediums—books, articles, blog
posts, editorials, news media interviews,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Representation of women in the field of legislative
studies is remarkably small: the proportion of women in the Legislative Studies
Section (LSS) of the American Political Science Association (APSA) is only 22%,
third from the bottom in a recent ranking of APSA sections. To solve the problem
of the small numbers of women studying legislative politics, we have formed a
team of scholars and developed a set of goals and implementation strategies. The
workshop will provide an opportunity for scholars of legislative politics to
share current research on congress, state legislatures, and comparative
legislatures, areas that are often siloed in the field rather than brought
together collaboratively. It also aims to spotlight the work being done by women
studying legislatures, as much of the new and different research being done in
the field of legislative studies is being done by women but women’s small
numbers in the field sometimes obscure their contributions. And it brings
together female scholars of legislatures in all three research areas in order to
encourage intellectual contributions that bridge across
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.