* 1940300
* EAGER: Building an Ecosystem for Broadening Participation for Computing: 4-H and the Land-Grant University System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Janet Golden, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2020
* USD 297,313.00

The University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL), in collaboration with the National 4-H
Council, proposes a project to advance effective practices for broadening
participation in computing (BPC) in out-of-school-time programs by engaging
computer science (CS) faculty and departments at land-grant universities (LGUs)
in 4-H programs using entrepreneurial models and tools. The project is aligned
with the National Science Foundation's Computer and Information Science and
Engineering Directorate's (CISE) effort to engage its Principal Investigators
(PIs) and their academic departments in meaningful BPC activities. It will
advance knowledge on developing a sustainable ecosystem for dissemination and
promotion of computational literacy among rural youth, youth from economically
disadvantaged backgrounds, girls, minorities (particularly African Americans,
Hispanic Americans, and American Indians), and youth with disabilities. The
ecosystem comprises national youth organizations (e.g., 4-H), corporations
(e.g., Google, Microsoft), CS departments at LGUs, and K-12 schools.

This project will involve CISE-funded PIs and the 4-H units at four LGUs to
achieve three objectives:

1. Implement and assess a collaborative strategic planning and resource
development process for BPC that engages LGU CS departments and 4-H programs in
four partner states. 4-H programs will collaborate with their local CS
departments to collaboratively develop and implement a plan for BPC that builds
on their specific strengths. Lessons learned will be adapted and shared as
models for action for other CS departments. 2. Expand an existing Computer
Science Professional Development Toolkit by developing additional resources for
supporting equity and inclusion in CS and developing computational thinking. 3.
Expand access to the developed strategic models and tools for LGU CS departments
and 4-H programs across the country. Existing communication with 4-H digital
channels that reach Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
professionals, including BPCnet.org and others, will be used to reach a wider
audience.

Research questions will include: What are the challenges and opportunities for
CS departments and state 4-H programs as they create a collaborative plan of
action for BPC in their state? What resources are needed to support CS
departments and state 4-H programs as they create and execute this plan? and
What is the impact of a blended learning model of professional development on
the confidence and competence of 4-H professionals, educators, university
students and volunteers who facilitate CS experiences?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.