* 1940345
* CoPe Conference: International Symposium on Interdisciplinary Evacuation Modeling for Rapid Onset Disasters: Corvallis, OR - Summer 2020
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Michael Lindell, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,999.00

This Coastlines and People (CoPe) conference will bring together tsunami and
flash flood researchers from countries/regions such as the United States of
America, Caribbean, Puerto Rico, Japan, Indonesia, Chile, New Zealand,
Australia, Europe (flood researchers), Canada, and China. The international
researchers, together with US participants, are drawn from a wide range of
disciplines including social science, engineering, geoscience, urban planning,
public policy/public administration, computational science, and mathematics.
This conference will address fundamental issues on how to integrate diverse
forms of social science data (i.e., survey, interviews, drills, field
observations, cell phone or GPS) into interdisciplinary agent-based evacuation
models. These qualitative or quantitative data exist often in fragmented and
unstructured formats, an obstacle that impedes the development of a
comprehensive model of people's evacuation from imminent tsunamis. The
procedures for integrating empirical behavior data into mathematical evacuation
models by engineers and computer scientists are only at the beginning stages of
development. Engineers and computer scientists recognize the importance of
including behavioral parameters in their models but typically oversimplify them
by making unfounded assumptions that significantly diminish the value of the
research products for policy makers. Conversely, social scientists have
generally failed to collect data on people's actual and intended behavior that
meet all of the engineers' and computer scientists' data needs. These problems
of interdisciplinary integration, which have long plagued tsunami research, have
begun to be overcome by hurricane researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, this
conference will draw upon the experience in hurricane evacuation modeling,
recognizing the substantial differences parameters such as the amount of
forewarning - many days for hurricanes but only a few minutes for some tsunamis.
Consequently, the conference participants will seek to identify critical data
needs for tsunami evacuation modeling (e.g., warning dissemination times,
household preparation times, evacuation mode choice, distance to safety). They
will also examine the effects of household and community preparedness for
tsunami evacuation, which varies between countries and from one community to
another within each country. The conference participants will overcome the
current research fragmentation by identifying behavioral datasets and
mathematical models that have not been published in international English-
language journals, establish protocols for post-tsunami behavioral data
collection, and establish a collaborative network of international
interdisciplinary researchers. The conference will also actively engage coastal
emergency managers and governmental policy makers, who can share their community
resilience challenges and seek opportunities to collaborate with researchers. At
same time, this conference will create opportunities to actively engage
undergraduate, graduate and K-12 students through a poster/paper competition,
and coastal hazard literacy education opportunities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this CoPe conference is to enable truly integrative and convergent
interdisciplinary evacuation models integrating natural, social, and engineered
systems for rapid onset disasters such as near-field tsunami and coastal flash
flooding. This conference will bring together a highly-diverse group of academic
researchers, educators, and agency professionals from many disciplines and
countries around the world to identify knowledge gaps, challenges, barriers, and
opportunities for integrated, interdisciplinary, and transformative evacuation
modeling approaches for rapid onset coastal disasters such as near-field tsunami
and coastal flash floods. The three-day symposium will feature keynote speeches
by recognized leaders and sessions focusing on different themes on the
integration of social science data into interdisciplinary evacuation models: (1)
Current state-of-art interdisciplinary rapid onset disaster evacuation modeling
from invited researchers, with each researcher being invited to contribute a
perspective or case study paper to an edited volume; (2) Integration of social
science data into interdisciplinary evacuation models; (3) Validation of
interdisciplinary evacuation models; (4) Tsunami warning dissemination mechanism
and communication channels; (5) Community-based testbeds and benchmark dataset;
and (6) Integration of protective-action decision-making theory to
interdisciplinary agent-based evacuation models. The expected outcomes are (1)
an edited volume to document the identified knowledge gaps and a road map of
future research directions; and (2) a journal special issue focusing on the use
of agent-based models in hazard vulnerability, mitigation planning, evacuation
modeling and planning to be published in a premier disaster related journal. The
conference organizers plan to hold the workshop at the brand-new Marine Science
Building at the Hatfield Marine Science Center located on Oregon State
University's coastal campus in Newport, Oregon. Graduate students will have
opportunities to present their research before world-renowned researchers.
Simultaneously, they will be responsible for developing poster sessions and
undergraduate student research competitions. Although this conference will focus
on rapid-onset coastal disasters such as tsunami and flash foods, the knowledge
gaps, key challenges, future directions, and emerging opportunities identified
to enable interdisciplinary evacuation models from this conference will be
transferable to other types of rapid-onset disasters such as wildfires, dam
failures, levee breach floods, landslides, and hazardous materials
releases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.