* 1940456
* CAREER: State-of-the-art Quantum Calculations on a Novel Class of Super-atoms: Discovering Exotic Chemical Bonding Schemes and Proposing New Two and Three Dimensional Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Evangelos Miliordos, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2025
* USD 569,714.00

New materials are in high demand in modern industry. There is a particular need
for new approaches to building batteries and other electronics. One type of new
material may be formed through the interaction of metal atoms dissolved in
liquid ammonia. In a normal atom, negatively charged electrons orbit around a
positively charged central nucleus. In this project funded by the Chemical
Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Evangelos Miliordos of Auburn University is studying concentrated
metal-ammonia solutions, where an electron from the metal atom moves so far from
the nucleus that it orbits the outermost edge of a nearby ammonia molecule. The
metal atom and ammonia molecule form a large combined structure, where the atoms
of the molecule act like the nucleus of a single super-sized atom. Professor
Miliordos is applying the principles of quantum mechanics to study the physical
and chemical properties of individual metal-ammonia molecules. The knowledge
from these theoretical studies can be used to guide experiments on this unique
class of chemicals, which are known as solvated electron precursors (SEP).
Future applications are possible in the chemistry of batteries/solar cells,
catalysis, and quantum computing. Students engaged in the project learn modern
computational chemistry methods and become experts in transition metal
chemistry. Professor Miliordos is also developing modules based on the research
results that will introduce these groundbreaking concepts to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the performance of high-
level electronic structure calculations (density functional theory, multi-
reference configuration interaction, perturbation theory, and coupled cluster
approaches) of the properties of transition metals coordinated with a number of
ammonia, amine, polyamine, or other ligands. As the ligands approach the metal
center, they displace some of the metallic valence electrons to the periphery of
the complex making bound Rydberg molecular systems. The diffuse electrons occupy
hydrogenic-type orbitals centered around the metal-ammonia core. In the lowest
energy states s-, p-, d-, f-, and g-shaped orbitals are identified within a
shell model resembling that of the Jellium or nuclear-shell models: 1s, 1p, 1d,
2s, 2p, 1f, 2d, 3s, and 1g. The electronic configuration for the ground and
several low-lying electronic states is investigated and accurate excitation
energies are calculated to explain existing and assist future experimental
studies. The stability of these transition metal complexes is examined in terms
of metal-ligand binding energies and activation energies towards the release of
molecular hydrogen. The broader impacts of this work include potential societal
benefits from an increased understanding of transition metal chemistry, as well
as opportunities for the training of students in the use and critical selection
of the existing electronic structure techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.