* 1940197
* Dual System Strongback Designs for Seismic Damage-Resistant Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Nicholas Wierschem, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 357,908.00

Strongback systems are a new design strategy for structural systems that can
mitigate the concentrated accumulation of structural damage in buildings during
an earthquake. Despite their promising potential to improve performance during
seismic events, strongback systems have not seen widespread use in new
construction because insufficient data exist to document and characterize their
behavior and functionality. The goal of this research is to investigate and
quantify how different elements and configurations of strongback systems
contribute to the resilience of buildings to earthquake damage and to determine
how best to incorporate those features into future designs. The increased
fundamental understanding of strongback systems, the developed optimal design
methodology, and predictive equations will help structural engineers to design
structures with strongback systems and encourage the further use of these
systems. The results will enable the construction of buildings that are better
able to withstand extreme seismic events, increase the safety of the public, and
provide a basis for more efficient construction practices that will increase
prosperity and reduce environmental impact. Additionally, through this project,
undergraduate research assistants and a graduate student will be engaged and
trained in numerical and experimental research methods. The small-scale, modular
experimental strongback model developed as a result of this research will be
used as the basis for hands-on learning activities in graduate courses. Project
data will be archived and disseminated through the NSF-supported Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-
ci.org), filling a need for high-quality system level data for strongback system
model validation. This award supports the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will fill gaps in the fundamental
knowledge of the performance of strongback seismic force-resisting systems and
will enable design methodologies that consider and exploit the complexities of
the nonlinear dynamic response of these systems. New data will be generated on
the demands that "elastic" elements of structural systems attract, the
consequences of approaching or exceeding the strength of such elements, and the
distribution of energy dissipating resistance. The potential of innovative
devices, such as those that feature inertance, to tune the dynamic behavior of
building structures will be demonstrated. Optimization within the large and
unexplored design space opened by the strongback system will guide and inspire
future studies on these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.