* 1940645
* Microphysics Contrasts between Stratus and Cumulus Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* James Hudson, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 346,279.00

This award supports research into connections between cloud types and the tiny
particles that cause water to condense to form cloud droplets. Those tiny
particles are also called cloud condensation nuclei (CCN). Since many CCN come
from air pollution, their effects on clouds, which is commonly considered as the
aerosol indirect effect (AIE), cause the largest climate uncertainty. Effects of
CCN determine the amount of solar radiation that reaches the Earthâ€™s surface.
This largely controls global climate. But clouds also change CCN by chemical
reactions within cloud droplets and coalescence among cloud droplets. These
cloud process effects on CCN in turn further impact the cloud properties that
control global climate. In one analyzed data set cloud processing seemed to
enhance AIE but in another dataset AIE seemed to be reduced by cloud processing.
The proposed research will extend this analysis to many other existing data sets
collected in different parts of the world and at various time periods in various
types of clouds. This research could help determine whether AIE is appreciably
offsetting or enhancing greenhouse warming of the global climate. Thus the
result could provide the scientific basis for national and international energy
policies. This fundamental research would increase knowledge of cloud processing
and lead to improved weather and climate forecasts as well as evaluate cloud
brightening geoengineering schemes proposed to offset global warming. In
addition, a graduate student will be trained and exposed to a wide array of
cloud field campaign data to start his/her scientific career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bimodal aerosol size distributions are due to increased
dissolved material within cloud droplets after they evaporate as they usually
do. The chemical reactions by trace gases diffused into cloud droplets and
coalescence among cloud droplets from cloud processing form the larger particle.
The required larger droplets for coalescence are more abundant in thicker
cumulus clouds whereas the longer lifetimes of stratus clouds favor chemical
cloud processing. The opposite effects of bimodal aerosol on cumulus and stratus
clouds may be due to these different types of cloud processing or to inherent
differences in cloud dynamics between these cloud types. These opposite cloud
effects are manifested in differences in cloud brightness and cloud lifetime
both of which impact climate. The proposed analysis method is based on
bimodality/unimodality of detailed high resolution CCN spectral measurements
compared with cloud characteristics such as droplet concentration, mean
diameter, spectral width, and drizzle amounts. These cloud microphysics
characteristics will be examined over various cloud liquid water contents to
determine the competing role of entrainment on cloud microphysics and CCN
modality. Results of different hierarchies of cloud characteristics according to
associated CCN spectra grouped according to modality should reveal how cloud and
drizzle characteristics respond to CCN modality in various environments and
cloud types. This could confirm or refute opposite impacts of bimodal CCN on AIE
in stratus and cumulus clouds and could untangle effects of chemical or
coalescence processing from differences in vertical winds between these cloud
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.