* 1940816
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Isotopic and proteomic signatures of diet
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Kimberly Foecke, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 01/31/2022
* USD 19,816.00

The unique dietary adaptations of modern humans and related species reflect
adaptability and cultural complexity, keys to the evolutionary success of the
human lineage. This project will focus on refining our understanding of a
chemical method commonly used to predict the amount of meat in diets of
hominins. The results will inform interpretations of dietary shifts in humans
and their ancestors. This project will also have broader applications in public
health, including measuring meat quality, palatability, composition, and
nutrition. This project will continue to contribute to STEM outreach initiatives
through the Smithsonian and other local institutions. The work will contribute
to training a graduate student and two undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stable isotope research
is an important tool at the forefront of efforts to understand dietary
adaptations. Material and faunal remains leave distinct isotopic signatures
across a number of chemical elements, with nitrogen isotope ratios being
particularly informative about how much meat is consumed. Previous research has
shown that nitrogen isotope ratios in bone roughly track the trophic level of an
organism. This insight has been applied to the archaeological record to predict
the trophic level of humans. Though often used, this proxy is subject to
complications stemming from a limited understanding of nitrogen isotope behavior
under certain biologically and culturally mediated processes like rotting and
cooking. Thus, it is currently impossible to accurately reconstruct diets under
comparable scenarios. Therefore, this project will refine our understanding of
nitrogen isotope fractionation mechanisms in these processes, provide testable
predictions for dietary reconstruction based on an isotope mixing model, and
apply the isotope mixing model to a case study question in Neanderthal dietary
reconstruction. Together, these results will inform our understanding of how
diets have adapted in response to dynamic social and ecological
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.