* 1940199
* Collaborative Research: Accelerating the Discovery of Electronic Materials through Human-Computer Active Search
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Eric Toberer, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2023
* USD 419,937.00

The overarching goal of this project is to accelerate the discovery of materials
with tailored electronic properties through human-computer active search. These
efforts will lay the groundwork for accelerating materials discovery, and
advance the capability to control electronic properties in materials with the
potential for profound societal impact. The thermoelectric and photocatalytic
materials predicted, synthesized, and characterized in this research can realize
societal advances in the space of energy and solar fuels. High-efficiency
thermoelectric materials can revolutionize how heat sources are transformed into
electrical power by eliminating the traditional intermediate mechanical energy
conversions. Earth-abundant light-responsive catalysts are emerging as an
alternative to costly, rare metal catalysts to store solar energy as portable
liquid fuels, like ethanol. These green reactions are enabling low-cost, carbon-
neutral fuels. The team brings together expertise in materials science,
chemistry, machine learning, visualization, metadata, and knowledge frameworks
to develop multi-fidelity, expert-guided active search strategies within
materials science and chemistry. Resonances among the team's existing outreach
programs will broaden inclusion of students from underrepresented groups and be
moderated via the Alliance for Diversity in Science and Engineering. The work
will provide cross-disciplinary training to graduate students and postdocs in
all aspects of material informatics, including participating in and leading team
efforts, co-mentorship of Ph.D. and postdoctoral researchers, inclusive symposia
at national conferences, and a summer workshop focused on the intersection of
visualization, machine learning, ontological engineering and materials science.
Through enabling the acceleration of the discovery of new materials, this
project supports the goals of the Materials Genome Initiative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary team will create a search framework
for scientific discovery that leverages recent advances in material databases,
machine learning, visualization, human-machine interaction, and knowledge
structures. To broadly assess the efficacy of this approach, the search effort
will span the electronic behavior of both molecules and crystalline materials:
(i) new organic photocatalysts for solar fuels production and (ii) new
thermoelectric materials for electricity generation. Central to this effort is
the engagement of domain experts and associated feedback in a human-in-the-loop
active search process. Dynamic visualizations will enable the user to (i)
understand the underlying reasons why the materials are being suggested and (ii)
provide a user steering capability to identify and annotate specific aspects of
the explored search space. Domain-expert annotations and feedback will be parsed
against a suite of ontologies, further aiding the search process by providing
relational insight between features. New molecules and materials will be
explored through a combination of first principles calculations and high-
throughput, automated experimentation; these results will be incorporated into a
continually growing open-access database. Efficiently integrating and directing
evolving data-streams from experiment, computation, and human steering during
the search will be achieved with a multi-fidelity active search policy. Through
enabling the acceleration of the discovery of new materials, this project
supports the goals of the Materials Genome Initiative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science Foundation's
Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity, and is jointly supported
by HDR and the Division of Materials Research within the NSF Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.