* 1940216
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Inexactness and Data-Awareness in Network Stacks for Distributed Machine Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Rachit Agarwal, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

The architectures underlying modern network hardware and software have their
roots in designs that were developed decades ago. Even though these
architectures have evolved in many ways over the years, they remain unchanged in
two key aspects: (1) They support ?exact? or complete/absolute reliable
communication (either hop-by-hop, or end-to-end, or both); (2) They adhere to
strict layering, and the resulting encapsulation and interfaces hide from lower
network layers the semantics of the data applications transmit over the
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These design principles place serious impediments
for emerging distributed machine learning (ML) training and inference
applications. These applications are seeing adoption in a wide variety of
important domains, such as, computer vision, robotics, data science, graphics,
and speech recognition. Two distinguishing attributes of these applications are:
(1) their computations are intrinsically inexact in nature, because these
applications rely on computing or utilizing statistical models, and (2) their
input and intermediate data have well-defined structure, i.e., tensors, or
multi-dimensional arrays of typed data. Give these attributes, enforcing exact
communication in a data semantics-unaware fashion limits the potentially
enormous benefits of embracing inexactness in these approximate
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores co-designing ML
applications with layers of the network software and hardware stack to allow
application-driven cross-layer optimization for energy efficiency, hardware
density/capacity, and performance. Given an application-provided overall
inexactness budget, this research will explore both how to systematically
apportion the budget across network layers, and how different layers can
reconfigure their functionality to achieve different levels of
approximation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will develop strawman
approaches to encoding structured data and to achieving budget-driven inexact
computation over it. The research will use experiments, simulations, and
analysis to identify performance benefits to ML applications, and fundamental
trade-offs that determine the feasibility of this approach. The resulting
inexactness-aware ML software stack could drive hitherto unseen performance and
accuracy improvements, and potentially drive future innovations in ML
algorithms, systems, and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.