* 1940608
* SBIR Phase I:  Large Scale Synthesis of Hollow Metal Nanospheres: Conversion of Batch Synthesis to Continuous Flow
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,03/31/2021
* Sarah Lindley, CORELESS TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2021
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is rooted in the development of a large-scale
synthesis for the manufacture of highly uniform hollow metal nanospheres for use
by the military in potentially contaminated zones of operation, in rural
settings with limited access to healthcare laboratories, or in the agricultural
field for faster and more affordable detection of lower levels of food-based
toxins and pathogens. Furthermore, establishing a source of these next-
generation metal nanoparticles at commercially relevant levels of quality and
quantity with consistent and predictable performance would pave the way for
their expansion into other industries that could also benefit from their
advantages, such as photocatalysis, water purification, and
photomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will scale-up the production of hollow metal
nanoparticles from the existing small-batch syntheses to a large-scale
continuous flow process, with strict standards for the control of their size,
shape, and optical response. Large-scale synthesis of highly uniform hollow
metal nanospheres with controllable size has not been achieved to date,
hampering the use and study of these advanced materials. A high-quality, high-
volume production method will position hollow metal nanospheres for rapid
commercial adoption in applications where they markedly outperform their solid
counterparts, such as in color reporting for lateral flow assays (LFAs), where
hollow gold nanospheres can offer a 10-fold improvement in assay sensitivity.
The primary objective of the proposed work is to determine the parameters
necessary for a high-quality, high-throughput synthesis based on continuous
flow, including reactor materials, chamber dimensions, precursor concentrations,
flow rates, and reaction times. The major technical hurdle lies in the
identification (within a very large parameter space) of suitable conditions for
a successful and controlled synthesis; accordingly, a major component of this
project is in-depth analysis and characterization of synthesized nanoparticles
by optical spectroscopy and electron microscopy. Characterization results will
be used to inform iterative reactor improvements. The resulting high throughput
reactor will both advance the state of the art of nanomaterial synthesis and
enable new research by creating a consistent supply of commercially available
hollow nanoparticles with reproducible physical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.