* 1940271
* SBIR Phase I:  Cost-effective manufacturing to enable adoption of a novel nutrient-dense chickpea dough platform in mass-market processed foods
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Ashton Yoon, Antithesis Foods Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop an alternative for high-calorie,
nutrient-poor, palatable foods. This proposal will create a nutritionally dense
ingredient portfolio, based on a novel chickpea dough, with broad application in
processed foods. The set of ingredients will consist of crunchy, high-protein,
higher-fiber, and low-calorie ingredients with broad applicability in the
processed food space; this could potentially impact population health, including
prevalence of type II diabetes, obesity, and their co-morbidities. Such a change
in ingredient sets will also result in a large commercial impact of this
research. Economic benefits include the development of new products, brands,
production and processing equipment to optimize the use of these novel, chickpea
based, nutrient dense ingredients. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the evaluation of a novel
chickpea dough to create a nutritionally dense ingredient portfolio with broad
application in processed foods. Generally, foods produced with nutritionally
dense ingredients have strong flavors and poor acceptance, but alternatives
require processing that is slow, inefficient, and costly. To solve this
challenge, we are evaluating a novel microwave technology. The goals of the
proposed innovation include: identification of formulations and processing
parameters for several ingredient applications, demonstration of consumer
sensory acceptance, and validation of scale-up viability through cost analysis.
Technical goals include: Prediction modeling of heating patterns and
identification of shapes, sizes, and ranges of processing parameters; drying
trials to identify a versatile dough formulation for multiple applications;
shelf stability tests; consumer acceptance tests to prove market viability; and
nutritional analysis to fully characterize the final
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.