* 1940328
* Conference: 2019 Louisville Earth Stewardship Initiative' August 11-16, 2019, Louisville, Kentucky
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Alexander Felson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,998.00

Environmental issues such as urban heat waves, flooding and sewer overflow, and
access to green space present challenges to cities nationwide and threaten
environmental sustainability. The Earth Stewardship Initiative (ESI), as a part
of the Ecological Society of America (ESA) conference, immerses scientists in a
demonstration project that helps shape cities by integrating ecological study
with landscape and urban design. The participants include scientists from many
disciplines and career stages, city officials, and urban planners. The emphasis
on maximizing diversity of the participants will make ESI more effective and
will improve societal impacts. ESI staffers will work with city employees to
identify plans, projects, and priorities that could benefit from increased
engagement with designers and scientists with different perspectives. At the end
of the ESI project, the target city receives several white papers detailing
solutions to identified sustainability issues. Graduate students exchange ideas
and information with city workers while gaining invaluable experience from their
collaboration with diverse frontline professionals. Ecologists are able to apply
their academic knowledge towards practical problems, and city officials and
employees gain access to current research and best
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entering its fourth program year, the ESI
project has significantly impacted training of urban ecologists and is fostering
the application of creative urban ecology through an interdisciplinary design
summit that addresses local ecological challenges for the ESA host city.
Historically, ecological research was predominately executed in remote areas
where ecosystems were relatively isolated from human activity. The emergence of
the field of urban ecology recognized the incongruence between ecological
results generated in remote, protected areas and those drawn from
experimentation in ecosystems heavily impacted by human use. Recognizing the
critical feedbacks between human activities and patterns of land-use,
biogeochemical cycles, climate, hydrology, and biodiversity, ecologists need to
shift from studying ecology in and of the city to a more active approach to
study and shape urban ecosystems. The ESI provides a forum for ecologists to
position themselves as contributors to shaping cities and pushes them to do so.
During the summit, participants are divided into teams and will research local
sustainability issues identified by city officials using ecological perspectives
to brainstorm creative solutions for complex city issues. They will also propose
"designed experiments," which embed scientific research and statistical analysis
into existing projects. This both advances theoretical knowledge and informs
local project management, providing a more direct path between NSF research and
societal benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.