* 1940193
* CoPe RCN: Arctic Migration in Harmony: An Interdisciplinary Network on Littoral Species, Settlements, and Cultures on the Move
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Chad Briggs, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 03/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Urbanization, globalization, and changing climate are activating the
simultaneous migrations of species, ecosystems, and settlements across Arctic
coastlines in new and unpredictable ways. Arctic port cities are witnessing
increased maritime traffic and inflow of labor; rural villages are facing
displacement from slow and sudden-onset disasters; sea ice melt and ocean
warming are shifting marine species ranges; and terrestrial ecosystems in
transition are upending Arctic food webs and introducing southern disease
vectors. Each of these intersecting mobilities challenge Arctic quality of life,
sustainable development, and environmental health. The Migration in Harmony RCN
(MIH-RCN) will establish a network of researchers, practitioners, and
stakeholders to jointly identify and prioritize research topics on the
contemporary migration of peoples, economies, cultures, and ecosystems catalyzed
by coastal environmental variability and natural hazards in the Arctic. The MIH-
RCN will advance knowledge on how the migrations of Arctic ecosystems,
economies, and peoples interact with one another, and how the social, geohazard,
and economic drivers and consequences of migrations intersect across different
fields. The network activities will engage local leaders, practitioners, and
researchers to bridge research divides and synthesize existing data; link
ongoing major research initiatives to fill this research gap; and implement
creative participatory methods to broaden participation in migration research.
The MIH-RCN will include students at all levels in its network activities. A
collaboration with SeaTech at Mt. Edgecumbe High School in Sitka, Alaska will
allow students researching whale migrations to present their work and learn from
network participants, and will scale the involvement of other high school
students. The RCN will work with the SURGE program (Scholars from Under-
Represented Groups in Engineering and the Social Sciences) from NSF INCLUDES
(Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science), to scale its mentoring program to
Alaska Native students and expose SURGE students to Arctic disasters
researchers. The MIH-RCN will engage international collaborations to contribute
regional solutions to the societal, economic, and environmental challenges of
migration across borders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the Migration
in Harmony RCN are (1) to synthesize existing research on Arctic coastal
migrations (2) to identify the transdisciplinary intersections of and gaps
between existing research; (3) to create integrated teams of social and natural
scientists, traditional knowledge holders, community leaders, public health
professionals, educators, and engineers to fill identified gaps; and (4) to
produce communication products to advance the understanding of how coastal
environmental variability and hazards impact the migration of settlements,
species, and cultures. The MIH-RCN will integrate knowledge from a
geographically, disciplinary, and culturally diverse set of network members in a
participation-broadening way. This ambition requires an innovative approach to
networking that moves beyond presentation-based meetings. The MIH-RCN uses a
coupled human and natural systems approach (CHANS) for coordinating and
synthesizing Arctic coastal research to advance a holistic understanding of
patterns, drivers, and consequences of changes in movement. This approach was
chosen due to its integrative features, bringing together theoretical and
analytical techniques from natural sciences, social sciences, and traditional
knowledge to understand the interface of complex systems. The approach will
allow the RCN to transcend a single discipline and synthesize the mobility
“patterns and processes that link people and their activities with wildlife and
their habitats.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.