* 1940992
* PFI-TT: Optimization of a portable blood flow monitor for improving reconstructive surgery operations and recovery
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Guillermo Aguilar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 04/30/2023
* USD 299,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the improvement in patient care and
outcomes resulting from an affordable way to perform continuous monitoring of
blood flow to and from a surgical site both during and post-surgery. As
conventional surgical blood flow monitoring systems are bulky and expensive, the
approach taken in this project allows for a compact and affordable device with
the potential to serve surgeons and patients alike. The proposed system will
increase the use of blood flow monitoring devices for use in reconstructive
plastic surgery, with potential to spread to other applications, such as
bedsores monitoring and/or field applications prevalent in military medicine.
The proposed technology may result in fewer follow-up, corrective surgeries
presently caused by delayed diagnosis of sufficient blood flow during surgery.
The broader societal impact and commercial benefit, through cost savings and
productivity gains within hospitals, will benefit patients and improve the
quality and throughput of the medical system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project addresses a primary compromise in reconstructive plastic surgery by
reducing the uncertainty of surgeons that surgically reconstructed tissue flaps
have adequate blood flow both during both the operation itself and post-op
patient recovery. This reduces hospitals' costs by decreasing the number of
unreimbursed follow-up, corrective surgical procedures required to correct flaps
experiencing inadequate blood flow. The research objectives are to: improve
depth of imaging and related quality of information to the surgeon or post-op
patient support nurse; improve imaging system stabilization, enabling better
surgical decision-making; and develop a user interface informed by market
discovery with end users (reconstructive surgeons), with the ultimate goal of
producing an improved prototype portable perfusion monitor to enable testing and
progress towards commercialization. The methods to accomplish these goals
include implementation of imaging system stabilization strategies, increased
depth-of-imaging to see deeper (sub-surface) blood vessels and flow in tissue,
and development of a user interface informed by customer discovery which
provides surgeons with surgical site blood flow information in their preferred
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.