* 1940026
* Constraining Frictional and Low-Temperature Plastic Rheology of Oceanic Lithosphere by Modeling Observations of Load-Induced Deformation from the Hawaiian Islands to Japan Trench
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Shijie Zhong, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2023
* USD 354,609.00

Plate tectonics is arguably the most important physical process of the solid
Earth. From the fundamental science point of view, plate tectonics controls the
thermal evolution of the Earth by recycling the relatively cold and stiff
surface layer (i.e., the crust and lithosphere) to the hot interiors of the
Earth's mantle to cause its cooling down with time, which determines the
generation of Earth's magnetic field. Plate tectonics is a unique feature to the
Earth and does not exist for other terrestrial planets in our solar system.
Plate tectonics is suggested to play an important role in regulating the Earth's
climate system. Plate tectonics also carves the most important surface
topographic features such as ocean basins, mid-ocean ridge systems, and major
mountain belts. Plate tectonics dictates that deformation occurs primarily at
plate boundaries (i.e., where different plates meet) through earthquakes with
volcanism as by-products. However, the cause of plate tectonics remains largely
unknown, despite decades of research. This project is aimed at uncovering the
physical mechanism for plate tectonics. The key aspect of this project is to
formulate state of art physical and dynamic models to integrate the observed
deformation caused by earthquakes, topography and gravity anomalies into our
understanding of plate tectonics generation. This project will support a PhD
student and includes significant international collaboration. The further
development a community finite element code for modeling viscoelastic, non-
linear deformation of lithosphere and mantle, will be made available to the
community through NSF-supported CIG (Computational Infrastructure for
Geodynamics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to model observations of
earthquake deformation, topography and gravity anomalies to constrain
lithospheric rheology in both plate interior (i.e., Hawaii) and convergent plate
boundary (Japan trench or subduction zone) settings. The project addresses the
following three geophysical questions. First, what constraints would the
observations of load-induced lithospheric deformation at the Japan trench and
Hawaii place on the low-temperature plasticity flow laws and coefficient of
friction in these two different tectonic settings? Second, how does lithospheric
rheology in the Japan trench compare with that at Hawaii? Considering that the
Japan trench is downstream of Hawaii along the Pacific plate motion, does the
lithospheric rheology evolve from Hawaii to Japan trench and how? Third, how do
the low-temperature plasticity flow laws constrained by the observations at
Japan trench and Hawaii compare with those derived from laboratory studies
including recent experiments? To answer these questions, this project will carry
out the following specific tasks: 1) Estimate seismic strain rate for the
Hawaiian region and Japan trench from earthquake information, quantify their
uncertainties, and compile other observations including lithospheric deflection
near Hawaii and at Japan trench and outer rise and free-air gravity; 2)
Formulate loading models for the Japan trench and Hawaii to compute the
observables of lithospheric strain rate, topography and gravity for different
low-temperature plasticity flow laws and coefficient of friction, and compare
them with observations to place constraints on the rheology; 3) Test low-
temperature plasticity flow laws from recent experiments, examine the effect of
the activation energy and different lithospheric thermal structure on load-
induced lithospheric deformation, and re-calibrate the lithospheric yield
strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.