* 1940621
* Conference:  Puerto Rico Honey Bee and Evolution of Invasive Organisms on Islands; August 13-15, 2019; San Juan, Puerto Rico
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Tugrul Giray, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

Honey bees are among the most successful invasive organisms worldwide, both on
and off islands. They play a key role as pollinators in agricultural systems
worldwide, but are also threatened by human activities. This award supports the
first conference to examine one strain of non-native honey bee, the Puerto Rico
Gentle Africanized honey bee, through the lens of invasion biology and island
biogeography. The conference is timely for two reasons. First, the introduction
and radiation of invasive organisms, and threats to honey bee health, continue
unabated. Second, invasive organisms - and honey bees in particular - have a
critical impact on global food security. In this conference, researchers will
communicate new findings that aim to stimulate their research and that of their
students and interact directly with stakeholders who can apply basic research
findings to improve management decisions. The new research directions and
improved management decisions are expected to translate into economic benefits
for a much-challenged Puerto Rico island economy. Additionally, because the
invited participants include a diverse set of student participants from the
University of Puerto Rico, this conference has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The amount and type of data
available for honey bees, including the Puerto Rico Gentle Africanized honey
bee, are unparalleled. However, bee researchers do not use an invasive biology
perspective, and invasive biology studies typically do not examine the honey bee
as a model. The adaptation of Africanized honey bees to the island of Puerto
Rico is an example of the changes that can occur to invasive organisms and their
ecosystem during island colonization. The invasion process impacts the invading
as well as the resident species and the ecosystem in which they navigate. One of
the advantages of studying island populations is that such adaptive processes
are accelerated. Moreover, adaptive processes may show similar patterns across
species and as such, data from island populations can be particularly useful to
develop and test models of invasion biology. This three-day conference will
develop an integrative analysis approach to honey bee invasions using various
types of data generated by different research areas and approaches to invasion
biology. These include genomics, morphology, behavior and ecology. On the first
day, all participants will give presentations. For the second day, attendees
will visit field sites to observe the honey bee population established on the
island of Puerto Rico. On the third day, attendees will form breakout groups for
round table discussions leading to a strategic plan on research directions,
resources, and policy advice on bees and other invasive organisms on
islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.