* 1940957
* The role of cortico-basal ganglia circuits in skill learning during development
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Sarah Bottjer, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,150,000.00

Skill learning, like speaking, includes learning behaviors based on practice. A
fundamental question of basic neuroscience is: how do learners measure success
in learning, or how does the brain evaluate behavioral outcomes in relation to a
goal? For example, parents serve as vocal tutors by uttering mature sounds (the
goals) which human infants must learn to reproduce as they practice babbling.
Skill learning is thought to involve goal-directed evaluation of self-generated
behavioral outcomes. The child evaluates how closely their babbling matches
their parentsâ€™ mature sounds. This gradually shapes brain circuits to select
appropriate actions. In this case, as infants compare their own babbling sounds
to the mature goal sounds made by parents, they gradually learn to emulate those
mature speech sounds. Vocal learning in songbirds provides a powerful model for
studying how specific neural circuits mediate such experience-dependent skill
learning during development. Like human infants, young songbirds engage in a
goal-oriented process in which evaluation of vocal utterances against a memory
of goal sounds learned from a tutor guides gradual acquisition of learned vocal
behavior. As in other forms of skill learning, successful acquisition requires
neural circuits to carry out comparisons of self-generated behavioral feedback
to goal representations. These studies will create new knowledge of how neural
circuits mediate skill learning. This new knowledge will be used to help in
developing lesson plans for elementary-school students in areas with high
proportions of under-represented minorities and training programs for teachers
in order to advance science education and literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research project is to investigate whether specific
subcircuits within cortico-basal ganglia pathways mediate distinct aspects of
goal-directed skill learning. Using vocal learning in songbirds as an
experimental model, the investigators will test the role of specific neural
circuits in evaluating self-generated actions against a goal behavior as animals
refine their motor output. Juvenile songbirds learn a behavioral goal (memorized
vocal sounds from a tutor) and produce variable behavioral output (babbling)
during a process of trial-and-error learning in which actions that match the
learned goal sounds are gradually strengthened. The research team will record
neural activity in juvenile songbirds during development as they are actively
engaged in learning; our strategy is to record from distinct subgroups of
neurons identified by their selective tuning to either a neural representation
of the goal or to feedback of self-generated behavior as juvenile birds begin to
refine their behavioral output. They posit that these two neural signals of
goal-directed learning give rise to distinct subcircuits as part of the
mechanism underlying action-outcome evaluations. One major prediction is that
cortical neurons that are selectively tuned to the memorized goal representation
provide a filter for identifying behavior that matches the goal, and convey this
information to the basal ganglia. These data will provide an important test of
how goal-similar actions are identified and processed in cortical circuits and
their downstream targets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.