* 1940999
* Workshop entitled, "Formulation Science and Engineering for the Common Good"
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Paschalis Alexandridis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,980.00

The workshop entitled, "Formulation Science and Engineering for the Common Good"
will be held during November of 2019 in Orlando, Florida. The workshop focuses
on highlighting both the science and engineering aspects of formulation.
Formulated products are multi-component chemical systems that are designed to
meet specific requirements, and they are important for a broad range of
industries such as food, personal care, and pharmaceuticals. Formulations
exhibit interesting structures and properties based on the proportion of
components including long chain molecules and particulate matter. This workshop
brings together university researchers and industry engineers to discuss and
exchange the latest ideas in the field and to foster future collaborations. The
forum also serves as a platform to educate young researchers about professional
development and carrier opportunities in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop program includes keynote lectures that offer expert views on the
current state-of-the-art in formulations research and development. The keynotes
are followed by panel discussions on key themes such as emerging trends, data-
driven approaches, computational tools, and challenges and opportunities for
formulation-related research. The long-term objective of this workshop is to
foster multidisciplinary and collaborative approaches toward formulations
research that could prove transformative towards achieving desired societal
outcomes in terms of health and environment. A report will be prepared at the
end of the workshop that will include a summary of the workshop findings and a
discussion of major opportunities in the formulations
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.