* 1940035
* EAGER: Development of a Bulk-Emulating Microphysics Scheme
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Adele Igel, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 137,579.00

Numerical weather and climate models use cloud microphysical schemes to
represent how a large collection of cloud particles grow, interact, and decay.
Explicitly modeling the full characteristics of a cloud, such as the
distribution of different particle sizes, is not computationally feasible for
most purposes, so researchers have devised schemes that can accurately represent
certain quantities that are important for the models. However, there are some
processes that depend greatly on aspects such as the particle size distribution,
so having an improved understanding of the differences between the two
approaches would be useful to identify problems. This work will create a cloud
scheme that is based upon explicit cloud modeling but is comparable to the less
computationally advanced schemes so that direct comparisons can be conducted.
The main societal impact would be the downstream effect on weather and climate
models. The project also provides training for a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a bulk-emulating
microphysics scheme. There are two common classes of microphysics schemes, the
bin scheme where the particle size distribution is explicitly predicted, and the
bulk scheme where 1-3 integral quantities of the particle size distribution are
predicted. Bin schemes are computationally expensive and not feasible for use in
global climate models. However, it has been recently suggested by the scientific
community that bulk schemes are incapable of properly representing aerosol-cloud
interactions. This project will develop a tool and method for testing the
conceptual and numerical limitations of bulk microphysics schemes with an end
goal of informing the community how new schemes should be designed in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.