* 1940696
* Collaborative Research: Predictive Risk Investigation SysteM (PRISM) for Multi-layer Dynamic Interconnection Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Wei Ren, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 05/31/2023
* USD 240,032.00

The natural-human world is characterized by highly interconnected systems, in
which a single discipline is not equipped to identify broader signs of systemic
risk and mitigation targets. For example, what risks in agriculture, ecology,
energy, finance and hydrology are heightened by climate variability and change?
How might risks in, for example, space weather, be connected with energy, water
and finance? Recent advances in computing and data science, and the data
revolution in each of these domains have now provided a means to address these
questions. The investigators jointly establish the PRISM Cooperative Institute
for pioneering the integration of large-scale, multi-resolution, dynamic data
across different domains to improve the prediction of risks (potentials for
extreme outcomes and system failures). The investigators' vision is to develop a
trans-domain framework that harnesses big data in the context of domain
expertise to discover new critical risk indicators, holistically identify their
interconnections, predict future risks and spillover potential, and to measure
systemic risk broadly. The investigators will work with stakeholders to
ultimately create early warnings and targets for critical risk mitigation and
grow preparedness for devastating events worldwide; form wide and unique
partnerships to educate the next generation of data scientists through
postdoctoral researcher and student exchanges, research retreats, and workshops;
and broaden participation through recruiting and training of those under-
represented in STEM, including women and underrepresented minority students, and
impact on stakeholder communities via methods, tools and datasets enabled by
PRISM Data Library web services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PRISM Cooperative
Institute's data-intensive cross-disciplinary research directions include: (i)
Critical Risk Indicators (CRIs); The investigators define CRIs as quantifiable
information specifically associated with cumulative or acute risk exposure to
devastating, ruinous losses resulting from a disastrous (cumulative) activity or
a catastrophic event. PRISM aims to identify critical risks and existing
indicators in many domains, and develop new CRIs by harnessing the data
revolution; (ii) Dynamic Risk Interconnections; The investigators will
dynamically model and forecast CRIs and PRISM aims to robustly identify a
sparse, interpretable lead-lag risk dependence structure of critical societal
risks, using state-of-the-art methods to accommodate CRI complexities such as
nonstationary, spatiotemporal, and multi-resolution attributes; (iii) Systemic
Risk Indicators (SRIs); PRISM will model trans-domain systemic risk, by
forecasting critical risk spillovers and via the creation of SRIs for
facilitating stakeholder intervention analysis; (iv) Validation &amp;
Stakeholder Engagement; The investigators will deploy the PRISM analytical
framework on integrative case studies with distinct risk exposure (acute versus
cumulative) and catastrophe characteristics (immediate versus sustained), and
will solicit regular input from key stakeholders regarding critical risks and
their decision variables, to better inform their operational understanding of
policy versus practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the
National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity, and is jointly supported by HDR and the Division of Mathematical
Sciences within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.