* 1940540
* Solid State and Materials Chemistry Workshop:  Hybrids and Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Beth Guiton, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,999.00

PART I: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid materials that combine two or
more components in an extended solid offer the potential for new structures and
emergent properties not available in single-component materials. Hybrid
materials play critical roles in applications such as gas capture and energy
conversion and storage. At the same time, the complexity of these materials
presents particular challenges regarding their controlled synthesis and precise
characterization. This workshop, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, offers the opportunity
for junior and senior researchers to discuss the topic of Hybrid Materials and
Interfaces by bringing together researchers in diverse sub-fields of materials
chemistry that often do not cross-pollinate knowledge. Through presentations and
working group discussions, the workshop will address overarching questions at
the frontier of hybrid materials research. Advertising and invitations for the
workshop have been planned to foster demographic, geographic, and scientific
diversity among discussion leaders and participants. The anticipated outcomes of
the workshop are better approaches for the controlled synthesis,
characterization, and theory of hybrid materials and interfaces as well as
improved communication among researchers working in this interdisciplinary
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART II: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Extended hybrid
materials of all kinds -- including inorganic-organic, organic-organic, and
inorganic-inorganic combinations at different length scales -- pose unique
challenges and opportunities in discovery, characterization, and establishment
of structure-property relationships. A workshop will be held in Alexandria, VA,
on the topic of Hybrid Materials and Interfaces in October 2019, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research. Themes include hybrid materials synthesis, control of functional
surfaces, control of buried interfaces, and opportunities for collaboration and
access to advanced characterization facilities. The workshop schedule is
designed to include invited talks, "lightning round" contributions from other
participants, and breakout sessions addressing overarching questions.
Advertising and invitations for the workshop have been planned to foster
demographic, geographic, and scientific diversity among discussion leaders and
participants. The anticipated outcomes of the workshop are identification of
strategies and research opportunities for the controlled synthesis,
characterization, and theory of hybrid materials and interfaces as well as
improved communication among researchers working in this interdisciplinary
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.