* 1940777
* PFI-TT: Industrial scale production of high-performance, in-home water filters to protect public health from lead and arsenic in drinking water.
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Nosang Myung, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2023
* USD 349,664.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnership for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will help to improve access to safe and
reliable drinking water supplies by ensuring safe and healthy water at the point
where it is used or consumed. The proposed nanotechnology-enabled water filter
technology provides a unique solution to drinking water pollutants, such as lead
and arsenic, as an in-home or point-of-use (POU) technology. The technology
could be used for unregulated water supplies like private drinking water wells,
where water is often consumed with little to no treatment; day care centers,
schools, offices, and other settings with extensive use of fountains and
bubblers; or circumstances with limited freshwater resources, such as natural
disasters or humanitarian missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will advance nanotechnology-enabled water treatment devices toward application
scale. The project will (i) scale up electrospinning processes to fabricate
nanofiber membrane sheets of dimensions necessary for integration into POU
treatment devices; (ii) integrate these nanofiber membrane sheets into prototype
POU treatment platforms to demonstrate ease of installation, use, and
maintenance; and (iii) validate the device for removal of lead and arsenic under
conditions typical of consumer product certification. These composite nanofiber
water filters are innovative because of their (i) simple, highly tunable
synthetic approach; (ii) higher external surface area (rather than internal
porosity) enabling fast, non-diffusion limited rates of target removal; (iii)
scalability, enabling application across a range of end users; and (iv) multi-
functionality derived from co-integrated ion exchange and sorbent sites. The
transformative aspect of this technology relates to our ability to exploit
synthesis processes to create multi-functional, nanostructured materials with
synergistic performance characteristics; the technology relies on a simple “one-
pot” electrospinning synthesis for creation of a robust platform that is
surface-enriched with multiple binding agents for metal
capture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.