* 1940463
* Inclusive Science Communication Symposium 2019: Building Knowledge and Capacity among Practitioners and Researchers to Foster Inclusive Public Engagement with STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Hollie Smith, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 73,164.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This project will advance evidence-based efforts to broaden informal STEM
engagement via the 2019 Inclusive Science Communication (Inclusive SciComm)
Symposium, to be held September 27-29, 2019, at the University of Rhode Island
in Kingston, Rhode Island. Science communication, defined as any information
exchange designed to engage targeted audiences in conversations or activities
related to STEM topics, is a rapidly expanding area of research and practice
with the potential to significantly increase public participation and sense of
belonging in STEM fields. That said, there are few opportunities for its
practitioners and scholars to convene around how to make their work both
inclusive and equitable, which collectively acknowledge identity, cultural
differences, and epistemologies as part of broadening participation. The 2019
symposium will address this gap through panels, workshops, and posters focused
on three themes that represent critical and difficult aspects of inclusive
science communication: (1) New Languages, Practices, Knowledge, and Research;
(2) Changing Systems and Structures through Science Communication; and (3)
Social Responsibility and Ethics. Within these themes, sessions will be
organized to address major barriers of absence identified by participants in the
2018 Inclusive SciComm Symposium: skills, lessons learned, and knowledge gaps,
especially with regard to facilitating difficult conversations across difference
(critical dialogue). The symposium also will emphasize the need to integrate
research and practice to advance inclusive, equitable, and intersectional
approaches to science communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an urgent
need to question assumptions and examine evidence regarding how science
communicators and scholars approach efforts to broaden participation, but
insufficient data exist on the inputs and outputs of inclusive and equitable
practice. Critical dialogue about potentially uncomfortable topics such as
privilege, power, or marginalization is an essential tool for inclusive practice
and pedagogy. Finding from the 2018 Inclusive SciComm Symposium indicated that
many educators and practitioners lack the language, skills, or confidence to
initiate this type of dialogue. This project supports the knowledge-building
component of the 2019 Inclusive SciComm Symposium to inform future science
communication training, practice, and scholarship, by building on preliminary
data collected during the 2018 symposium and responding to the need for more
robust evaluation of science communication activities. Applying the Theory of
Planned Behavior, the project will employ pre/post symposium surveys to
investigate how 2019 symposium activities affected knowledge, attitudes,
subjective norms, and efficacy (the variables of the Theory of Planned Behavior)
of attendees with regard to critical dialogue. Focus groups at the symposium
will be used to identify priority research areas related to inclusion,
generally, and critical dialogue, specifically, that could advance inclusive
science communication practice and beneficial outcomes. The project also will
evaluate symposium impacts with regard to 1) attendees' opinions on utility of
symposium components for advancing inclusive science communication and 2) how
attendees' experience and response orientations inform their approaches to
difficult science communication conversations. Qualitative data from the surveys
and focus groups will be thematically coded using constant
comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have strategic impact for
inclusive science communication practice and, therefore, for informal learning
and public engagement with STEM topics. Increasing awareness and effective
implementation of critical dialogue by science communicators and trainers should
enhance both for ethical engagement of traditionally under-represented and
marginalized groups and should foster diverse types of public participation in
societal debates about scientific issues. The outcomes of this research will
benefit and link the complementary, but often siloed, fields of informal science
learning and science communication. A final report will summarize research
findings and offer specific next steps to advance inclusive science
communication practice and research, especially with regard to fostering
critical dialogue. The report will be posted on inclusivescicomm.org and
distributed via a national network of partners working in informal science
education, science communication, and public
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.