* 1940361
* Measurement of Atmospheric He/N2 (Helium to Nitrogen) Ratio as a Tracer of Stratospheric-Tropospheric Exchange
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Ralph Keeling, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2023
* USD 528,788.00

This project supports the development of new instrumentation to measure very
precisely the ratio of the concentration of helium (He) to nitrogen (N2) in the
atmosphere. Measurements of this ratio will be used to evaluate the exchange of
atmospheric constituents between the stratosphere (the layer of the atmosphere
just above the troposphere) and the troposphere, the lowest portion of the
atmosphere closest to the Earth's surface. Better understanding of
stratospheric-tropospheric exchange (STE) is important for increasing general
knowledge about the atmosphere and improving models that predict weather and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly developed instrumentation will be used
to: (1) measure long-term trends in He/N2 as recorded in the Scripps Institute
of Oceanography archive of high pressure gas cylinders of air that extends back
to the 1970s; (2) conduct real-time measurements of He/N2 for a period spanning
one year at La Jolla, where stratospheric influences are expected in association
with Santa Anna wind events; and (3) test new methods to allow He/N2 ratios to
be measured in flask samples. Modeling studies will be used to assess the
expected stratospheric influences on the He/N2 ratio. This project is expected
to provide the first estimates of seasonal and synoptic variations in the He/N2
ratio. This effort will also improve the ability of Ar/N2 measurements to serve
as a constraint on ocean warming. The new technique will be used to advance the
understanding of stratospheric circulation and the resulting implications for
tropospheric chemistry, and ultimately, by assessing the sources of these
compounds, to attain a better understanding of the effects of human activities
on the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.