* 1940560
* Conference Proposal: Learning through Play and Imagination
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Thalia Goldstein, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,999.00

Many researchers have claimed that playful and imaginative activities lead to
learning in childhood. But this claim is deceptively simple, and it leaves open
a host of critical questions about how (and even whether) play and imagination
can effectively promote learning. These questions include: How, exactly, does
the process of playful learning work? Which dimensions of play sessions or
imagined scenarios are particularly effective for children's learning, and why?
Which topics do children learn most readily through playful and imaginative
activities, and at what ages? How do characteristics of individual children
(e.g., executive function, temperament) interact with the process of learning
through play and imagination? Integrating information and and answering these
questions are important for the implications they hold for educators and media
creators . To stimulate cross-disciplinary discussions, this two-day conference
(co-sponsored by the Society for Research in Child Development) aims to identify
and fill gaps in the literature on children's learning from playful and
imaginative activities, build collaborations across labs and subdisciplines on
open research questions, and produce proposals for evidence-based strategies for
how these activities can best be used to enhance children's learning and
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining traditional talks with
interactive activities, and by actively seeking participants both from academic
disciplines and practice fields (e.g., media creation, playground and toy
design), this conference will give participants a wide view research in learning
in and through play and imagination, delve into best practices, and explicitly
encourage collaborations and planning for future work to answer crucial open
questions in this field. Participants will leave the conference with shard
conceptualizations of imaginative and playful learning and the ways it could be
researched and applied. The results of these conversations will be widely
disseminated through blog posts, open-access papers, and publicly available
pamphlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.