* 1940392
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Electronic Methods to Prevent Aquatic Biofouling
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2019,09/30/2020
* James DiLorenzo, WAVEARRAY ANTIFOULING SYSTEMS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2020
* USD 248,423.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project addresses biofouling (unwanted attachment of aquatic
organisms, e.g. barnacles) of ships . Current antifouling methods are both
harmful to the environment and costly. Toxic paints may pollute our seas and
waterways. Maintenance to mitigate biofouling is labor-intensive, expensive, and
somewhat hazardous. Increases in fuel costs due to frictional drag during a
vesselâ€™s operation can approach 40%. This project will develop an innovative
electronic approach to biofouling prevention by developing submersible
ultrasonic transducer arrays optimized for low voltage operation in a marina.
The near-term commercial opportunity is with both marina owners and larger
marina nationwide operators, with long-term opportunities in commercial and
naval military transport, a total addressable market of approximately $10
billion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will address the challenges for commercial deployment of
transducer arrays to prevent biofouling of ships docked in marinas, and will
enhance the scientific understanding of acoustic wave generation in water using
piezoelectric transducers and the opportunity to use shock waves to prevent the
attachment of bio-species to hulls of ships. The program has four scientific
objectives: 1) Define the maximum fouling-free area and distance possible with a
single, ultrasonic transducer mounted 30 to 50 cm underwater, on target surfaces
1 to 15 meters distant. 2) Achieve low-voltage operation required for commercial
deployment, using new transducers with low impedance in submersible housings. 3)
Develop an ultrasound sensor in a waterproof housing to create a coherent array
for full coverage. 4) Develop a prototype electronically steerable array
demonstrating a significantly larger biofouling-free area than a fixed
transducer element, to enable use on larger ships, such as commercial and
military transport. A beam-steering solution will reduce the required number of
transducers for increased functionality. The program will innovate in areas such
as acoustic beam steering, electronic design of piezoelectric transducers, and
electro/mechanical design for submersible housings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.