* 1940771
* International Technology Entrepreneurship and Commercialization Workshop 2019: Support for Participants including those from Underserved Groups in S&amp;T
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Angus Kingon, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 10,500.00

A five-day Technology Entrepreneurship and Commercialization Workshop for
domestic and international STEM researchers (graduate students, post-doctoral
scholars, and junior faculty) to be held at Brown University in August 2019. The
objective of the Workshop is to provide processes and frameworks to encourage
researchers to engage in the commercialization of their research, through direct
venture creation or engagement with companies. It includes assistance to
researchers in understanding career choices, discussions of commercialization
resources available to them, including those provided by the Federal government
such as I-Corps and SBIR/STTR. The Workshop especially encourages the
participation of individuals from under-represented groups in Science and
Technology, with Workshop discussion topics focusing on under-representation
challenges, and providing mentors and role models. In alignment with the NSF
mission, it will increase the number of researchers who are focused on the
creation of economic and social value from their research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach in the workshop is via the provision of
tested tools, mental frameworks and processes for commercialization that are
cognizant of the mindset of researchers. It has a limited experiential project
component, with researchers utilizing the research from their own research
groups to engage in: evaluating their research for unique capabilities;
formulating product concepts; determining customer and user needs; and building
a business case. The experiential components not only advance the early stage of
commercialization but allow the researchers to imagine the full process.
Significant time is devoted to discussion of topical issues, led by subject
matter experts. Topics include: realities and challenges of representation in
STEM research, and in commercialization processes, particularly technology
entrepreneurship; career path options, and balancing fundamental research with
appropriate attention to commercialization activities; resources available to
support commercialization activities. Role models and mentors will engage with
the participants. Faculty from US universities will participate in the Workshop
to observe and evaluate the methods used in order to adapt for their own
curricular use. Faculty will engage in discussions on this
topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.