* 1940458
* The 2019 International Conference on Cleaner Production and Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Mingzhou Jin, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 28,627.00

This grant is in partial support of the 2019 International Conference on Cleaner
Production and Sustainability (CPS 2019), to be held October 30 to November 2,
2019. The conference is designed for researchers and practitioners interested in
the issues of cleaner production and circular economy from all over the world to
stimulate new ideas and share their innovations and best practice. During this
conference, participants will discuss theoretical and practical concepts,
methods, tools, policies, research gaps, and examples of sustainability-relevant
research topics. Cleaner production and circular economy are two important
concepts for realizing environmental, social, and economic sustainability and
must be addressed in a convergent one. Solutions to complex sustainability
challenges can be developed only via inter- and trans-disciplinary research. CPS
2019 will bring together researchers and practitioners to discuss barriers to
achieving cleaner production and circular economy. They will also discuss how to
address these challenges through new insights, engineering methods, social
interferences, business practice, and wise policy. CPS 2019 will cover a wide
range of topics related to cleaner production and circular economy, including
eco-innovation and design for sustainability, ecological capital and eco-
governance, education for sustainability, energy efficiency and renewable
energy, food-energy-water nexus, green behavior, and green supply chain. CPS
2019 will identify knowledge gaps, enhance the holistic understanding on global
sustainability, and discover new research directions of cleaner production and
circular economy and result in a roadmap for sustainability research community.

The event will enable international professionals with diverse backgrounds and
expertise to share the most recent ideas, outcomes, and practices on cleaner
production and circular economy. This engagement should have broader influences
on professionals in research, industry, administration, and education. Attending
the conference will allow the researchers, especially early career faculty and
graduate students, to showcase their research and develop an international
network for ongoing exchange and future collaborations. Practitioners and
educators can learn new research progress and incorporate them into their
practice. With participation of scientists, engineers, industry practitioners,
and policy makers, CPS 2019 is expected to be an excellent venue for the broad,
environmentally sustainable community to share their findings and opinions on
cleaner production and circular economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.