* 1940781
* Environmental sustainability of Southwestern US utility-scale photovoltaic expansion under changing climate conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Ashley Broadbent, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 298,366.00

Photovoltaic (PV) systems can have a local air temperature warming effect that
can impact their efficiency and may further exacerbate the warming of the local
environment. Interactions between PV, land, and the atmosphere is further
complicated by climate changes. The potential for widespread PV deployment to
act as a reliable source of renewable energy must therefore be evaluated in a
modeling framework that can accurately characterize future regional-scale
climatic conditions, faithfully represent relevant PV-land-atmosphere
interactions, and assess electricity production. This project targets accurate
and robust assessment of climatic effects associated with future deployment of
PV systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will couple a PV surface energy
balance model that has been developed and extensively evaluated offline by the
research team to the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) climate prediction
system (referred to as WRF-SolarPV). Through a climate-based application of WRF-
SolarPV that accounts for spatially explicit PV deployment extent and
configuration, the research team will generate maps of PV deployment “sweet
spots” across the Southwestern US, highlighting locations with high levels of
sustained solar irradiance that align with suitably low PV module temperatures
under a future climate. Specifically, the research will address how future
climate may impact the solar resource across the southwestern United States, and
what hydro-climatic implications associated with future PV electricity
generation can be anticipated. Through an explicit accounting of electricity
generation, the research will address key concerns associated with reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions and environmental sustainability. The framework to be
developed will enable advancements in numerical modeling of energy systems via
examination of the regional characteristics of current and future PV-land-
atmosphere interactions, including feedbacks among GHG warming, local-hydro-
climates, and electricity production in a dynamically interacting system. The
research team will develop the open-source state-of-the science tool WRF-SolarPV
to be broadly disseminated to the larger climate modeling, engineering and
energy communities through the National Center for Atmospheric Research, which
supports, maintains and disseminates the WRF system for over 39,000 users in
over 160 countries. Development and provision of such a tool is anticipated to
be of considerable value to stakeholders considering transition to PV as a
renewable source of energy but lacking the assessment tools to do so. The
project will also facilitate participation and mentoring of high school
students, through an educational collaboration with local public charter schools
that have participated in summer intern programs with the research team in the
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.