* 1940171
* CoPe EAGER: Modeling the Social Ecology of Coastal Flood Risk
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Fonna Forman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,872.00

Coastal flooding is projected to worsen in the future due to a combination of
continued expansion of coastal cities and increasing environmental variability.
Unfortunately, many people in coastal areas lack the resources needed to avoid
living and working in areas at risk of flooding, and experience great hardships
when flooding occurs, finding it extremely difficult to recover their housing,
health, and ability to return to work after flood events. In contrast, affluent
urban areas are typically better protected, recover more quickly, and may even
experience significant improvements after a flood event. This raises a deeply
alarming concern that rising sea levels and more frequent and intense coastal
flood events will not only impose enormous human and property costs on coastal
communities, but might also deepen inequality, amplify social divisions and
place long-term burdens on poor and marginalized communities. Such outcomes
could in turn create conditions conducive to less trust in the political system
and higher levels of civil unrest. This project seeks to better understand how
the impacts of coastal flooding vary across social strata and identifies
modeling tools and interventions, including community-based, policy and
management options, that can be applied to mitigate coastal flood risks and
constrain the cascade of negative outcomes. The work derives models that can
inform policy debates over managing coastal flood risk, has the potential to
empower vulnerable communities to engage in more effective and equitable flood
planning and management, and expands workforce capacity in convergence
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops and tests a knowledge
platform and action framework that integrates fine-resolution flood modeling
with socio-economic inequality analysis to assess fast and slow onset coastal
flood risks and vulnerabilities at the household and community levels, with an
emphasis on the distribution of impacts across social strata. Further analysis
assesses implications for governance within and across communities. Pilot
research focuses on two regions of California with high risks of flooding: the
Los Angeles Metropolitan Region and the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta Region. The
goal of this research is to assess the extent to which flood visualization tools
co-developed with vulnerable and differentiated communities can identify fair,
affordable, site specific interventions that can mitigate flood risk and
constrain negative social outcomes including long-term burdens on the poor,
political outcomes that favor the rich, and conditions conducive to civil
unrest. The research develops a novel quantitative framework for understanding
and assessing the dynamic relationship between flood risk and socio-economic
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.