* 1940857
* ACQUISITION OF A TRIBOLOGICAL FACILITY FOR THE ANALYSES OF FRICTION, WEAR, AND LUBRICATION OF GEO-SYSTEMS
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Ze'ev Reches, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 302,315.00

This award will provide funding to build an experimental facility dedicated to
Geotribology that will focus on the friction, wear and lubrication of geo-
systems, with a parallel equivalency to engineering tribology. The facility will
include a tribological system of multiple integrated tools that are commercially
built by engineering standards. Via this project, a new facility, GeoTrib, will
be created to study the fundamentals of friction, wear, and lubrication in
geological systems, from faults to the base of glaciers. The facility will allow
multi-scale and multi-condition analyses of earthquake physics, fault stability,
and glacial motion and will impact socio-economic issues of seismic hazard and
climate change. Further, the facility will use engineering methods and standards
and thus will contribute to narrowing the gap between the geoscience community
of friction and wear, and the equivalent, large engineering community. GeoTrib
will be an open facility for interested researchers who could conduct their
experimental work with minimal support of the local team thanks to its
versatile, modular design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until recently, tribological
techniques have not been widely applied to geological problems. The facility
will utilize engineering tribological methodologies and standards for
experimental studies of fundamental crustal and mantle mechanical problems that
are too difficult to conduct with existing geophysics systems. GeoTrib will be
used for analyses of faulting processes, earthquake physics, glacier flow,
landslide creep, debris flow, stream-bed erosion, volcanic eruptions and lava
flows. Potential research projects include: (1) the effects of sample scale on
roughness, friction and wear; (2) the effects of water presence, water
saturation, and temperature (-25 degrees C to 1,000 degrees C) on plasticity and
healing rates of faults zones; (3) the dynamic friction and fluid-solid
interactions at elevated temperature; (4) static and dynamic strength of bi-
material faults; (5) the evolution of fault hardness with temperature, velocity,
and displacement; (6) testing theoretical friction/wear/lubrication models at
crustal conditions of temperature and water presence; (7) investigating brittle-
ductile transition with thermally-dependent mechanisms, e.g., dislocation climb,
grain-boundary-sliding, at the nanoscale; and (8) the fundamentals of ice
friction and rock wear at glacier base and icy
satellites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.