* 1940915
* PFI-RP: Developing a New Large-Scale Battery Technology
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Susan Odom, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 04/30/2024
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this this Partnerships for Innovation
– Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project will be the availability of a low-cost
stationary battery. Low-cost energy storage will accelerate the adoption of
intermittent renewable energy. The small footprint of this battery will enable
large-scale energy storage in previously inaccessible locations. Students will
be trained in advanced industrial research and entrepreneurial skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a battery with
potentially an order of magnitude improvement in volumetric energy density over
commercial conventional flow battery systems. This improvement is possible with
a new approach in which energy is stored in solid particles, and electrical
power is delivered through dissolved species in organic electrolyte. To advance
translation, advances are needed in engineering the energy storage chemical
reaction processes, optimizing the dissolved chemical species needed to deliver
power, and designing a membrane with high conductivity but low crossover of the
dissolved chemical species. Furthermore, this project will address the systems
engineering and scaling challenges associated with
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.