* 1940925
* Workshops for Faculty and Staff Development in Implementing Physics Advanced Laboratory Experiments
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Beth Cunningham, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by conducting a series of workshops to enable physics faculty
and staff members to adopt improved experiments in their undergraduate advanced
laboratories. These faculty and staff members are often assigned to teach these
advanced laboratory courses in areas beyond their own research specialty. The
instructors often lack the expertise to understand the background of the labs,
design the labs, or best integrate the labs with other instruction. This project
is especially important for instructors in small schools who often lack access
to the facilities and expertise found in larger institutions. The project will
create a mobile workshop capable of bringing workshops to these locations as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous workshops included quantum mechanics
experiments with photons, nuclear magnetic resonance, quantum analogs, Hall
effect, gravitational wave interferometry, graphene, high Tc superconductivity,
using field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), and open cavity helium neon laser
experiments. The topics for the workshops supported by this award will be
governed by demand and will include newly developed upper division laboratory
experiments. The effectiveness of the workshops will be evaluated by
questionnaires distributed to the participants and mentors immediately after the
workshops. There will also be a follow-up survey sent to the participants 1.5
years after the workshops. The questions will deal with the content and value of
the workshops, if the participants implemented the featured experiment at their
home institutions, and what was required to do so. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.