* 1940668
* Workshop: Human technology partnerships and the changing nature of work; Evanston, IL - November 2019
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Noshir Contractor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 02/29/2024
* USD 59,998.00

Technologies are fundamentally changing the nature of work. The challenge of
understanding and designing work shared with intelligent machines requires a new
interdiscipline to grow out of three current domains. The science of human
organizing is focused on understanding how individuals, teams, organizations,
and industries interact. Technologies focus on how human work can be facilitated
by new technologies such as computational work design, artificial intelligence,
and machine learning. Finally, the emerging field of data science is focused on
how data-intensive science and data-driven decision-making can transform work
and organizations. Each of these three domains -- science of human organizing,
technologies and data science -- are making breathtaking advances in
understanding and enabling the future of work at the human-technology frontier.
However, over the past decade, there has been a growing recognition by scholars
that the loosely-connected networks in each of these three domains would benefit
from better intellectual engagement. The purpose of this workshop is to
facilitate that engagement with the goal of helping shape a research agenda at
the intersection of these three areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is
specifically geared towards charting a research agenda that is at the nexus of
recent theoretical and empirical advances in three relatively disparate areas.
First, the science of human organizing explores how work changes by novel forms
of organizing enabled by technologies such as offshoring (and now reshoring),
outsourcing and crowdsourcing, the gig economy and the sharing economy. The
second domain of loosely-connected networks focuses on technologies to
architect, design, implement and evaluate the platforms, algorithms, intelligent
agents, embodied agents, robots as well as intelligent machines to facilitate
the future of work at the human-technology frontier. The third domain explores
data science methodologies that leverage advances in computing infrastructures
and data streams to understand and enable the future of work at the human-
technology frontier. While we have witnessed significant intellectual advances
in each of these three areas, the challenge is to develop a research agenda that
builds on the synergies across these three areas. The research agenda and ideas
developed at the workshop will be a direct response to the promise of the future
of work in society. To paraphrase the noted novelist and thought leader, William
Gibson, the future is here -- but it is not evenly distributed. The goal of this
workshop is to leverage recent technological advances but to temper the
exuberance associated with technological developments with a reasoned and
principled theoretical and empirical understanding of the social dynamics that
are afforded by these technological developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.