* 1940134
* Collaborative Research: Workshop on Exuberance of Machine Learning in Transport Phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2020
* Ali Beskok, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,983.00

This award is to support the Workshop on Exuberance of Machine Learning in
Transport Phenomena to be held on February 10-11, 2020 in Dallas, Texas. The
workshop focuses on highlighting the current state-of-the-art and future
directions on the application of Machine Learning on transport phenomena
research. With the growth of Machine Learning in all areas of science and
engineering, we have observed a rapid growth in the number of workshops,
conferences, and summer schools all over the world. This workshop is unique in
which it brings together national experts from all areas of transport phenomena
research to exchange ideas, and to establish a better understanding on
limitations and potentials of Machine Learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop program includes invited speakers who will offer their expert views of
important directions in Machine Learning, transport phenomena, and their
intersection. It will also involve panel discussions on related topics,
exploring novel ways to advance the field, and to identify gaps across the
curriculum for effective training and education of the future generation of
scientists and engineers capable of tackling important problems at the
intersection of these two subjects. A Final Report will be prepared at the end
of the workshop which will include a summary of the workshop and the major
recommendations made by the experts in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.