* 1940809
* EAGER: Mixed Reality for Improved Science Reading Comprehension
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Len Annetta, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

This EArly grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) is a partnership between East
Carolina University (ECU), Spark Plug Games, Cumberland County Schools, and
Teresa C Berrien Elementary School that will develop and perform preliminary
testing of mixed reality (MR) to improve understanding of academic language in
elementary science text. Understanding science vocabulary is crucial for
elementary school students to learn and enjoy science but many students fail to
fully comprehend fundamental science vocabulary needed for scientific literacy.
Mixed reality (MR) is an extension of augmented reality (AR) in that the virtual
objects and experiences overlay or are superimposed on the physical world. In
MR, the user can interact with the virtual objects as well as the physical
world. This project plans technology that will activate virtual content in
science texts at the appropriate time to assist the learner in reading and
understanding new vocabulary. The MR technology will make the science content of
a science reading module come alive with 3D images, moving diagrams, and sound.
The goal is to improve students' comprehension of science text by using mixed
reality (MR) to develop engaging personalized learning systems. The project is
an exploratory study to develop and conduct preliminary tests of a prototype
system meant to demonstrate its usefulness and effectiveness. It will be
determined what is needed to design and develop MR learning environments,
specifically focused on improving upper elementary grade students' science
reading comprehension. The project will lead the way for development of quality
MR learning experiences and eventually for affordable accessible products
suitable for a broader implementation in elementary schools, libraries, and
homes across the world.

Utilizing both qualitative and quantitative data in an iterative approach to
design and development, this EAGER grant is poised to create and test a working
prototype built on the Unity Game Engine and deployed through Microsoft HoloLens
glasses. A reading module will be chosen that closely aligns with the content in
the North Carolina Standard Course of Study for 5th grade science and conveys
challenging abstract concepts with academic language and difficult vocabulary.
The technology will activate content in science texts at the appropriate time to
assist the learner in reading and understanding new vocabulary. The appropriate
time will be operationally defined as when the reader's eye track over a
predetermined science vocabulary term (e.g., Potential Energy). This part of the
effort will require the creation of a software integration layer by Sparkplug
Games to stitch together several proven but discrete technologies into one
system. The head mounted display will monitor the student's direction and
duration of gaze to inform the system of what content is currently important.
The research will take place in two phases. In the first phase, hardware and
software will be integrated to create the MR enhanced science module. This phase
will include collecting student data (read and think aloud) and curriculum
specialist/teacher interviews to inform the enhancement of the text (e.g. which
concepts should be enhanced, how much explanation is helpful, how does the
student activate and deactivate further explanations). Measures will include
"Think Aloud" and researcher observations to determine which vocabulary and
concepts are most difficult for students to process and interviews with teachers
and district personnel to align the materials to North Carolina and other
standards. The second phase will test and iteratively improve the prototype MR
experience with 5th grade students (N = 20-30) to ensure that the technology
works smoothly and provides an accessible and engaging experience for students
reading below, at, and above grade level. Measures will include "Think Aloud"
use of MR enhanced text, observation to compare reading with and without MR
enhanced text, student and teacher interviews, and a pre- and post- Oral Reading
Fluency test analyzed using non-parametric statistical measures. Diverse
participants will be selected to test the prototype with individuals reflecting
the spectrum of reading skills, gender, racial, and ethnic diversity of the 5th
graders. Fifth grade teachers and other school and district staff such as
instructional coaches and administrators will also participate -- their
perspectives will be solicited during the design process in order to create an
MR experience that aligns to the content they are expected to teach and is
workable in terms of classroom implementation. This project is expected to have
a broad societal impact in three ways. First, it will develop a framework for
using data to develop MR materials that bridge science learning and interest
into effective elementary literacy practices and supplement traditional science
instructional tools (e.g. kits), which have been difficult to implement
effectively in some environments. Second, this project aims to develop classroom
tools for teachers to use emerging technology in exciting ways, increasing
engagement and improving learning outcomes for diverse students. Third, this
project aims to develop skills that are fundamental to success in future STEM
learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.