* 1940965
* EAGER: Dual magnetic resonance and optical modalities for image-guided early detection, staging, and resection of ovarian tumors
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Bahman Anvari, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 10/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Ovarian cancer is the deadliest gynecological cancer in women. Most women are
diagnosed at the late stage of the disease. Surgical removal of tumors followed
by chemotherapy is the gold standard to treat ovarian cancer. Currently, there
is no sufficiently accurate screening method for early detection of ovarian
cancer. The investigators propose to develop a dual imaging modality based on
magnetic resonance and flourescene for early detection, staging, and image
guided-removal of ovarian tumors. Feasiblity of the proposed approach will be
tested in animal models of ovarian cancer. The proposed approach may ultimately
enable early detection of ovarian cancer, and improve survival.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this EAGER proposal, the investigators
propose to explore the transformative potential of a dual imaging modality agent
using magnetic resonance (MR) and fluorescence for early detection, staging, and
guided-resection of ovarian tumor implants. This dual imaging modality method is
based on an innovative liposomal nanoparticle system that contains gadolinium
(Gd), and a new brominated cyanine dye (BrCy106) as the respective MR and
optical contrast agents. The long-term goal of the investigators is to develop
imaging methods with high sensitivities for both early detection and
localization of small ovarian tumors prior to surgery by MR imaging (MRI),
followed by near infrared fluorescence imaging (NIRFI) at surgery to aide
staging and guide surgical removal of all tumors which cannot otherwise be
visualized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.