* 1940460
* BPCnet: Scaling Up the Impact of NSF CISE Broadening Participation Activities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Lucinda Sanders, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,633,896.00

The Computing Research Association (CRA), in collaboration with the National
Center for Women in Information Technology (NCWIT) and Dr. Linda Sax and her
research team at UCLA, proposes to expand and enhance the BPCnet portal. As part
of its commitment to broadening participation in computing (BPC), the National
Science Foundation (NSF) Computer and Information Science and Engineering
Directorate (CISE) is piloting a requirement that its Principal Investigators
(PIs) include a BPC plan in their projects. The online resource portal
BPCnet.org was developed by CRA to assist PIs in finding and developing
meaningful BPC efforts. The portal includes a range of resources: scholarly
papers, programs-in-a-box, examples of existing projects that PIs can join for
collective impact, and documents describing how PIs and their departments can
best create their own BPC plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, CRA
describes the next stage in the portal's development. The effort will create
detailed procedures -- Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) -- for obtaining,
vetting, administering, and maintaining new and current resources on the portal.
It will implement a multifaceted curation strategy to obtain new resources,
present resources so that they are easily accessible and searchable, and
continually evaluate the portal content in order to remove or revise resources
that have been judged ineffective or obsolete. The effort will launch a
promotion and community engagement campaign to create awareness and use of the
portal among CISE PIs. It will expand BPCnet.org to include a greater number and
variety of easily accessible resources and result in portal that is more
efficient, effective, and sustainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.