* 1940034
* CoPe RCN: Cascadia Coastal Hazards Research Coordination Network
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Ann Bostrom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2024
* USD 486,207.00

1940034 (Schmift). Coastal natural hazards such earthquakes, tsunamis, flooding,
and landslides pose research, planning, and communication challenges. These
challenges create novel opportunities for advancing both fundamental knowledge
as well as science to support the resilience of coastal communities and thus
reduce the likelihood of coastal hazards resulting in disasters. The
similarities of the Pacific Northwest coast to other coastal subduction zones on
the Pacific Rim provide unique opportunities for comparative and collaborative
research of global significance. Greater regional coordination of hazards
research is needed, to leverage the scientific opportunities hazards in the
region offer, as well as to meet community needs for place-specific hazards and
risk science. The Cascadia Coastal Hazards Research Coordination Network (RCN)
will engage stakeholders across academic, government, and tribal institutions to
advance convergent coastal hazards and resilience research across the Pacific
Northwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RCN will build on existing coastal hazards
research infrastructure and practice-based partnerships to integrate public and
population health science and scientists into other disciplinary and
interdisciplinary hazards research; enhance the understanding of the coastal
hazards in subduction zone environments, as well as dynamic and cascading
coastal hazards; and advance the development of integrated, interdisciplinary
research questions and approaches across engineering, planning and policy, and
geosciences, to mitigate risks and disasters from natural hazards in partnership
with Pacific Northwest coastal communities. The Cascadia Coastal Hazards RCN
will tackle fundamental questions on the mechanisms and consequences of
interacting natural hazards in collaboration with potentially affected
communities, in order to advance interdisciplinary simulation and modeling of
coastal hazards. The RCN will also advance human-centered design and use-focused
representations of and communications about coastal hazards modeling and
simulation results, as well as the integration of geo- and engineering sciences
with research on coastal policy and planning, informed by the risks to coastal
community health in the face of disaster. The RCN will contribute to enhanced
coastal community decision making, planning and resilience to coastal hazards,
through advances in collaborative hazards and resilience research. By including
members whose organizations research or aim to mitigate coastal hazards, the RCN
steering committee will be constituted to liaise effectively with the primary
coastal hazards and resilience-oriented organizations in the Pacific Northwest,
including the Washington Coastal Hazards Resilience Network, state and federal
research and management agencies. Through annual workshops and monthly cross-
disciplinary seminars on coastal hazards, the RCN will also create research
capacity in the region by providing graduate students with unique opportunities
to learn, apply, and advance transdisciplinary coastal hazards sciences, and
increase the diversity of this science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.