* 1940764
* EAGER: Experimental studies of electrical double-layer capacitance of graphene using van der Waals heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Davood Shahrjerdi, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 12/31/2021
* USD 119,960.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical devices based on graphene
have shown promise for sensing and energy storage applications. Graphene-based
electrochemical transistors have also been demonstrated to record electrical
signals in the brain. A major reason for interest in this family of devices is
their ease of fabrication and simple operation. New applications using
electrochemical devices require dense integration of these devices into large-
scale functional systems. This has, however, remained a difficult challenge. It
is difficult to maintain high performance and low variability when reducing
device dimensions. Advances in nanofabrication make it possible to miniaturize
electrochemical devices, but much work still needs to be done to fully
understand the underlying physics that governs their operation. This knowledge
is essential to enable systematic downscaling of the electrochemical devices.
This project will make important progress towards that goal by studying
capacitance in a strongly correlated quantum
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrical double-
layer capacitance per unit area is a key metric for engineering the performance
of miniaturized electrochemical devices. An important new research direction for
studying the electrical double-layer capacitance of graphene is to investigate
the capacitance per unit area with the aid of graphene electronic band
structure. Inspired by this new research direction, the proposed research
explores a new paradigm for precise engineering of the electrical double-layer
capacitance of miniaturized graphene electrochemical devices. This paradigm
involves enhancing the correlation between electrons in graphene and ions in the
electrolyte. The research approach in this study is interdisciplinary in that it
will use advanced van der Waals graphene heterostructures from quantum physics
to explore a longstanding question in electrochemistry. Specifically, van der
Waals graphene heterostructures will be used as the test device structure, where
the potential profile across graphene will be tuned during the construction of
the heterostructure. To study the effect of the potential profile in graphene on
the electrical double-layer capacitance, the devices will be electrically
characterized using capacitance-voltage and voltammetry measurements. The
proposed research project may enable accurate engineering of the capacitance in
graphene with nanoscale precision, while revealing a pathway for increasing its
achievable value beyond the current limits. This project will also trai of
students in important scientific areas and provide them with expertise in device
physics, nanofabrication, and analysis methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.