* 1940242
* Travel Grant for US Participants for LT4All2019
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Jan Trmal, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 09/30/2020
* USD 24,999.00

The last decade has seen breathtaking advances in human language technology
(HLT), which includes automatic speech recognition, machine translation, and
information search and retrieval. This in turn has changed the way humankind
access and share information and knowledge in the digital domain. These advances
in HLT are currently available only for a very limited number of the world's
languages (less than 2%). At particular disadvantage are speakers of thousands
of indigenous languages of the world, including the native languages of North
America. Developing HLT in these languages, however, is not merely a matter of
developing new algorithms or creating data resources: indigenous populations
whose culture and identity is inextricably tied with their language must be
fully engaged in HLT development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, and as a
part of the United Nations' celebration of 2019 as the International Year of
Indigenous Languages, a 2-day conference called "Language Technologies for All
(LT4All)" is being organized under the joint auspices of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the European
Language Resources Association (ELRA) and the International Speech Communication
Association (ISCA) in Paris, France, in December, 2019. This conference will
provide a forum for UNESCO, government, academic and industrial representatives,
language technology researchers, linguists, indigenous community members, and
language users from all over the world to share achievements and challenges.
This award will support US HLT researchers, particularly students and post-
doctoral fellows, and representatives of the US indigenous nations communities
to travel to and fully participate in LT4All. Participation in the conference
will have a positive societal and scientific impact in two directions: a) as the
HLT research is nowadays targeted only at a small set of languages, it will lead
to increasing the intellectual exposure and awareness of the US researchers in
the field of HLT to issues of under-represented language groups worldwide, and
b) supporting the representatives of US indigenous communities will allow them
to participate in the information exchange to strengthen the multi-faceted
information exchange between the HLT researchers, industry representatives,
policymakers and the under-represented language users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.