* 1940866
* EAGER: Data-Driven Control of Power Systems using Structured Reinforcement Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Iqbal Husain, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 220,000.00

Over the foreseeable future, the North American power grid is envisioned to
evolve as the most complex Internet-of-Things, generating massive volumes of
data from thousands of digital sensors. In this modern grid, conventional
generation as well as distributed energy resources (DERs) in the form of
renewables, energy storage, smart loads, and power electronic converters are
foreseen to serve as active endpoints that react and respond proactively to
commands driven by these data. To realize this vision, grid operators today must
start planning for an infrastructure that not only seeks to install more sensors
and actuators, but also bridges the gap between the two, and enables them to
transition from data to control. The challenge, however, lies in dodging the
curse of dimensionality in both data volume and controller size. Even the
simplest control designs today demand cubic numerical complexity, making it
almost impossible to learn them in real-time. The objective of this EAGER
project is to take a step forward towards addressing this challenge. The goal is
to develop machine learning algorithms that translate large volumes of power
system data to real-time control actions without running into unacceptably long
convergence times. Structured learning algorithms that can scan, recognize, and
extract the most useful attributes of large datasets, and at the same time also
identify the most vulnerable parts of the grid that need to controlled using
that data will be developed to achieve this goal, reducing computation and
control time by significant orders of magnitude. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the
technical front, the project will study two key questions. First, given
Synchrophasor data streaming from hundreds of Phasor Measurement Units, are all
spectral components of these data essential for taking a given wide-area control
action Or does there exist a low-rank structure of the data that may be enough
for the control goal? Second, does every actuator in the grid need to be
triggered after a disturbance, or does there exist a certain neighborhood around
the source of the disturbance, controlling which may be enough to stabilize the
grid with a reasonably good performance? Furthermore, can the outline of this
neighborhood be estimated from combinations of online Synchrophasor data and
offline archived data from the energy management system? We will integrate ideas
from structured compressive sensing, model reduction theory, and adaptive
dynamic programming to answer these questions from core machine learning and
control-theoretic points of view. Our study will address two critical control
applications of Synchrophasors, namely (1) hierarchical frequency control using
both conventional generators and DERs, and (2) power oscillation damping of
major tie-line flows in the presence of large-scale wind and solar penetrations.
The study will promote many new directions of theoretical and experimental
research in the application of machine learning for tomorrow?'s power system
operations. Workshops and conference tutorials will be organized to train
graduate students and power system professionals in Synchrophasor data
analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.