* 1940970
* EAGER:  A Gateway Drone for High School Students
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Stefanie Tellex, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 12/31/2022
* USD 249,987.00

The aim of this proposal is to broaden access to computer science and robotics
education for high school students in the New England area, with a particular
emphasis on students from underrepresented groups. This award will allow us to
distribute 300 low-cost Raspberry Pi/Python autonomous drones to students; train
teachers to teach an introductory robotics course to the students; and assess
the impact of this program at attracting and retaining underrepresented groups
to STEM. This project will have an impact on hundreds of high school students in
the New England area. The investigators will have a close collaboration with two
local high schools in the Providence area, the Providence Career and Technical
Academy (PCTA) and the Metropolitan Regional Career and Technical Center (MET).
In year 2, the investigators will recruit 14 more sites, with 20 students at
each site for a total of 300 drones. This project will scale the drone program
to more students, and pilot a model that can grow even more in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the hypothesis that
distributing autonomous drone kits to high school students will increase the
participation and retention of underrepresented groups in STEM. Providing a
hands-on project that teaches students to build and fly an autonomous drone will
increase the student's participation in technical fields, increase the rate of
college enrollments, and provide essential skills. The investigators will use
Brown's accessible open-source curriculum for autonomy education that emphasizes
hands-on experience. The drone is equipped with a monocular camera and
actuators, and performs all processing on board with a Raspberry Pi 3. As a
result, the base station machine can be any computer with a web browser, so the
program can run using a school's existing computing resources, without requiring
software installation. This pilot project will enable hundreds of high school
students to build drones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.