* 1940865
* EAGER: A Shock Tube Study of Laminar Flames in Transportation Fuels at Engine Relevant Temperatures
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Ronald Hanson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 11/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This project aims to develop novel experimental techniques for studying flames
at conditions relevant to transportation systems. Currently, experimental
limitations prevent the study of premixed flames at the high-temperatures found
in modern spark-ignition and jet engines. By using shock tubes, this work aims
to overcome those practical limits and allow future experimental studies to be
conducted at the conditions most relevant to modern engines. Exploratory work
will also be undertaken to understand unique structures only present in high-
temperature flames. Together, this work will support the development of the
clean and efficient engines needed to meet the critical goals of reducing air
pollution, reigning in transportation-related greenhouse gas emissions, and
limiting dependence on foreign fossil fuels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The first of
two major goals of this project is to refine the shock-tube flame speed method
recently demonstrated in the Hanson laboratory. The rapid heating and quiescent
post-shock conditions in a shock tube allow for spherically expanding flames to
be initiated and studied at previously inaccessible temperatures. This method
will be further refined and validated to optimize experimental and data-
processing methods in order to ensure that high-temperature flame data produced
using the method meets the high quality standards of the scientific and
engineering communities. The second major goal is to use a variety of laser- and
imaging-based diagnostics to study peculiar flame structures observed at high
temperatures. Both simulations and preliminary experimental evidence suggest
that two-stage flames, with a cool flame preceding the classical hot flame, may
be observed at high temperatures. This phenomenon will be experimentally
investigated, an objective that will leverage both the unique ability to
generate flames at high temperatures afforded by the shock tube and the existing
optical diagnostic expertise of the Hanson lab. Diagnostics to be employed in
the study of high-temperature flame structure are likely to include line-of-
sight laser absorption, planar laser-induced fluorescence, and spectrally
filtered emission imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.