* 1940243
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Physics and Generative Machine Learning Models for Inverse Materials Design
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Michael Lawler, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2023
* USD 338,320.00

This project is aimed to address a grand challenge in data-intensive materials
science and engineering to find better materials with desired properties, often
with the goal to enhance performance in specific applications. This project
addresses this grand challenge with a specific focus on finding metal organic
framework (MOF) materials that are used to separate gas mixtures and finding
better battery materials for energy storage. The PIs will combine theoretical
methods from statistical mechanics and condensed-matter physics, and physics-
based models, to generate information-rich materials data which is integrated
with generative machine learning (ML) algorithms to search a complex chemical
design space efficiently and to train deep learning models for fast screening of
materials properties. This project will be carried out by a multidisciplinary
collaboration involving researchers from physics, materials science and
engineering, computer science, and mathematics. The resulting multidisciplinary
environment fosters training the next generation data savvy scientists who will
engage in collaborative multidisciplinary research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing approaches for computational design of metal
organic frameworks (MOF) and solid-state electrolyte materials are largely based
on screening of known materials or enumerative search of hypothetical materials.
This project develops a new approach that integrates first principles
calculations, experimental data and abundant data generated by physics-based
models to train generalized antagonistic network (GAN) models for efficient
search of the materials design space, and to train deep convolutional neural
network (DCNN) models for fast and accurate screening of properties of the GAN-
generated candidate materials. Additionally, graph-based GAN models will be used
for MOF topology exploration and can be applied to other nanomaterials designs.
More specifically, the investigators will: 1) develop and exploit physics-based
models for fast calculation of properties such as diffusivity, ion conductivity,
and mechanical stability; 2) develop generative adversarial network (GAN) models
with built-in physics rules for efficient exploration of the chemical design
space for both MOF materials and solid electrolytes; 3) use persistence homology
and Bravais lattice sequence representations of MOF materials and solid
electrolytes, respectively, to build Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN)
models for fast and accurate prediction of the physical properties of generated
materials; 4) apply high-level quantum-mechanical calculations for verification
of discovered materials. Accomplishments from this project will lead to
accelerated discovery of novel nanostructured materials for gas separation and
energy storage, materials for lithium-ion batteries, novel data-driven scheme
for materials design, and theoretical methods enabling implementation of
advanced data science techniques. The highly interdisciplinary collaboration
will offer students unique opportunities to interact with a variety of
disciplines, and training the next-generation scientists with the mindset for
multidiscipline collaborations. Educational and outreach activities will be
developed and undertaken in conjunction with the proposed research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity, and is
jointly supported by HDR and the Division of Materials Research within the NSF
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.