* 1940950
* Reshaping Motor Learning in High-Dimensional Tasks via Soft Robotic Physical Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Rajiv Ranganathan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 03/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

Movement impairments after neurological injury such as stroke are one of the
leading causes of long term disability in the United States. Impairments  of the
upper extremity, including hand and finger function, are extremely common, often
resulting in difficulties performing daily activities.  Neurorehabilitation
often requires learning coordination patterns that involve the complex motion of
a large number of joints in the body. Because common approaches such as
instructions and visual feedback are largely ineffective for guiding such
complex motor learning, this project aims to understand and facilitate the
learning of complex coordination patterns by applying forces using robots. The
project will lead to development of a soft-robotic glove and associated
algorithms for understanding and facilitating motor learning. Understanding how
to guide motor learning in complex tasks has a wide range of applications in
stroke rehabilitation, skill-training for athletes, collaborative human-robot
manipulation, and robot-assisted surgery among others. Advances made in this
project will thus have significant societal impact in these areas. The multi-
disciplinary research is integrated with outreach and educational activities
that aim to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups and to increase
involvement of middle and high school students in engineering research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on unique and complementary expertise of the team
in motor learning, computational modeling, robotics, and control, this research
project will result in a rigorous, systematic framework for modeling and
facilitating bidirectional human-robot learning, via physical interactions, for
tasks involving a large number of degrees of freedoms. The project goal will be
achieved through four integrated research thrusts: (1) developing a soft,
compact, and sensor-rich robotic glove that can apply desired assistance or
resistance (emulating impairment) to individual finger joints; (2) developing
dynamic model decomposition (DMD)-based data-driven models that capture the
learning dynamics and the role of robotic assistance/resistance; (3) exploiting
the DMD-based models and model predictive control theory to design the desired
robotic assistance as well as the sequence of target locations, to facilitate
rapid learning; and (4) evaluating the research approach with extensive
experiments, by examining the evolution of the task performance and the
underlying coordination patterns of hand joints. The motor learning will be
evaluated on in a motion coordination task in which motion of the joints of the
hand will be mapped to the up, down, right and left motion of a cursor on a
screen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.