* 1940155
* Integration of STEM and Social-Emotional Development in Out-of-School Time Programs: A Virtual Conference
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Gil Noam, McLean Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 01/31/2021
* USD 74,959.00

Out-of-school time (OST) programs today are grounded in the positive youth
development framework. According to the National Research Council, high-quality
OST programs apply the youth development framework to STEM by providing young
people with rich, engaging learning experiences that couple STEM concepts with
hands-on activities. These experiences apply STEM to real-world social contexts,
foster youth voice and choice, build relationships with adults and peers, and
support learning, thinking, interest, and identity development. Presently, there
is emphasis for OST programs to focus on the development of social and emotional
skills that impact all learning and performance. Social emotional skills, like
perseverance, relationship building, problem-solving, and self-awareness, are
also referred to as 21st-century skills, workforce skills, life skills,
essential skills, or soft skills. For this conference, the term social-emotional
development (SED), incorporating the above terms and social-emotional learning,
will be used. There is a potentially deep and effective connection between SED
and STEM, prioritizing skills that are mutually important to both fields.

In this virtual conference, The PEAR Institute will convene practitioners and
researchers who can imagine the power of an integrated vision of STEM and SED.
An important aim of this conference is to catalyze OST programs toward the
intentional and explicit integration of STEM and SED in a high-quality manner.
Activities by which this will happen include: (1) mapping the practice landscape
of STEM-SED integration in OST to understand the interest in, capacity of, and
demand for such programming; (2) documenting exemplars that illustrate explicit
and intentional program integration; (3) exploring existing and potential
researcher-practitioner partnerships to understand methods, data, and data
systems used to capture efficacy and effectiveness of integrated STEM-SED
programming; and, (4) drafting a research agenda that focuses on the quality of
implementation and impact of integrated STEM-SED programming.

The target audience for this conference consists of professionals. Participants
will represent the diversity of STEM and SED communities, including
representatives of national youth-serving organizations (e.g., executives,
research directors, practitioners), State Afterschool Networks (e.g., network
leads, summer and afterschool practitioners, contributors to educational
policy), and STEM learning ecosystems (e.g., community leads, OST practitioners,
business leaders, college and university researchers). The conference format
includes one short introductory session to set the stage and two longer working
sessions. With input from the panelists and working group leaders, the team will
produce a narrated slideshow focused on the mapping of the connections between
STEM and SED to innovate assessment and data systems for research and practice.
In addition to the narrated slideshow, the project team will produce two
conference briefs for the field (i.e., one to two-page descriptions of
findings), and an informal webinar regarding the conference outcomes.

This award is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This
includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in
STEM learning experiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.