* 1940920
* Professional Experiences for Students in Plasma Science: Student Travel Support to Attend the 2019 Gaseous Electronics Conference
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* David Staack, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support student participation at the 72nd Annual Gaseous
Electronics Conference (GEC) is to be held October 28 - Nov 1st, 2019, in
College Station, TX. The GEC has a long and venerable history in pursuit of the
foundational physical and chemical processes occurring in partially ionized,
collisional plasmas, encompassing the interactions between atoms, molecules,
charged particles, photons, waves, and fields. The GEC has a strong tradition of
encouraging and promoting student participation. Attending research conferences
is an important educational experience for students that cannot be replicated at
their home institutions. The GEC provides opportunities for students to expand
their networks, to learn about cutting edge research, and to develop and hone
their professional communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEC is a place
to welcome students into a global professional community where they can envision
themselves spending their careers. The GEC program is organized with coffee
breaks mid-morning and mid-afternoon, as a way of facilitating conversation
among participants. At the 2019 GEC, intentional steps are being taken to create
a more inclusive conference atmosphere for those from groups not well
represented at the conference. These steps include a reconsideration of the GEC
experience to add a commitment to diversity and inclusivity to its reputation as
a premier venue for gaseous electronics research. Although demographic changes
in research communities have slower time constants than might be desirable, the
student participation enabled by this award has the potential for long term
impact on the diversity of future GEC community. This approach includes
introduction of several tested professional development and social events
intended to appeal to early career attendees, including students and those from
underrepresented groups. Questions added to the post-conference survey will help
to assess need for, interest in and effectiveness of the added events, and
responses will be used to guide planning for subsequent
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.