* 1940218
* CoPe Conference: Evaluating Land Use Tradeoffs Due to Sea Level Rise in the Chesapeake Bay: Hampton, Va - June 2020/ Salisbury, MD - October 2020
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Taryn Sudol, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,583.00

The Chesapeake Bay (CB) coastal region has one of the highest rates of sea level
rise in the United States. Homes, ecosystems, and millions of dollars of
critical infrastructure are increasingly at risk of erosion,and various types of
flooding. In order for CB communities to plan for the future, members must
understand their local rates of sea level rise (RSLR) and the factors
contributing to these local variations. A significant contributor to differences
in RSLR is that land surrounding the CB is sinking (i.e. vertical&lt;br/&gt;land
motion (VLM)) at different rates, but the causes behind these rates are not
easily measured or widely understood. Scientists, town planners, and land
managers must discuss the current science of VLM, how to monitor its rates
across the CB, and possible mitigation strategies. Furthermore, scientists and a
wide range of community stakeholders, including those in underrepresented rural
areas, should understand how RSLR will have multiple impacts on residential
communities, wetlands, and agriculture. They each have their own priorities that
will influence what management options are most ecologically, socially, and
economically desirable or feasible. Presenting the latest science on the causes
of RSLR, anticipated land use changes, and the cost-effectiveness of different
management options will empower the CB region and others facing similar threats
from RSLR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will convene two workshops: 1) Vertical
Land Motion in the Chesapeake Bay, and 2) Evaluating Land Use Tradeoffs in the
Chesapeake Bay. Workshop 1 will improve scientific understanding of the physical
drivers of VLM rates in the CB and identify areas where understanding VLM rates
may be most critical for land use planning. Workshop 2 will focus on how to
effectively communicate VLM science and how rates of RSLR will cause land use
changes and affect coastal communities. The goals of the workshops are to: 1)
understand and disseminate the state of the science on VLM; 2) improve
stakeholder understanding of accelerated RSLR; 3) learn how RSLR may change
current land use practices, and 4)engage stakeholders throughout the workshop
process. The workshop schedules involve: a) pre-workshop planning; b) holding
workshop 1 c) workshop 1 synthesis and outcomes analysis; d) holding workshop 2;
and e) a synthesis report and information distribution. Participants will
include researchers, land conservationists, agricultural specialists, town
planners, and community members, especially from underserved communities. At the
end of these workshops there will be better information for use in community
decision-making. Workshop organizers will assess how priorities differ among
stakeholders and what factors most influence stakeholders' actions, which will
guide selection of the research, tools, and outreach communities need to
effectively plan for sea level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.