* 1940483
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Mapping Melting Glacial Surfaces with GNSS Reflectometry
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Seebany Datta-Barua, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 344,675.00

Part I: Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Global navigation satellite systems
(GNSS) such as the Global Positioning System (GPS) are continuously transmitting
signals toward Earth. While many people may be familiar with using the GPS
signals for positioning and navigation, these signals are also usable for
sensing Earth’s environment. Ice and snow surfaces are continuously awash with
radio signals broadcast from GNSS. When the signal bounces off the ice or snow
surface and then arrives at a receiver, it acts as a form of radar, in which the
radar transmitter is free, covers the globe, is always on, and is unaffected by
precipitation. This work will build and deploy a GNSS reflectometry (GNSS-R)
system specifically to detect reflections off glaciated surfaces. The goal of
the work is to find out how the signal changes depending on surface type, and
specifically, whether using GNSS as a radar can be effective for monitoring snow
and ice melt and freeze on a glaciated surface. In this system, two GNSS
antennas and receivers will be used, one facing upward for positioning, and one
directed downward to collect the surface reflections. Setting up the GNSS-R
system near the ice runways on the McMurdo Ice Shelf, near to the US McMurdo
Station, Antarctica, the system will monitor for variations in the signal as it
reflects off alternately surface ice, meltwater, and snow. With camera images
and lidar surveys at the site will relate the GNSS “radar” signal and the area
it bounced from (knowable from geometry because the GNSS satellite and receiver
locations are known) to the surface type. If GNSS-R is developed to the point of
being comparable to or better than existing ways of characterizing frozen
surfaces, it would find a niche in applications ranging from local ablation
monitoring to assessment of aircraft runway safety. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Part
II: Technical Description&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aspires to
answer the question: Can global navigation satellite system (GNSS) reflectometry
(GNSS-R) be used to reliably map snow-cover, ice, and surface water in a harsh
glaciated environment at high spatio-temporal resolution? Our working hypothesis
is that GNSS-R can differentiate among cold snow, wet snow, bare ice, wet ice,
and surface water in a way that will yield observations that can inform how
glacial surfaces accumulate and ablate. This project will test this hypothesis
by conducting GNSS-R instrument design, field trial and signal processing, and
comparison with other methods, including the single-antenna interferometric
reflectometry (GNSS-IR) method currently in use. The objective is to develop
GNSS-R instrumentation and data-processing techniques as an effective high-
spatiotemporal-resolution method of characterizing the composition of snow, firn
and melting ice surfaces relevant to climate change on the Antarctic Ice Sheet.
The GNSS-R receiver system will capture the signal after it has interacted with
the surface (glaciated in this case), in order to infer variable compositions of
the surface. Passive radar return intensity will be used to characterize the
surface type, whether snow, firn, ice, or water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.