* 1940551
* EAGER: Embedded Deep Neural Nets for Predicting Reynolds Stresses in Complex Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2022
* John Eaton, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2022
* USD 299,404.00

Engineers rely on computational simulation of turbulent flows prior to costly
experimental testing to design automobiles, ships, jet engines, wind turbine
arrays, and many other flow systems. Realistic turn-around times from concept to
solution requires using approximate models to represent the effects of
turbulence in the design process. Direct numerical simulations capturing all
details of the flow are too expensive for practical full-scale systems, and
standard turbulence models are unable to accurately predict the complex, three-
dimensional flows pervasive throughout engineering systems. Contemporary machine
learning algorithms are creating a paradigm shift in the information that can be
gleaned from data and the scale of the data sets that can be efficiently
processed. The goal of this project is to improve turbulence models using a
data-driven approach which leverages the massive data sets produced by direct
numerical simulation of the flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental
hypothesis of this research is that a machine learning model which accurately
predicts the turbulent stresses for a given mean flow field will improve
simulation results when implemented in a Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes code.
This project will develop improved models for the anisotropy tensor and terms in
the turbulent kinetic energy transport equation using deep neural networks.
Neural networks will be trained using only direct numerical simulation data and
implemented directly in a computational fluid dynamics solver so that the
predictions are independent of errors in any baseline model: a substantial
advancement over existing discrepancy-based methods. Development of
interpretability methods will elevate neural networks from black box tools to
trustable models with clearer links between predictions and the underlying flow
structures. Techniques for identifying flow regions where the neural net is
poorly trained will produce robust machine-learned models that do not degrade
computational fluid dynamics predictions below baseline model performance. Our
approach also introduces corrective terms into the basic governing equations.
Therefore, the lessons learned will provide a framework for future modeling work
in any mechanics-based engineering discipline. The models will be tested using
experimental data for a number of industrially relevant flows that have caused
difficulty for conventional models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.