* 1940961
* CLPS1-CLPF ADAPTORS FOR PROTEASE SUBSTRATE SELECTION IN CHLOROPLASTS
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Klaas van Wijk, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 01/31/2024
* USD 930,000.00

Proteolysis, the breakdown of proteins or peptides to amino acids, is critical
for removal of unwanted or damaged proteins and regulation of cellular processes
such as metabolism. Chloroplasts are essential plant organelles that are
important in biomass productivity and agriculture. However, the determinants of
chloroplast protein life-time and degradation are poorly understood. Cells and
organelles contain hundreds of proteolytic systems. This research will provide
insight into the role of the central chloroplast Clp protease system, consisting
of protein chaperones, a protease core complex and several proteins involved in
selection and delivery of specific Clp protease substrates. The research
findings can also be implemented in molecular farming and synthetic biology
(e.g. through tunable protein degradation), since cellular compartments such as
chloroplasts are favored for overexpression of products with nutritional or
pharmaceutical value. The outcome of this research will allow more rational
protein design for stable accumulation of chloroplast proteins, thus directly
impacting these applications. This project will provide training in proteomics,
mass spectrometry, molecular genetics, biochemistry, structural biology at the
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral levels. Summer internships will be
offered through our NSF-sponsored REU programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is built on extensive investments in biological materials such as
Arabidopsis protease mutants, previously identified candidate Clp substrate or
Clp adaptors, as well as expertise in mass spectrometry, proteomics and
structural biology. The central objective of this proposal is to unravel the
functional, structural, and mechanistic details of a novel ClpS1-ClpF adaptor
system, including substrate selection, substrate half-life, and interactions
with Clp chaperones. It may also lead to the discovery of additional Clp
adaptors. We will use our in vivo tools to test the physiological role of ClpS1
and ClpF in substrate selection. In vivo degradation assays will test the impact
of Clp components on the half-life of candidate substrates. High-resolution
structural information through X-ray crystallography or CryoEM will be obtained
for ClpS1 and ClpF, with their functional partners. In vitro and in planta
interaction assays and functional complementation will determine the role of
protein domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.