* 1940308
* CoPe EAGER: Addressing Human-Centric Decision-Making Challenges from Coastal Hazards via Integrated Geosciences Modeling and Stochastic Optimization
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* John Hasenbein, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,932.00

Coastal communities are susceptible to flooding due to tropical storms,
hurricanes, and heavy rainfall events. These events have increased recently in
frequency and intensity. Therefore, it is critical to develop smart, science-
based systems, tools and models that capture the underlying behavior of coastal
hazards, and to coordinate and optimize decisions before, during and after
natural hazards, to enhance the resilience and response of coastal communities.
This research undertakes an exploratory and unifying research agenda focused on
integrating geosciences-based modeling of coastal floods with scenario-based
stochastic optimization for human-centric decision-making problems that coastal
communities face in the wake of hurricanes and other flood-inducing events.
Using such events as archetypal coastal hazards, the project addresses a
specific human-centric problem: evacuating patients from hospitals and nursing
homes just before such hazards. Patient evacuation planning is especially
important as mismanagement has several times led to unnecessary deaths in
hospitals, in nursing homes, or during evacuation. Development of an effective
decision support tool, to be used by regional evacuation coordination agencies,
could have wide-ranging impact across the United States in future disasters.
Indeed, a primary goal of this research is to create a tool that can be
disseminated for national use. The knowledge and tools developed on large-scale
multi-hospital patient evacuation will lead to new ways to optimally coordinate
limited resources when faced with uncertain but predictable events such as
hurricanes. Moreover, this integrated approach is extendable to other coastal
logistical problems (e.g., prepositioning emergency supplies, siting shelters,
prepositioning repair resources and spares for critical infrastructure recovery)
thus initiating new research agendas. This research also features robust
collaboration with various organizations, including those involved in weather,
hurricane, and flood prediction, and emergency management and evacuation, in
order to ensure feasibility and usability of the tools produced. On the
educational front, the PIs will create teaching modules on evacuation modeling
and develop a new course on humanitarian operations research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a specific problem that
significantly affects coastal communities in order to highlight the value of
integrating geosciences-based modeling of coastal floods with scenario-based
stochastic optimization: optimizing large-scale multi-hospital and nursing home
evacuation in response to flood-inducing events. This high-stakes problem needs
accurate flood predictions. In particular, this research integrates coupled
weather forecast, runoff production, river routing, inundation mapping models
(in general, geoscience models) with an underlying stochastic optimization model
of the decision-making problem. The main use of the geoscience models will be
the rigorous generation of flooding scenarios that will serve as input to the
stochastic optimization models. The modular architecture of the Weather Research
and Forecasting Model, hydrological modeling system (WRF-Hydro), with the Noah
Land Surface model (LSM), will be coupled to a vector-based river routing model
(RAPID). The integrated geoscience model will generate statistically-grounded
flooding scenarios before a hurricane or heavy rainfall event in order to
improve recommendations for resource allocation and logistics decisions (e.g.,
staging area locations, allocation of medical personnel, allocation/routing of
ambulances between sending and receiving facilities, etc.). Finally, recognizing
the uncertainty in the hurricane forecasts, this effort generates a series of
flood scenarios (instead of a single realization) to be used in the patient
evacuation problem, which was not done before. A significant merit of the
proposed work is to bring together two research communities that do not usually
work closely together: operations research and geosciences modeling. In creating
this bridge, the research links the predictive power of geosciences modeling
with the prescriptive power of stochastic
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.