* 1940310
* III: Small: ACM BCB 2019: Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Dongmei Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2022
* USD 15,000.00

The 10th Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) International Conference on
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology and Health Informatics (ACMBCB2019),
the flagship conference of the ACM SIGBio (Special Interest Group in
Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics), will be held in
Niagara Falls, NY, on September 7-10, 2019. It is the premier dissemination
forum for interdisciplinary research linking computer science, mathematics,
statistics, biology, bioinformatics, biomedical informatics, and health
informatics. Its mission is to support advanced research, training, and
outreach. It brings together superb researchers, practitioners, and students
from around the world to promote novel scientific findings in bioscience and to
deliver new knowledge for societal impact. The past few decades have seen
tremendous growth in the scale and complexity of biological and medical data
including recent mainstream recognition of big data challenges. However, the
development of synergy in bioinformatics, computational biology, and health
informatics research has been difficult. Thus, it is important to train new
researchers to achieve this synergy. This award will support up to 15 early-
career professionals (students and recently graduated post-doctoral fellows) to
share their travel costs to the conference. Senior researchers will serve as
mentors to these early-career professionals to improve bioinformatics,
computational biology, and health informatics community building. This award
aims to increase the participation of students and recently graduated post-docs;
train the next generation of researchers and educators in computer science,
biological science, biomedical science and other related areas; and broaden
diversity in bioinformatics and computational biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ACMBCB2019 conference will showcase leading-edge research on new technologies
and techniques around gathering, processing, analyzing, and modeling of data and
information for a variety of scientific, clinical, and healthcare applications
from bench to bedside. It will provide activities such as workshops, tutorials,
oral sessions, and poster sessions for researchers from different disciplines to
interact, to discuss, and to collaborate. To be selected for participation,
early-career professionals will need to submit a short research proposal
containing Intellectual Merit, Broader Impact, and supporting information such
as a resume and a letter of support from their advisors. A committee consisting
of experienced researchers will review the research proposals and select the
awardees with the support from the conference organizers. In addition, this
award will enable ACMBCB2019 to expand "Women in Bioinformatics" to strongly
encourage participation from more underrepresented groups by inviting senior
researchers to share their experience and wisdom in career development, and to
serve as mentors to facilitate early-career professional groups with the goal to
continually build the community throughout the year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.