* 1940287
* Collaborative Research: Machine Learning methods for multi-disciplinary multi-scales problems
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Dallas Trinkle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2023
* USD 331,136.00

This project addresses two of the most pressing challenges in modern scientific
research: (a) modeling natural phenomena across a broad range of space and time
scales, and (b) the application of data science to discover physically
meaningful relationships from large datasets. It will leverage knowledge from
related and disparate disciplines, connecting them through data science. Four
specific problems will be studied: cloud formation and evolution, movement of
particles through random media, frustrated magnetic systems, and the
reconstruction of urban topography. These benchmark problems have been selected
as they capture different disciplinary aspects of multi-scale challenges. State-
of-the-art methods in machine learning (including Artificial Neural Networks)
will be used to develop new mathematical representation for small-scale
processes. If successful, this project will substantially increase the
capability of scientific computing to address a wide variety of important
problems from the natural and social sciences, and will be disseminated widely
through a pair of workshops, multiple campus visits across the 5-institution
consortium, high impact peer-reviewed publications and presentations and the
training of a cadre of more than a dozen post-docs and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop, implement and evaluate
a new constrained optimization framework to discover and test physical phenomena
at different resolutions and scales, including new machine learning algorithms
aimed at discovering the stochastic differential equations underlying noisy
data. This will be used to train physical parameterizations that account for the
effects of small-scale processes in coarse resolution models. Core to this will
be the design of a new framework to constrain artificial neural networks to
deliver solutions that are interpretable and meaningful in the domain sciences
and that can be directly associated with differential
operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity, and is
jointly supported by HDR and the Division of Mathematical Sciences within the
NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.