* 1940192
* CoPe EAGER: Collaborative Research: Evaluating Coastal Community Resilience Bonds to Facilitate Community Recovery
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Guirong (Grace) Yan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 09/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

This project evaluates the use of a new type of bond, a coastal community
resilience bond (CCRB), that has the potential to assist coastal communities to
recover more quickly and become more resilient following a disaster. If
effective, this new bond mechanism can be extended to other communities. This
new type of bond integrates social assets and physical infrastructure in its
development to enable investment in community resilience. The two goals of this
resilience bond are to: (1) achieve equitable recovery of both physical and
social systems and institutions; and (2) reduce the resilience gap between
different types of communities. The resilience bond development includes not
only the repair of the physical systems in a community, but also valuation and
investment that enable timely recovery of social institutions, bridging a gap in
current disaster resilience bonds. As part of this research graduate students
will receive cross-disciplinary training where the fields of urban planning,
engineering, and finance overlap. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test this new type of
bond, the research team considers two case study communities in Mississippi and
South Carolina each having different resilience planning capacities, but both
identifying needs in resilience investment. Community level modeling with a
portfolio of options to achieve these goals and objectives will consider metrics
identified as part of the engagement process combined with what is achievable. A
resilience bond pricing methodology will be developed through a series of
interviews and consultation with insurance and finance industry experts. Pricing
will be discussed with community stakeholders to determine if it is within the
acceptable range. The primary outcomes of this research are: (1) the development
of a coastal community resilience bond which not only includes the repair of the
physical systems in a community, but also provides valuation and investment to
enable timely recovery of social institutions, bridging a gap in current
disaster resilience bonds; (2) a high-fidelity loss model integrated with a
community-level model to enable decision-making based on community needs; and
(3) development of a coastal community resilience bond development methodology
that is adaptive to varying capacities for resilience investment and planning in
a variety of communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.