* 1940619
* IRES Track-I PILOT: Location-Independent Multi-Source Video Streaming
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Mohsen Amini Salehi, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 01/31/2022
* USD 74,997.00

Video streaming is the major source of Internet traffic in the U.S. and
worldwide. To enable high quality and fast video streaming, independent from the
viewers' geographical location, researchers propose to explore a inter-fog
computing system called Latency Aware STreaming (LAST) that enables multi-source
video streaming. Leveraging the locality feature exists in video stream
requests, LAST will be able to partially pre-process video streams and stream
the missing segments simultaneously from peer LASTs that possibly have those
missing segments cached. LASTs also have the ability to locally process video
streams. Therefore, for each video segment, a LAST has to determine whether to
stream it from a neighboring LAST or process it locally. To reduce streaming
latency further, the LAST platform proactively determines hot videos in a
certain jurisdiction and preheats those videos at the fog
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an exploratory but potentially
transformative research idea in its early stages. This project, involving the
radical approach of multi-source video streaming, is considered high risk/
potentially high payoff. The project is interdisciplinary and combines cloud/fog
computing and video streaming. To explore this idea, two students (possibly one
graduate and one&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate student) are expected to travel to
visit CLOUDS Lab at Melbourne University in Australia that is directed by Dr.
Rajkumar Buyya, one of the most outstanding researchers in cloud computing and
he is the highest cited scientist in Cloud Computing. In a close collaboration
with CLOUDS lab, the team of researchers will learn working with iFogSim, which
is a platform for&lt;br/&gt;simulating and testing fog computing systems
developed at CLOUDS Lab. It will enable students to simulate and prototype the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;LAST platform. During the visit, students will learn and
extend iFogSim to accommodate video streaming tasks and achieve multi-
source&lt;br/&gt;streaming via inter-fog systems. This project will help
undergraduate and graduate students from UL&lt;br/&gt;Lafayette to become highly
skilled and globally engaged workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.