* 1940942
* PFI-RP: Translational Research from Academia to Industry on Low Cost Plastic Materials for Infrared Thermal Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Michael Mackay, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 04/30/2024
* USD 675,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project will address the long-standing challenge
of making cheaper infrared (IR) thermal imaging systems (i.e., “night vision”),
long used for defense &amp; military applications. The potential of IR thermal
imaging and detection for applications in consumer electronics, transportation,
medical imaging, robotic and aerospace has also been known for decades, but the
high cost of IR cameras &amp; detectors has impeded widespread use of these
systems in consumer markets. The proposed technology consists of a new class of
inexpensive materials for the creation and production of windows, lenses and
other optical components of IR thermal imaging systems. The proposed novel class
of synthetic polymers will be used for the first time in IR optical applications
at the lower cost and easier processing of conventional materials. This advance
would further enable the development of lower-cost IR imaging systems for mass
deployment in consumer markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be
focused on a new class of IR optical materials known as 'Chalcogenide Hybrid
Inorganic/Organic Polymers' (CHIPs). These polymers have the highest refractive
index of any synthetic polymer known to date and possess superior IR
transparency, in comparison to classical synthetic polymers. CHIPs materials can
be processed into optical elements, such as lenses or windows, for IR thermal
imaging. In this project, the development of large-scale synthetic methods of
CHIPs materials with desirable optical and thermomechanical properties will be
conducted. New processing methods will be developed using classical melt
processing techniques, such as molding/casting or hot pressing to prepare high
quality windows and lenses. Additive manufacturing techniques, such as FFM-3D
printing, will also be employed for the first time to rapidly prototype CHIPs
lenses and windows. The proposed project will optimize design of optical
components at the systems level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.