* 1940181
* Collaborative Research: Autonomous Computing Materials
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Takaki Komiyama, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2022
* USD 345,915.00

The recent explosion in worldwide data together with the end of Moore's Law and
the near-term limits of silicon-based data storage being reached are driving an
urgent need for alternative forms of computing and data storage/retrieval
platforms. In particular, exabyte-scale datasets are increasingly being
generated by the biological sciences and engineering disciplines including
genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and high-resolution
imaging, as well as disparate other scientific fields including climate science,
ecology, astronomy, oceanography, sociology, and meteorology, amongst others. In
this data revolution, the continuously increasing size of these datasets
requires a concomitant increase in available computational power to store,
process, and harness them, which is driving a need for revolutionary new,
alternative substrates for, and forms of, computing and data storage. Unlike
traditional data storage and computing materials such as silicon, the human
brain offers a remarkable ability to sense, store, retrieve, and compute
information in a manner that is unrivaled by any human-made material. In this
research project, analogous modes of information sensing, data storage,
retrieval, and computation will be explored in non-traditional computing
molecular systems and materials. The over-arching goal of the research is to
discover revolutionary new modes of data storage/retrieval, sensing, and
computation that rival conventional silicon-based technology, for deployment to
benefit society broadly across all domains of data science. Graduate students
and postdocs across five institutions will be trained and mentored in a highly
interdisciplinary manner to attain this goal and prepare the next-generation of
data scientists, chemists, physicists, and engineers to harness the ongoing data
revolution. The research will be disseminated to a broad community through news
outlets and integration of high school student internships in participating
research laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale datasets from spatial-
temporal calcium imaging of the mouse brain will be recorded into DNA-based,
nanoparticle-based, and phononic 2D and 3D soft and hard materials. Continuous
spatial-temporal data will first be transformed into discrete data for mapping
onto DNA-conjugated fluorophore networks, dynamic barcoded nanoparticle
networks, and phononic 2D and 3D materials. Sensing, computation, and data
storage/retrieval will be demonstrated as proofs-of-principle in exploiting the
chemical properties of molecular networks and materials to recover the encoded
neuronal datasets and their sensing and computing processes. Success with any of
these three prototypical materials would revolutionize the ability to encode
arbitrarily complex, large-scale datasets into complex molecular systems, with
the potential to scale across diverse data domains and materials frameworks. The
investigators' Autonomous Computing Materials framework will thereby enable the
encoding of arbitrary "big data" sets into diverse materials for data storage,
sensing, and computing. This project maximizes opportunities for disruptive new
computing and data science concepts to emerge from a multi-disciplinary,
collaborative team spanning data science, neuroscience, materials science,
chemistry, physics, and biological engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data
Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity, and is jointly supported by HDR and the
Division of Chemistry within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.