* 1940859
* CAREER: Securing Cyberspace: Gaining Deep Insights into the Online Underground Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 06/05/2019,03/31/2022
* Yanfang Ye, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2022
* USD 241,664.00

As the Internet becomes increasingly ubiquitous, it offers a low-risk harbor for
cybercrime -- illegal activities such as hacking and online scams. Cybercrime is
increasingly enabled by an online underground ecosystem, within which are
anonymous forums and so-called dark web platforms for cybercriminals to exchange
knowledge and trade in illicit products and services. To better protect the
trust of legitimate institutions and users within cyberspace, and to disrupt or
mitigate the harm of illegal markets, there is an urgent need to gain deep
insights into the online underground ecosystem and understand its intricate
relationships. The goal of this project is to design and develop an integrated
computational framework for in-depth investigation of the online underground
ecosystem and thus to help secure cyberspace by producing data-driven
interventions of cybercrimes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have three
main parts. First, the research team will design methods and develop algorithmic
and scalable techniques to automate the analysis of online underground markets.
Second, the team will develop a novel framework for cross-market user
identification and profiling. Third, the team will design an innovative model
and propose algorithms for structural analysis of cybercriminal social networks
to gain deep insights into the organization and operation of cybercriminals in
the ecosystem. The broader impacts of this work include benefits to scientific
communities and society as a whole by developing interventions into online crime
to secure cyberspace for its users. The establishment of a cybersecurity lab
through this project will enhance education and workforce training in
cybersecurity. The project integrates research with education through curriculum
development, the participation of underrepresented groups, and student mentoring
activities for a newly-established cybersecurity degree
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.