* 1940056
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Safe, Energy Dense, High Performance Lithium Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Surendra Singh, Belmont Scientific Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the ability to detect and prevent fires in lithium-
ion batteries. Lithium-ion batteries have become the preferred mode of energy
storage and reuse in numerous applications ranging from mobile phones to
aircraft. The low safety of current Li-ion batteries has led to a number of
accidents in various applications ranging from computers to electric vehicles
and aircraft. Excessive heat release from one cell can compromise the safety of
the entire battery pack and the host system. By eliminating the potential for
fires in each cell, the proposed technology will enable the construction of
larger format cells to reduce the battery integration costs. Improved safety
also will usher in the move towards higher energy density cells and open new
applications that can benefit from Li-ion batteries. The projects potential
societal impacts include significant revenues if successful, increased safety
and even lives saved, increased penetration of energy storage and associated
environmental impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to develop an innovative technology to improve the safety of Li-ion batteries
and prevent fire due to manufacturing defects, abuse and abnormal use. In
today's batteries, these failures trigger exothermic reactions that can
transition into uncontrolled thermal runaway. The resulting fires have impacted
the safety of various systems ranging in scale from small (mobile phones and
computers) to very large (aircraft). The objective of this effort is to develop
a technology embedded in a compact sleeve that slides over the cells in a
battery pack to passively detect the conditions and isolate the failing cells to
prevent their thermal runaway. The Phase I research consists of designing the
safety sleeves for select Li-ion battery chemistries and geometries, then
demonstrating their effectiveness in detecting and preventing thermal runaway in
both individual cells and in battery packs. The results from Phase I research
will be used to design prototype sleeves for additional battery sizes, shapes
and chemistries that will be tested further in Phase
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.