* 1940249
* EAGER: Multi-level Research into I-Corps' Impact on Entrepreneurial Development:  An Exploratory Study
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Kevin Leicht, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 296,238.00

This EAGER project engages in research that has the potential to be
transformative in the field of innovation. The project involves a study that
evaluates the individual and combined effects of Innovation Corps (I-Corps)
activities to explore the multi-level impact on entrepreneurial development of
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on entrepreneurship and in the
related fields of economics, psychology, and sociology has found that new
business creation is affected by a wide range of factors at multiple levels of
analysis (individual, team, organization, community, industry, and economy).
I-Corps, with its entrepreneurship training offered at different levels, formats
and from different locations across the country, provides a unique setting to
collect data conducive to interdisciplinary, multi-level investigation of new
business creation with a focus on technology startup firms originating from
innovations developed on university campuses. The research and the data that it
collects on program activities and impact will help advance future research and
the development of more comprehensive theories about technology
commercialization and new business creation. The outcomes will inform the next
generation of entrepreneurship training and startup strategies, and, it will
also help advance fundamental knowledge about the key determinants of
entrepreneurial success and the development of appropriate metrics for its
evaluation. It will enable future innovation research and the development of
more comprehensive theories about technology commercialization and new business
creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.