* 1940105
* CoPe EAGER: Mobilizing our Coastal Communities: Facilitating Rapid Response Observations of Extreme Event Flooding, Inundation, and Overwash
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Diane Foster, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,181.00

Extreme storms, high tide flooding, tsunamis, earthquakes, and other natural
events pose high risk to coastal communities and cause billions of dollars of
damage. Although the geophysical forcing leading to the flooding may be regional
in nature, the intensity and duration of the flooding may exhibit significant
temporal or spatial variability over a range of scales. Advancing technologies
for low-cost instrumentation that can be rapidly deployed by citizen scientists
will allow for scientists and local communities to address the chronic under-
sampling problem by collecting critical observations of extreme flooding. A
lending library for instruments that are able to measuring localized flooding
will be created. The observations collected by citizen scientists will serve as
a resource for coastal geologists and planners focused on the predictions of
flooding and the structural response of the landscape to extreme events. This
knowledge could provide information to communities faced with emergency response
and coastal adaptation decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
engages three cohorts of citizen scientists (undergraduate students, Extension
Science Volunteers (ESVs), and coastal residents) in a collaborative citizen
science project. High-resolution flooding observations from a range of extreme
flooding situations will be collected by the various citizen scientist groups.
This exploratory project will, from the onset, engage the geophysical and
citizen science disciplines to capitalize on recent technological advancements
for the goal of transforming our capacity for high-resolution geophysical field
sampling. Our objectives are to 1) develop low cost sensors with students and
ESVs as partners, 2) create a coastal flooding instrumentation lending library
(CFILL) accessible to coastal residents, 3) provide training on the use of the
instruments and test the usability of CFILL protocols with citizen science
volunteers, and 4) deploy the sensors in collaboration with coastal residents to
facilitate high-resolution sampling of parcel and community-level flooding and
inundation. Advancing technologies for low-cost instrumentation that can be
rapidly deployed by citizen scientists will transform our ability to address the
chronic under-sampling problem by collecting critical observations of extreme
flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.