* 1940716
* EAGER: Novel probes for label-free detection of neurodegenerative DNA repeats
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Mohtashim Shamsi, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2022
* USD 149,870.00

This project will design and apply new probes to detect neurodegenerative
diseases caused by the expansion of short sequences in human gene. The
neurodegenerative diseases (e.g. Friedreich Ataxia, Huntington's Disease,
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis) caused by such expansions are heritable and lead
to death at early age. Current methods are limited to detecting small fragments
along with imprecise interpretation of the actual length of the suspected
sequence. In the proposed research, the principal investigator will engineer
short nucleic acid probes to detect long neurodegenerative DNA sequence targets
with high dynamic range and resolution. This research project will span the
fields of chemistry, biology, and engineering and provide a highly
interdisciplinary training experience to high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students. This project will also contribute to public scientific
literacy through workshops and Science Cafe discussion at Carbondale Science
Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In human gene, repeat sequence expansion occurring
in tandem cause more than two dozen neurodegenerative and neuromuscular diseases
such as Friedreich Ataxia, Huntington's Disease, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
etc. These diseases are genetically transferrable and leading to death at early
age. Current methods lack direct and precise interpretation of repeat lengths in
a suspected gene. The principal investigator will direct an experimental
research project to develop novel oligonucleotide probes for the impedance based
detection of pathological lengths of neurodegenerative repeats (e.g. GAA, CAG,
GGGGCC repeats) in order to enhance dynamic range, sensitivity, and resolution
of detection. The central hypothesis for this project is that oligonucleotide
probes with non-tandem complementary repeats and rigid backbones can capture 10x
larger complementary targets and transduce into an impedance signal, which can
be proportionally correlated with the number of repeats in pathogenic range. The
principal investigator will a) design probes to correlate impedance signal with
pathogenic length of repeat sequences, b) test detection range of the probes for
neurodegenerative repeats, c) test specificity of the designed probes by
challenging them with non-specific repeat sequences, and d) detect
neurodegenerative repeats in real samples. The challenge in the project is to
achieve highly linear detection range up to pathogenic length with single repeat
resolution due to complex secondary structures of long repeat targets, which
makes this proposal high risk and high payoff. The broader impact of this
proposal is multidimensional. First, this fundamental research will provide a
detection tool to improve public health and biomedical research. Second, it
involves integration of major STEM fields including chemistry, biology, and
engineering. Third, it will train STEM workforce for nucleic acid biosensing
research at high school, undergraduate, and graduate level. Fourth, general
public will be educated by discussing research output in Science Cafe at The
Carbondale Science Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.