* 1940115
* TRTech-PGR: Increasing the nation's capacity to measure plant phenotypes by image analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Edgar Spalding, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,869,112.00

If scientists better understood how the many thousands of genes in a plant
affect growth, development, and physiology, it would be easier to improve crops.
Scientists would also better understand how non-crop plants fundamentally
support life on this planet. It is relatively straightforward to characterize a
plant’s genes (the genotype) these days but the growth, development, and
physiology (comprising the phenotype) are much harder to measure. Yet,
understanding how the genotype produces the phenotype requires good measurements
of both. Digital imaging has emerged as a methodology for efficiently measuring
many important phenotypes. This project will address three general deficiencies
that prevent more phenotypes from being measured efficiently by image analysis.
Pipelines: not enough computational pipelines capable of measuring broadly
useful phenotypes have been constructed. People: not enough people interested in
plant biology research are trained in the computer science and data science
methods to make more pipelines. Process: that art and science of combining
pieces of technology to form a pipeline that a biologist can use as a tool is an
interdisciplinary process that is currently difficult to replicate everywhere it
is needed. If 20 years ago the public generally understood how computers and
imaging could be applied in plant biology research, this project may not have
been necessary. Therefore, a built-in robust outreach component will present
concepts and engaging exercises to youth outside of a university setting.
Collectively, the project will advance the field of measuring plant
phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many phenotypes including those related to crop
health and productivity can be measured from images using computers and applied
math techniques. This approach to measuring phenotypes is presently limited by
too few automated and high-throughput image analysis pipelines, too few people
in the community capable of creating them, and no systematic process to
facilitate new pipeline creators. This project addresses these deficiencies by
creating effective high-throughput image analysis pipelines, training postdocs
and students in the necessary technical domains and soft skills, and by making
the pipeline creation process as formulaic and modular as possible. With input
from community surveys and an Advisory Board, a prioritized list of needed
measurements will be created. Pipelines designed to meet those measurement needs
will be deployed as Web services on public cyberinfrastructure such as CyVerse
and the Open Science Grid. Postdocs and graduate students will be trained in
image analysis techniques, machine learning, virtual machines and containers,
file transfer and storage methods, and high-throughput computing. They will
learn to abstract biological imaging problems and adopt the perspective of the
user to produce new robust measurement tools. In cases where a good solution
exists but is not readily accessible, the trainees will deploy the existing tool
on public cyber infrastructure. The overall result will be more high-throughput
image analysis tools to meet the community’s phenotype measurement needs and an
increase in the community’s capacity to create more. This award was co-funded by
the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, and the Infrastructure Capacity for Biology Program in the Division of
Biological Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.