* 1940676
* I-Corps: A Non-Toxic Electrodeposition Process for Structural Color
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* L. Jay Guo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
development of a novel process to generate environmentally friendly, low-cost
and robust structural color paints to address the increasing concerns over
emission of toxic elements into the environment by the spray-painting of
pigment-based paints, e.g. those used in automobile industry. It also provides a
cost-effective solution for making structural colors without using expensive
vacuum equipment. We propose a new process to immerse 3D shaped parts directly
into specially prepared non-toxic chemical solutions to electrochemically
deposit multilayered structural colors. The advantage of this proposed process
is twofold: (1) it can potentially reduce the overall coating time by 20-30% (2)
it can reduce carbon emissions and waste generation from the spray-painting
process by 50%. In addition, structural colors can be designed to produce
optical resonances in any wavelength, a property that makes it highly compatible
with LiDAR systems. The coming mobility and autonomous driving era have opened a
vast market for specially prepared reflective coatings that are specifically
compatible with LiDAR systems, which presents an exciting opportunity for the
optically designed structural colors. Lastly, because the design is flexible
with the type of materials used to generate bright and vibrant colors, one can
select materials that are bio-compatible and safe to wear on skin, which can
open future applications for our technology in the cosmetics industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project involves the use of electrodeposition
to generate metal-dielectric-metal multilayered structural color paints and has
several clear advantages over traditional deposition or assembly methods for
preparing colored films. Unlike pigment-based colors, structural colors generate
color using the interference effect of light. Different colors of high
brightness are achieved by simply tuning the thickness of the electrodeposited
middle cavity layer. Structural colors are an environmentally friendly
alternative to pigments and generate brighter and more efficient colors compared
to pigments. However, their extensive uses at low cost are still hindered due to
the complicated fabrication processes and the required expensive vacuum systems
for material deposition. To address this issue, our innovation introduces an
inexpensive and non-toxic bench-top electrodeposition method for the fabrication
of thin film structural colors of optical quality that is entirely performed at
ambient conditions without caustic reagents and without the use of any expensive
ancillary equipment. Our process is compatible with highly non-planar substrates
of arbitrary shape, size and roughness, which could be ideal for the coating of
automobile body and many shaped interior parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.