* 1940217
* CoPe Conference on Community Resiliency In The Face of Coastal Hazards and The Renewable Energy Transition; May, 2020, Annapolis, MD
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Jeremy Firestone, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2021
* USD 92,699.00

Communities along the east coast of the United States, primarily North Carolina
to Maine, are in a time of rapid transition. First, like much of the rest of
coastal United States, they are experiencing more pronounced coastal hazards,
including sea level rise, increased storm rain events, and surging oceanic
waters, resulting in flooding. These factors are complicated by climate change.
In addition, as the US moves toward clean energy, wind turbines are beginning to
be placed in the ocean off their coasts. These two dynamics could result in new
relationships between communities and their coasts. This workshop will explore
the implications of the changing nature of the human relationship between
coastal communities, coastal processes, and electricity infrastructure in the
ocean. The workshop will be oriented toward future research and opportunities to
adapt, advance preparedness, and absorb and bounce back after storm events. The
workshop will be held in Annapolis, Maryland in Spring 2020, and bring together
scientists, planners, citizen groups, and business
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition of the US east coast is
characterized by two dynamics: coastal hazards, including rising seas, storm
surge and increased precipitation events leading to flooding and inundation,
which often have more serious impacts in the most vulnerable coastal
populations, and siting and installation of renewable energy infrastructure in
the ocean. The workshop seeks a better understanding of these interrelated
dynamics with a focus on resilience building efforts and consideration of the
development of an offshore wind energy system. The workshop will draw on
academia (e.g., social and physical scientists, disaster management specialists
and Sea Grant engagement professionals); government (federal, tribal, and state
and local planners); adaptation practitioners; coastal civil society; and
industry/private sector (chamber of commerce, commercial fishers, offshore wind
developers) and focus on the changing human relationship with the coast/sea in
small coastal communities. The workshop will work to improve understanding of
(a) the links between large-scale coastal changes from physical processes and
industrialization of the ocean from offshore renewable energy, (b) how best to
engage policymakers in viewing these two forces of change together to find
common strategies, overcome institutional barriers, and innovative partnering
opportunities with co-benefits, and (c) effective risk communication strategies
that articulate tradeoffs and uncertainties related to rapid transitions and
resilience building in coastal communities. The workshop will generate an
interdisciplinary research roadmap that address emerging coastal community
transitions and identifies best practices and risk communication strategies to
enhance adaptive capacity and resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.