* 1940285
* SBIR Phase I:  High thermal conductivity continuous fiber reinforced 3D printing materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Thomas Bougher, TCPoly
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop thermally conductive 3D printing
materials for cooling of high-performance electronic devices. As electronic
devices become more compact and energy-dense, there is a growing challenge of
overheating, resulting in poor performance and device failure. This problem is
particularly relevant to transportation and energy-related technologies
increasingly reliant on high-performance electronic components, such as electric
motors, battery packs, power electronics, and high-performance processors. This
project will develop a new additive manufacturing composite material with
thermal conductivity 1000x higher than standard plastics, enabling lightweight,
corrosion-resistant, and high-performance heat transfer technologies. Moreover,
the materials enable 3D printing on low-cost desktop Fused Deposition Modeling
printers without significant hardware modifications, drastically reducing the
complexity and cost of printing high performance components. By creating a
transformational material for use on a broadly accepted additive manufacturing
technology platforms, this project will help create a new market for advanced
heat transfer technologies that can significantly increase the performance of
electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will result in the development of plastic composite
materials with higher effective thermal conductivity than aluminum and the
ability to be printed on low cost 3D printers. Thermally conductive plastic
composites are traditionally composed of base polymer and a high content of
thermally conductive filler particles, resulting in poor mechanical properties,
high viscosity, high cost and processing difficulties (including inability to 3D
print reliably), and a maximum thermal conductivity of ~30 W/m-K (nearly an
order of magnitude lower than aluminum). Metals conduct heat well, but are
heavy, expensive to manufacture into complex shapes, and can be susceptible to
corrosion and fouling when interacting with fluids. This project is proposing a
new composite system consisting of a core-shell structure with a core of
continuous high thermal conductivity continuous fiber and a shell of a composite
thermally conductive matrix. Utilizing 3D printing, this material can be printed
into complex shapes to produce new heat transfer parts such as heat sinks, heat
exchangers, liquid coldplates and other technologies with thermal performance
exceeding metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.