* 1940761
* E2CDA: Type II: Self-Adaptive Reservoir Computing with Spiking Neurons: Learning Algorithms and Processor Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Peng Li, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 215,672.00

While computing has become increasingly data centric across many disciplines,
conventional computer architectures have limited potential in meeting the
escalating performance and energy efficiency needs in this era of data-driven
science and engineering. This project aims to develop brain-inspired neural
models of computation and adaptive processor architectures to enable intelligent
data processing and learning in a wide range of applications. While being
strongly interdisciplinary, this work will bridge neuroscience, artificial
neural networks, computer architecture, and hardware engineering. The planned
research will provide rich training and educational opportunities to students,
and produce new curriculum. Research participation from undergraduate and
underrepresented students will be promoted. The outcomes of this project will be
broadly disseminated. Research collaboration with the US industry will be
actively pursued via interaction with the Semiconductor Research Corporation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is aimed at attaining brain-like learning
performance by imitating how the brain represents, processes, and learns from
information, and more specifically, by developing models of computation based on
the third-generation spiking neural networks, and efficient adaptive processor
architectures. Within the framework of so called reservoir computing, the
proposed neural models mimic key characteristics of the brain such as
information processing based on spike timing. Furthermore, this project will
develop brain-inspired learning mechanisms to allow training of complex
recurrent spiking neural networks. Self-adaptive processor architectures with
integrated on-chip learning, light-weight runtime learning performance
prediction, and energy management will be developed to maximize system energy
efficiency while providing a guarantee of performance.