* 1940594
* Universality and Accident in Complexity: The Odyssean Quest of Murray Gell-Mann
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2021
* David Krakauer, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 12/31/2021
* USD 44,945.00

"Universality &amp; Accident in Complexity: The Odyssean Quest of Murray Gell-
Mann" is a Symposium organized to honor the life works and memory of Nobel Prize
Laureate, Dr. Murray Gell-Mann. The Symposium will bring together research
leaders across diverse disciplines for intense discussions about the common
mechanisms underpinning the dynamics of complex systems. Dr. Gell-Mann's legacy
will be used as a conversation starter to form creative partnerships and inform
cutting-edge research designed to support and further the creative thinking
needed to find solutions to complex problems. Most importantly, this activity is
a training opportunity for a new generation of junior researchers that will help
accelerate the cross-disciplinary collaborative scientific exchanges needed to
identify novel problems and solutions in the investigation of complex systems.
As such, this project will facilitate the scientific and professional
development of early-career researchers as well as inclusion of scientists from
traditionally underrepresented groups. The symposium will be held at the Santa
Fe Institute in Santa Fe, NM, in March 2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.