* 1940375
* SBIR Phase I:  Eco-friendly Production of Carbon Nanosheets for Ultra High Energy Storage Electrode Application
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,10/31/2020
* MICHAEL OPOKU, SURGEPOWER MATERIALS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2020
* USD 224,128.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is applying a plant-based graphene product as a battery
material to increase energy storage density, decrease charging times and extend
battery life. The benefit to society is that the plant-based material may
facilitate adoption of electric vehicles and reduce the grid storage cost of
renewable energy, potentially providing greater energy security. The proposed
material's cost-efficient nature will facilitate broader adoption of graphene in
other advanced technology areas such as composites, conductive inks, printable
electronics, catalysis, sensors, and biomedical devices, thereby pushing
nanotechnology frontiers.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a green sustainable process using
an abundant plant material as input and producing extremely high purity graphene
with superior physical attributes. This feasibility research will demonstrate
that high-quality SP2Hybrid graphene can be manufactured from a plant-based raw
material at lower costs than current methods of graphene production and is
environmentally sustainable. Current production of graphene, such as
liquid/chemical exfoliation, uses starting materials derived from non-renewable
resources. The proposed process utilizes an abundant cassava crop as feedstock
sold as commodity in the US and overseas. Preliminary samples of SP2Hybrid
graphene properties have been validated by third parties to have 4X the surface
area (2956 m2/g) and up to 5X (5.0 cm3/g) the pore volume of current solutions,
offering better performance as an electrode material in batteries and
supercapacitors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.