* 1940078
* CoPe Conference:  Symposium on Far-Field Effects of Sea-Level Rise, Fayetteville, AR 2020
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* William Schwab, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,973.00

This workshop engages a diverse group of interdisciplinary scientists and
stakeholders to examine the consequences of climate change that impact both the
coasts and the US Heartland. Issues to be discussed include ground and surface
water flow and renewal, flooding, human migration, agriculture, transportation,
and economic far-field effects. There will be live streaming of the symposium.
Videos of workshop presentations will be archived on University of Arkansas
servers so they can be made discoverable and available, post-meeting, to the
broader public. Documents recording the results of the discussions and the ideas
to be further considered will be generated and made publicly available. The
symposium will be nationally advertised to attract a broad, diverse group of
participants. Key speakers, who are experts, will introduce the relevant topics
and challenges faced in the far-field to the assembly, generating a national
discussion. Small breakout groups will drill more deeply into the subject
matter. The symposium will include at least two Pacific Island communities that
have identified the mid-continent of the US as a relocation zone when their
islands are inundated by sea level rise and the populations are forced to move
to higher ground. Broader impacts of the work have significant societal benefits
in terms of how communities in the US Heartland will handle the influx of
migrants, as well as how far-field community economies and environments, driven
by changes in coastal geometries due to rising sea levels, will respond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Far-field effects of sea level rise including its
physical, social, and economic impact on the US continental interior, which is
remote from the coastal zone, are poorly constrained and understudied. This
3-day national symposium explores what is known about far-field issues related
to sea level rise, to examine the challenges facing impacted communities, and to
identify knowledge gaps and research priorities. Discussion topics include: (1)
impacts of rising sea level on dynamics of continental river systems; (2)
influences of rising sea-level on continental climate and the hydrologic cycle;
(3) population dislocation and migration flows from the coastal zone to the
continental interior; (4) economic impacts of resource flows (material and
capital) from the continental interior to the coastal zone; (5) economic impacts
of sea level rise on continental agriculture; and (6) economic impacts of sea
level rise on continental river commerce. Flooding-of-record proportion in
Nebraska, Arkansas, and throughout the Mississippi-Ohio-Missouri river, all of
which are far-field locations, highlight impacts of altered continental
hydrology on continental agriculture and river commerce, demonstrating the need
for such a symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.