* 1940041
* CoPe EAGER: Pathways for Community College Students to Explore the "Tipping Point" in Vulnerable Coastal Communities Following a Natural Hazard
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Kari Davis, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Rita Teutonico
* 08/31/2023
* USD 201,309.00

Austin Community College (ACC) will launch a citizen science program to engage
community college students in the collection and analysis of data from Hurricane
Harvey and its impact on the Texas coastline. At least 25 students will conduct
exploratory work on the "tipping point" for the vulnerable coastal community of
Port Aransas, Texas Shifts in human pressures or environmental conditions can
cause tipping points or abrupt changes in an ecosystem that may be difficult or
impossible to reverse. This pilot study will focus on the vulnerable Port
Aransas community using data such as water distribution before and after
Hurricane Harvey. Students will also use economic data (census, tax values,
etc.) in studying the tipping point. ACC will educate students in natural
hazards, data collection and analysis, and the application in close Texas
communities. Once students are exposed to these techniques, they can then
establish a network of citizen scientists in underserved, underrepresented, and
understudied communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project will be
to 1) inform future potential citizen scientists on natural disasters, the
aftermath of natural disasters and evaluating living conditions of an impacted
community using existing data, 2) educate underrepresented STEM students in
scientific methods and data collection, and 3) examine the concept of tipping
points as a focus for data collection, scientific integration across disciplines
and scientific application. The project will advance knowledge on using citizen
science for community engagement as well as for retaining underrepresented
students in STEM. The project will measure student gains in 1) increased
awareness of coastal hazards and their impact, and 2) interest in a career in
the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.