* 1940114
* Collaborative Research: I-AIM: Interpretable Augmented Intelligence for Multiscale Material Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Wei Chen, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 387,881.00

The ability to model, predict, and improve the mechanical performance of
engineering materials such as polymers, composites, and alloys can have a
significant impact on manufacturing, with important economic and societal
benefits. As advanced computational algorithms and data science approaches
become available, they can be harnessed to disrupt the current approaches to
materials modeling, and allow for the design and discovery of new high-strength,
high-performance materials for manufacturing. Bringing together
multidisciplinary teams of researchers can maximize the impact of these new
tools and techniques. This Harnessing the Data Revolution Institutes for Data-
Intensive Research in Science and Engineering (HDR-I-DIRSE) award supports the
conceptualization of an Institute to develop novel data science methods, address
fundamental scientific questions of Materials Engineering and Manufacturing, and
build such multidisciplinary teams. The project will apply novel data science
methods to advance the analysis of large sets of structural data of composite
materials and alloys from the atomic scale to correlate with and predict
mechanical properties. The methods are based on machine learning techniques and
uncertainty quantification, and will help uncover underlying structural features
in the materials that determine the properties and performance. The methods and
results will help accelerate the development of ultra-high strength and
lightweight carbon-based composites for aerospace applications, and multi-
element superalloys for more durable engine parts, by navigating in the large
possible design space and providing faster predictions than experiments and
traditional simulation methods. The project will also lead to new methods and
computational algorithms that will become publicly available. The investigators
will train graduate and undergraduate students from various disciplines with a
focus on engaging women and minorities in STEM fields, develop short courses
that integrate novel Materials Science and Engineering applications and Data
Science methods, and foster vertical integration of interdisciplinary research
from undergraduate students to senior scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims at building an effective and interpretable learning framework for
materials data across scales to solve a major challenge in current data-driven
materials design. The combined Materials Science and Data Science approaches
will synergistically contribute to the development and use of interpretable and
physics-informed data science methodologies to gain new understanding of
mechanical properties of polymer composites and alloys, with the potential to be
expanded into different property sets and different systems. The PIs will
utilize available data efficiently through combination with physical rules and
prior knowledge, to develop an interpretable augmented intelligent system to
learn principles behind the association of input structures with material
properties with uncertainty quantification. The interconnected tasks involve the
(1) collection and curation of large amounts of computational and experimental
data for polymer/carbon nanotube composites and alloys from open data sources
and targeted calculations and experiments, (2) the development of geometric and
topological methods incorporating physical principles to generate a better, more
sensitive low-dimensional representation of the multidimensional data and
characterize the parameter space related to mechanical properties, (3) the
development of a Bayesian deep reinforcement learning framework to generate
interpretable knowledge graphs that depict the relational knowledge among
physical quantities with uncertainty quantification, and (4) the prediction of
mechanical properties to reveal design principles to improve materials
performance, evaluate and validate the methods, and develop software for
dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National
Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity and
is co-funded by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.