* 1940395
* SBIR Phase I:  Microfluidic Technology for Single Cell Multi-Omic Sample Preparation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Harvey Tian, Inso Biosciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 03/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to commercialize an automatable microfluidic
technology capable of disrupting the existing sample preparation market. This
market, projected to surpass $5.32 billion USD by 2025, is driven by the
development of new and automatable technology platforms. These technology
platforms not only facilitate the development of precision medicine, but also
our understanding of the fundamental mechanisms behind cellular behavior. Here,
automated sample preparation platforms are favored for their ease of use and
integration potential with both upstream cell capture technologies (e.g. single
cell selection, rare cell enrichment) as well as downstream analysis
technologies (e.g. DNA/RNA sequencing, mass spectrometry). Rather than requiring
scientists to reproduce complex in-house protocols developed by different
academic laboratories, automated platforms would allow users the freedom of
simply loading a sample and walking away. However, existing platforms in this
market are limited by their fundamental single-compartment design, making the
processing of complex systems highly challenging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the feasibility of a fundamentally different approach to multi-omic
single cell processing. Instead of relying on a single-compartment design (e.g.
droplet microfluidics, microwell technologies, valved and chambered
microchannels, tube-based kits, etc.) for cell processing, this project will use
novel micropillar-based microfluidic technology for high efficiency separation
and isolation of single cell omes. Here, micropillar arrays within our
microfluidic channels serve to physically size-separate genomic DNA from
proteins and RNA during cell lysis in a manner compatible with existing analysis
methods. In Phase I, we will build upon our preliminary results by demonstrating
bi-omic isolation of the genome and transcriptome from the same cell along with
the ability to amplify and sequence the genomic DNA before and after bisulfite
treatment for tri-omic isolation of the genome, transcriptome, and
methylome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.