* 1940352
* STTR Phase I:  Purification of Mycosporine-like Amino Acids using Aptamers
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* David Smernoff, Heliobiosys, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this STTR Phase I project is to harvest a natural
sunscreen for broader distribution. This project will use a group of fast-
growing microorganisms that make these ingredients. The challenge will be to
harvest enough of the material to make effective and affordable sunscreens. The
problem is akin to trying to collect all the "needles in a haystack". New tools
that incorporate reusable analogues to "magnets" for capturing and releasing the
sunscreen compound will provide a novel way to get the material out of a complex
mixture of broken open cells and into the sunscreens. There is a lack of
genuinely non-toxic, environmentally safe sunscreens in the U.S. market today.
Melanoma, the most common cancer in the U.S., is a deadly form of skin cancer
directly attributable to sun damage to skin, and conventional sunscreens are
under pressure because of human health concerns and possible impacts on coral
reefs. This work will provide a new class of sunscreens safer for people and
marine life. Unlocking the potential of this nature-designed sunscreen will
improve human health and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I
project will evaluate the technical feasibility of using aptamers (small nucleic
acids) to isolate mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs) from a complex mixture of
compounds derived from cyanobacteria. Small molecules present challenges for
aptamer development because they can be: difficult to immobilize, have multiple
three-dimensional conformations, and few chemically distinguishing features.
MAAs present unique challenges due to the similarity of their chemical structure
with other cell lysate materials and wide variety of amino acid substitutions.
This innovation entails the isolation and identification of the specific MAAs
being produced, isolation of aptamers that are highly specific, and assessing
process scalability. MAAs are not commercially available so reference standards
will be derived from the culture broth. These materials will be utilized as
targets in aptamer selection using a proprietary single-stranded DNA library of
aptamer sequences to identify suitable candidates by next-generation sequencing
and bioinformatics analysis. Those aptamer candidates will then be screened and
evaluated using an affinity purification workflow and absorbance-based
microplate assay. The end result of this work will be to establish if this is a
robust and scalable affinity purification method for
MAAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.