* 1940652
* National Robotics Initiative (NRI) PI Meeting 2020 Technical Program Organization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Odest Jenkins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 08/31/2020
* USD 39,771.00

This award will support the organization of the annual Principal Investigators
(PI) meeting for the National Robotics Initiative (NRI), which was launched in
2011. The PI meeting will bring together the community of active NRI
participants to provide cross-project coordination of intellectual challenges
and best practices in education, technology transfer and general outreach. This
activity will also establish a repository illustrating the research ideas
explored and milestones achieved by the NRI projects. The meeting is planned for
two days in February of 2020 in the vicinity of Washington DC. The format will
include presentations by the attending PIs of projects in their final year, a
poster session with all other projects, keynote speeches, and panel
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to organize the next NRI PI
meeting. The meeting promotes dissemination and serendipitous collaboration
amongst NRI researchers. The organization includes participation and BPC
recruitment activities for graduate students as well as PIs. This award is for
the meeting organization only. Meeting logistics and facility rental is handled
by a separate award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.