* 1940986
* PFI-TT: Using Ultralight Carbon Aerogel Electrodes to Increase Energy Density of Rechargeable Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Charles Mullins, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 12/31/2023
* USD 249,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-TT) project is the higher energy density batteries
that will result from our carbon aerogel technology. With every new device and
application powered by a lithium ion battery, consumers expect increased
performance (capacity and cycle life) at lower cost. To satisfy these demands,
batteries of higher energy density than current state-of-the-art are needed. The
proposed lightweight aerogels enable higher energy density batteries by
replacing the heavier metal foils used in today’s battery electrodes. This
increase in energy density is expected to allow customers to choose between
either (1) a higher energy output for a given battery size/weight, or (2) a
smaller battery size/weight without sacrificing the energy output achieved in
current battery cells. With the global lithium ion battery market projected to
rapidly grow from $21.4 B in 2018 to $45.6 B in 2021, the proposed technology
provides a transformative strategy to battery manufacturers to increase the
performance of devices powered by lithium ion
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project involves constructing
energy-dense battery electrodes that are smaller and lighter than current state-
of-the-art. In conventional lithium ion batteries, the energy density is
restricted by the weight of the metal-foil current collectors used to support
the electrode films. As a solution to this limitation, the proposed project will
advance the development of a porous, ultralight-weight carbon aerogel to replace
the standard metal foils. Successful demonstration of the proposed technology
will rely on completing the following goals: (i) developing a batch production
method for scaling up aerogel production, (ii) optimizing the pore structure,
electrical properties, and mechanical durability of the aerogel substrates,
(iii) scaling up the fabrication procedure to produce composite aerogel
electrodes, (iv) designing and fabricating large-format cells with the
constructed aerogel electrodes, and (v) identifying the optimal cell chemistry
for high performance aerogel pouch cells. Successful solution of these issues
would provide a strategy to construct lighter, smaller, and more energy-dense
lithium ion batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.