* 1940272
* Collaborative Research: Atomic Level Structural Dynamics in Catalysts
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Qiang Zhu, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 09/30/2022
* USD 325,000.00

Catalysts help make chemical reactions go faster and their development impact
areas such as energy, the environment, biotechnology, and drug design. The
vision of this project is to harness computational tools from modern statistics
and machine learning to perform data-driven discovery of new catalysts. To this
end, a collaborative team is assembled with the complementary expertise in
catalysts, materials science, biophysics, computational modelling, statistics,
signal processing, and data science. How a reaction is accelerated depends on
the dynamic changes in the structure and shape of a catalyst and its associated
chemical reactants (a catalytic system). The goal of this project is to explore,
describe, and quantify the dynamic structures of enzyme and nanoparticle
catalysts at the atomic level. Recent advances in microscopy and spectroscopy
now make it possible to measure with great detail dynamic changes in time and in
dimensional space. This project combines recent advances in data science with
these new experimental tools to extract features that describe the dynamic
behaviour of catalytic systems. In addition, the project will enhance the
development of educational infrastructure for data-intensive and
interdisciplinary science, contribute to workforce development, promote gender
equality in the sciences, and disseminate scientific knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guiding hypothesis of this research is that catalytic
functionality cannot be fully understood without describing the atomic-level
structural changes triggered by the molecular interactions of reactants with the
catalyst. This hypothesis is tested by utilizing experimental datasets obtained
from electron microscopy and single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy-
transfer spectroscopy to explore structural dynamics in nanoparticles and
enzymes. A data-analysis workflow, which integrates denoising, dimensionality
reduction, clustering, and dynamic Markovian modelling, enables descriptions and
classifications of the complex dynamical evolutions in spatiotemporally resolved
measurements. The research develops and applies advanced methodologies to
process noisy, high-dimensional data - a crucial bottleneck for the analysis of
dynamic systems. The information extracted from experimental data guides the
computational sampling of the conformational space of proteins and nanoparticles
within a statistical physics framework, using supercomputer technology. This
information facilitates the development of physical models that probe phenomena
that are currently experimentally inaccessible, such as picosecond nuclear
motions, as well as protein conformational changes and their coupling with
chemical events. The transformative impact is to better understand catalysis by
establishing a link between dynamic system response and catalytic functionality.
The computational approaches developed through this project have the potential
to be generally applied to many fundamental problems in materials science and
structural biology where dynamic behaviours are
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity, and is
jointly supported by the HDR and the Division of Chemistry within the NSF
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.