* 1940165
* How do shipworms eat wood? A non-enzymatic, symbiont-mediated mechanism for the digestion of lignocellulose in teredinids
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* John Shipway, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 476,483.00

Shipworms live in the ocean and are related to clams. They are some of a very
few animals in the world that can eat wood. They also play an important role in
nature by recycling the carbon in wood. It is estimated that between 2 - 5% of
the world’s woody plant material is eaten by shipworms. The goal of this project
is to understand how shipworms eat wood. Digesting wood’s complex structure
isn’t easy. Scientists know that relatively large enzymes alone cannot break
down wood, because wood molecules are packed too tightly together for enzymes to
enter. Shipworms farm bacteria in their gills, and these bacteria have recently
been found to produce very small compounds that may move into the shipworm gut
where the small compounds can make powerful oxygen radicals to digest the wood.
Making the oxygen radicals is proposed as the first step needed to break open
the wood structure into smaller pieces. Then, in a second step, enzymes can
completely digest the wood. Previously, the compounds that can make the oxygen
radicals were found only in some types of fungi that also digest wood.
Scientists believe that studying this shipworm chemistry may open up new
knowledge about how carbon is cycled in our oceans, and may also lead to new
discoveries on ways to make biofuels and renewable materials. The researchers
involved in this project also believe strongly in supporting young,
underrepresented female scientists and will be running educational opportunities
for girls in a local town.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shipworms are the principle
degraders of lignocellulose across the world’s oceans; they cause billions of
dollars of damage to wooden structures (boats, piers and sea-defenses), but they
also play a major role in carbon-cycling. The relative simplicity of their
symbiotic communities and the unique compartmentalization of their digestive
system make shipworm symbiosis a tractable counterpoint to terrestrial
xylotrophs (e.g., fungi, termites). The goal of this project is to explore the
unknown mechanisms of wood digestion in shipworms by examining how these animals
interact with their gill endosymbionts and determining specifically whether a
symbiont-mediated chemical degradation mechanism is active in the host gut.
There are three approaches to reach this goal. The first approach is to
determine how low molecular-weight (LMW) metabolites from shipworm gill
symbionts may be activated in the host gut to generate a non-enzymatic system
for lignocellulose deconstruction. This involves mapping the location of LMW
metabolites in the gill and digestive system. The second approach will examine
gut compartmentalization for pH environments that may promote symbiont-mediated
iron reduction, redox-cycling and the generation of hydroxyl radicals associated
with CMF reactions. It will also assess the spatial arrangement and
compartmentalization of shipworm anatomy, and identify and map structures
linking the gill endosymbionts with the digestive tract. The third approach will
compare and analyze the digestive products and waste material from shipworms
grown on isotopically-labelled wood. Understanding the basis of wood digestion
may allow discovery of candidate catalytic/enzymatic systems and development of
new strategies for bio-based materials and biofuel
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.