* 1940656
* Working Meeting on Systemic Change and the Future of Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 03/31/2021
* USD 99,385.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by 1) identifying key levers for expanding efforts to improve
instruction in undergraduate STEM and 2) clarifying trends in technology and the
workforce that may transform the future of undergraduate STEM education and need
to be considered in building strategies for systemic change. This small
conference is part of the work of the Roundtable on Systemic Change in
Undergraduate STEM Education at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering
and Medicine. Discussions at the meeting will inform the Roundtable's future
work and shape its agenda for action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-day
conference will bring together stakeholders with many perspectives on the future
of undergraduate STEM education. The first day will focus on how the STEM higher
education enterprise thinks about, talks about, and evaluates teaching of
undergraduates, as well as strategies for scaling evidence-based instruction to
reach students of all backgrounds and goals. Representatives of disciplinary
societies in STEM will be key participants in these discussions. The second day
will consider the impact of globalization and technological change on
undergraduate STEM learning. Participants will network and strategize together
about how to educate the increasingly diverse student population in the context
of multiple pressures from the surrounding system. Additionally, participants
will come away from the conference with new ideas for thinking broadly and
systemically about improving student learning in undergraduate STEM education.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional
and Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform
and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and
disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.