* 1940076
* Collaborative Research: Precision Learning: Data-Driven Experimentation of Learning Theories using Internet-of-Videos
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Dongwon Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2023
* USD 416,000.00

This is a project to study what works to help students learn more effectively in
the context of the ASSISTments system. ASSISTments is an online system that
provides both assistance to students and real time assessment data to teachers.
ASSISTments now supports 100,000 students who have completed more than 12
million mathematics problems. The system uses teacher input and artificial
intelligence to provide assistance to students who are attempting to solve
mathematics problems. This project will increase the assistance provided by the
teacher and machine learning by incorporating video suggestions, such as those
produced by the Kahn academy, targeted to the needs of the student. The
experimentation will take content from three Open Educational Resource textbooks
that are openly licensed and free to schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the researchers will identify a large collection of videos that
address mathematics skills in the textbooks and will extract features of these
videos including language complexity, speaking rate, and other features. These
videos and features will be checked by both teachers and through a Mechanical
Turk process for usability before they are presented to students. Additionally,
the project will develop a suite of novel technologies for precision learning
including fine grained video feature extraction, student feature learning from
heterogeneous raw data, causal modeling, and fairness aware and causal
relationship enhanced optimized personalized recommendation. The research will
advance theoretical understanding of fundamental issues related to personalized
learning and will enable data-driven experimentation of learning theories.
Causal modeling will enable the researchers to learn the features of video that
are correlated with learning effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution Big
Idea activity and is co-funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education and
the Division of Research on Learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.