* 1940273
* CoPe RCN: Advancing Interdisciplinary Research to Build Resilient Communities and Infrastructure in the Nation's Estuaries and Bays
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Mark Stacey, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

U.S. coasts feature a number of bays and estuaries within which many
metropolitan cities are located: Washington, D.C. near Chesapeake Bay, New York
City on the Hudson River, Boston on Massachusetts Bay, and San Francisco on San
Francisco Bay, just to name a few. The impacts of storms and sea level rise on
estuaries and bays are just beginning to be understood, and many questions
remain unanswered. The semi-enclosed nature of bays also brings a unique set of
challenges and opportunities for developing engineering or nature-based
solutions to protect coastal infrastructure and communities. Natural habitats,
such as salt marshes, oyster reefs, and sand dunes, offer coastal protection
with ecosystem benefits, but the effectiveness and environmental impacts of
these structures are not well understood. A shared network of waterways connects
the diverse population of a basin, from urban centers to rural communities,
presenting new challenges linking socio-economic disparities and environmental
factors. This CoPe RCN will synthesize insights from existing coastal resiliency
projects around the country and propose bold new strategies that integrate
ecosystem enhancement and recovery to protect coastal communities and
infrastructure. It will provide interdisciplinary training to young scientists
through workshops and focus-group interactions. The RCN will have strong
outreach activities through engagement with stakeholders in federal, state, and
local governments; not-for-profit organizations; and coastal communities. The
goal is to translate research results into specific recommendations for
developing coastal resiliency solutions and seek stakeholders' feedback to
orient academic research towards addressing pressing concerns faced by urban and
rural communities living around the Nation's estuaries and
bays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Estuarine CoPe RCN will bring together
oceanographers, engineers, ecologists, and social scientists to discuss major
open questions in the interdisciplinary science of coastal resiliency. The RCN
will synthesize recent advances in estuarine resiliency research and involve
researchers working on several bays and estuaries: Chesapeake Bay, Hudson River
and New York Harbor, Massachusetts Bay and San Francisco Bay. Comparative
studies between these systems will be conducted, including analysis and modeling
of sea level rise, coastline retreat and ecosystem change, risk analysis,
dynamic barriers, engineered and nature-based mitigation structures, and the
social science of coastal communities' responses to risks. Three in-person
workshops are planned and each workshop will be followed by one-day stakeholder
meetings at which investigators will engage with stakeholder communities.
Regular virtual meetings through video-conferencing will be scheduled for focus
group discussions. A steering committee, consisting of researchers from multiple
institutions, will guide the RCN activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.