* 1940146
* Workshop to Develop US Leadership in the Emerging Area of Soft Evolutionary Materials; Washington University; St. Louis, Missouri; 13 October 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Guy Genin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nakhiah Goulbourne
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,350.00

Evolutionary materials that can change their form and function on demand have
been at the heart of many technological revolutions, including lasers and fast
actuators. A new materials revolution is underway, with evolutionary materials
that not only change form and function, but also happen to be soft so that they
can be used in entirely new technologies that interface with humans. Many of
these materials challenge our understanding of what materials actually are, and
blur the boundaries between a material and a structure. Soft, evolutionary
materials hold much promise for a new generation of devices and cures.
Establishing US dominance in this area and harnessing the potential benefits for
prosperity and the general welfare will require developing a set of leaders
across career stages and backgrounds, and setting the research agenda for this
emerging field of soft, evolutionary materials. The daylong workshop funded by
this grant will bring together established experts and young investigators from
around the US to advance the understanding of soft matter and its application
across a broad range of disciplines, and will develop the research agenda in
this emerging field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus will be developing the
tools needed to model, design with, and optimize these new materials that change
function and/or form in response to external stimuli. The workshop will develop
an agenda in multi-materials, metamaterials, multi-component materials, and
polymers. Bringing together experts across these sub-disciplines constitutes a
major opportunity for developing American leadership in soft evolutionary
materials. The gathering will afford ample opportunity for students to interact
with internationally leading professors both scientifically and socially through
a mentoring lunch and opportunities for one-on-one meetings with NSF program
managers associated with the sister meeting, the Society of Engineering Science
Annual Meeting. The workshop will thus enable investigators across a broad range
of career stages to gain insight into pathways to success in these areas. A
specific aim is to help young investigators maximize career development
opportunities at this conference by providing them comfortable foundations of
both scientific background and networking. The successes and failures of the
workshop to achieve this goal will be assessed carefully through a survey to be
completed by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.