* 1940351
* CoPe EAGER: Creating Interactive Augmented Reality of Extreme Coastal Hazards for Stakeholder Education
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Patrick Lynett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 09/30/2022
* USD 265,288.00

Effective communication of hazards from extreme coastal events, such as tsunamis
and hurricanes, is one of the most important components of stakeholder
engagement and education. &lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will develop an
Augmented Reality/Mixed Reality (AR/MR) platform for the communication of
coastal hazards to the broader public. There are preliminary concepts on how a
coastal wave simulation model might be developed for various AR platforms, and
this effort will investigate the feasibility of such a system. AR hardware
options span a wide range of computational ability, from complex and relatively
expensive smart glasses (e.g. the Magic Leap One or the Microsoft HoloLens) to
smart phones. A truly useful AR tool should be available on a range of hardware
options. The research strategy will be to start simple and build complexity.
Initially, the project will attempt to use existing hydrodynamic models to
create AR visualizations for idealized, small coastal communities. From this
task, the project will have a handle on the challenges of geo-referencing the
user and the hydrodynamic information, as well as building a topography/building
layout/hydrodynamic overlay that can be visualized on available hardware. Next,
the project will modify this simple AR layout to allow the hydrodynamics to
interact with the environment for example to have a tsunami flow around a
building. In the second year of the project, applications will extend to target
communities, at least one in the Pacific Northwest and one in the Gulf/East
coast. The final task of this project is to visit these communities, demonstrate
the created AR and MR applications, and receive feedback for any future
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.