* 1940141
* CoPe EAGER: Establishing Interface Standards for Physical Exposure and Human Impacts Data Collection and Publication in Rapid Response to Coastal Hazards
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2021
* James Done, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,464.00

Rapid response research is critical to understanding community resilience in the
face of coastal hazards, such as tropical storms and flooding events. Yet, on-
the-ground data collection efforts following these events are often
uncoordinated and occur in different locations with different data collection
approaches. The proposed work will establish standards to help coordinate rapid
response data collection following major disasters. A coordinated approach to
these efforts will improve the research community's ability to analyze and
understand the impacts that disasters have on human livelihoods and the policy
responses that are likely to protect at-risk communities from disaster exposures
and improve recoveries in disaster-stricken communities. This research will
democratize large data sets, enabling PIs with reduced research capacity to
utilize multiple data sources, in order to test hypotheses related to coastlines
and people. Further, this project will train one graduate student as well as a
recently graduated undergraduate student through the NCAR SOARS program, which
helps to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary project (atmospheric science,
economics, engineering, and epidemiology) aims to define and document several
standardized data formats that could be useful for integrated hazard exposure
and human impact research, as well as provide software tools and a case study of
the use of these standardized data formats, aiming to increase the value of open
access data repositories. The multidisciplinary team will develop and apply
interface standards for coastal hazard exposure data that enable use with human
impacts analysis. The project will identify common levels of temporal and
spatial aggregation that are used for researching human impacts of coastal
hazard exposures, which will improve the reproducibility of research in the
context of coastlines and people. Open-source software tools that reformat and
enable visualization, exploration, and modeling of data by the broader research
community will then be developed and published, removing barriers that are
created by incompatibilities in data structure and format across related
projects. A case study analysis will combine novel birth outcomes and
groundwater pollution datasets from Hurricanes Matthew, Michael and Florence.
This exercise will display the value of analyzing rapid response data in its
native form while highlighting the broader intellectual benefits from
reformatting and releasing data to the scientific community for re-
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.