* 1940532
* Building Community  Through Systemic Initiative for Modeling Investigations and Opportunities with Differential Equations (SIMIODE)
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Brian Winkel, Manhattan College
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2021
* USD 301,523.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program, the
SIMIODE (Systemic Initiative for Modeling Investigations and Opportunities with
Differential Equations) community will develop a mathematical-modeling approach
for the first undergraduate calculus course. Introductory calculus is an
important course in undergraduate STEM curricula, and the design and teaching
enhancements proposed in this project have the potential to increase the
retention, graduation, and quality of STEM majors nationwide. The mathematical-
modeling approach to differential equations uses best practices in STEM
undergraduate teaching: it is hands-on, problem-based, inquiry-driven, and
incorporates group learning. The project will create teaching materials that
focus on real world data and encourage students to transfer knowledge between
mathematics and other disciplines. The project will combine in-person and
virtual support for faculty seeking to adopt a mathematical-modeling approach in
their own classrooms. This support includes workshops, panel discussions,
presentations at regional and national conferences, and mentoring in an online
community. The project will support different levels of faculty engagement: some
faculty will introduce a few modeling activities into their classes while others
will complete a full curriculum shift to mathematical models. Finally, the
project will conduct research on the efficacy of specific approaches to faculty
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project will support
the development of peer-reviewed, open-source teaching materials that will be
made available to the public through SIMIODE's HUBZero platform. The online
platform will allow users and authors to share comments, modifications, and
extensions of the material. The project will also promote awareness of this
modeling approach through dissemination of teaching materials at conferences.
Secondly, the project will provide initial and long-term support for faculty
development via an online community and in-person workshops. These workshops
will focus on incorporating these materials into courses, thus encouraging a
sustained pedagogical shift from technique-driven to a model-driven approach.
Summer workshops and annual mini-courses at national conferences will
demonstrate the modeling approach to teaching differential equations and will
provide in-person mentoring and support to faculty adopting this approach.
Throughout the project, the assessment team will review the effectiveness of the
online communities and in-person workshops so the program staff can modify them
to provide the best support. SIMIODE employs a double-blind peer review of
published materials by a Board of Contributing Advisors that includes material
authors and users. The Board and participants will also provide feedback on the
efficacy of the project's activities in delivering faculty support needed to
affect pedagogical change. The online community platform will provide the
flexibility needed to adapt multiple approaches in faculty support, (e.g.,
webinars; group or individual mentoring) as dictated by the ongoing formative
project assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.