* 1940980
* The nature and emergence of lexical difficulties in aging adults
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Michael Ullman, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

As people get older, they have increasing difficulty remembering words. For
example, we might have trouble recalling the name of a tool that we need or the
first name of a new neighbor. These problems can be common and frustrating and
can impact one’s work personal life. Surprisingly, the nature and causes of
these language declines in healthy aging are still not understood. This research
examines the types of word difficulties we experience with aging, when they are
likely to appear, and why they occur. In addition to explaining these declines
in healthy aging, such research may lead to a better understanding of age-
related memory disorders together with potential strategies for alleviating the
deficits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this research is to
rigorously characterize what types of lexical difficulties emerge during aging,
and when, by testing 250 adults ranging in age from 30 to 79 years. All
participants will be given language tasks designed to assess word learning and
use, while controlling for potential differences among participants, such as
those in education, socioeconomic status, and age at which participants learned
the words being tested. The second objective of the research is to find the
causes of word-finding declines in aging. Increasing evidence suggests that
learning words is dependent on the hippocampus, a brain structure known to
underlie memory more generally (e.g., where you put your keys). Because the
hippocampus shrinks dramatically with age, this should also affect memory for
words. To test this explanation, MRI scans of the hippocampus will be conducted
to see if shrinkage of the hippocampus maps to word finding declines. If
hippocampal declines explain word finding difficulties in aging, they may also
explain other age-related cognitive deficits. High school, undergraduate, and
graduate students will be trained, furthering the educational impacts of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.