* 1940453
* Traveling Wave Approaches for Improved Sensitivity and Spatial Coverage in Continuous-Wave (CW) Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Alan McMillan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 492,986.00

Electron paramagnetic resonance imaging (EPRI) is a low-cost and highly specific
imaging technique with significant applications. In medical imaging, EPRI can be
used to obtain tissue oxygenation images to identify oxygen-starved areas of
tissue. Oxygen-starved areas of cancer are usually more aggressive and harder to
treat, so a medical imaging tool to identify hypoxia would be highly useful. A
primary advantage of EPRI relative to other medical imaging techniques is the
significantly lower cost of its instrumentation. For example, in comparison to
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), EPRI can be performed without using a
superconducting magnet. This drastically reduces the cost of constructing,
siting, and operating EPRI systems compared to MRI systems. Unlike MRI, however,
the technology for using EPRI to perform whole-body human imaging has not yet
been developed. One of the primary challenges in further development of EPRI is
the difficulty in performing signal excitation at the frequency ranges that are
desirable for high-sensitivity imaging. This project addresses this shortcoming
by developing novel instrumentations that will ultimately enable EPRI systems to
be used for whole-body human imaging. The successful completion of this project
has the potential for the development of a low-cost, human imaging technology.
Since this technology offers imaging capabilities similar to MRI but at a small
fraction of its cost it is expected to significantly reduce the cost of medical
diagnostic techniques based on imaging technologies. This will likely contribute
towards reducing the cost of overall healthcare services provided to the public
in the U.S. and around the world. Additionally, this project has important
educational impacts, which include increased participation of under-represented
students in research and graduate engineering education, active involvement of
undergraduate students in research, mentoring K-12 science teachers and
curriculum development, and broad dissemination of research results to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to develop
new techniques for continuous-wave (CW) electron paramagnetic resonance imaging
(EPRI) that enhance its sensitivity and move towards the development of
instrumentation capable of whole-body human imaging. Specifically, we propose to
develop a traveling-wave (TW) approach for continuous-wave electron-paramagnetic
resonance imaging. In the TW approach, RF signal excitation is performed using
traveling waves that propagate from a remote antenna or probe inside a waveguide
through tissue. In comparison to the conventional reactive near field approach,
uniform magnetic fields across a much larger volume can be realized using the TW
approach. Therefore, the development of the continuous-wave, TW-EPRI is expected
to enable both the necessary volumetric coverage and sufficiently high magnetic
field strength needed to perform whole-body human imaging. To accomplish this,
we will pursue four aims to develop and study novel, low-cost CW, TW-EPRI
instrumentation. These include: 1) develop a CW, traveling-wave EPRI system in a
parallel plate waveguide environment to demonstrate feasibility for a traveling
wave EPRI system; 2) Develop phased-array transmit techniques for improved
magnetic field uniformity in high-frequency (&gt;300 MHz) continuous-wave, TW-
EPRI systems; 3) Integrate the imaging system and develop improved
reconstruction algorithms; and 4) Develop techniques for accelerating image
acquisition speed and improving the sensitivity of CW, TW-EPRI
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.