* 1940024
* CoPe EAGER: Coastal Hazard Planning in Time
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Ann Bostrom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 12/31/2023
* USD 297,288.00

This project develops and evaluates new public communication tools for coastal
resilience known as "geo-narratives." These new tools are useful to both long-
term adaptive planning and urban design and short-term hazard responses,
including evacuation, emergency management, and post-disaster relief and
diagnostics. To develop these geo-narratives, the investigators leverage
scientific advances in localized modeling of hazardous geo-environmental
processes, and local community history and understanding of hazards. Co-produced
with partner communities, the geo-narratives are interactive, science-and-data-
rich, and include multimedia storytelling, story-mapping, and 3D visualizations.
They convey both local knowledge and values, as well as scientific information
and adaptive opportunities associated with coastal megathrust earthquakes. The
investigators plan to evaluate the extent to which geo-narratives help
communities use relevant science in planning and policy decisions, thus
contributing new knowledge in both the development of planning materials and in
the evaluation of their impact. The project builds capacity to integrate
knowledge across the sciences, informs planning practices that seek to
communicate and address geohazard risks, and thereby benefiting partner
communities directly and contributing to coastal
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a common focus on subduction zone hazards
and risk, and complementary expertise in sea-level change, the research team
translates scientific consensus and uncertainties into locally actionable
information to be tested in geo-narratives for use in actual community planning
and emergency preparedness workshops. Geo-narratives convey the evolving
scientific understanding of subduction megathrust earthquakes and co-seismic,
cascading hazards (e.g., subsidence and uplift, liquefaction, tsunami
inundation, landslide generation, building collapse) overlaid on localized sea-
level change projections. Partner-community participant interviews and surveys
of the regional population examine the effects of the geo-narratives on trust in
the information, and ability to relate temporal and other aspects of the science
to locally meaningful decisions and policies. Recent discoveries in Pacific
Northwest earthquake history make Washington State an ideal place to examine
these issues while results will be applicable in other settings with multiple
hazards. The Washington coast sits on the Cascadia Subduction Zone, which
experiences tectonic uplift on the Pacific shore and is prone to megaquakes
every few centuries and the region also includes the complex inland waterways of
the Salish Sea, with dramatic sea-level change year-on-year, exacerbated by
tectonic subsidence on the continental side of the Cascadia Subduction Zone. The
project engages with several communities in these different coastal conditions
to compare the effects of geo-narratives across contrasting hazard conditions
with different timeframes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.