* 1940810
* GRC Colloidal, Macromoelcular, and Polyelectrolyte Solutions - Engineered Response in Soft Matter
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Ilona Kretzschmar, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,060.00

The 2020 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Colloidal, Macromolecular, and
Polyelectrolyte Solutions will be held February 2-7, 2020 in Ventura, CA. A
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) focusing on students and early career attendees
will also take place the weekend prior to the GRC. The theme of the conference
is "Engineered Response in Soft Matter" which focuses on the fundamental models
and mechanics of soft and active systems, their response to external stimuli,
and their applications in medicine, biology, additive manufacturing, and energy
storage. This award will partially support registration and travel cost for
doctoral students and early career scientists to attend the GRC/GRS. The
conference will provide graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and young
faculty members with opportunities to engage with leaders in soft matter
research in the unique GRC setting. The success of the meeting will be assessed
using established GRC guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is the
19th meeting of the GRC on colloidal, macromolecular, and polyelectrolyte
solutions since its inception in 1984. The PIs are experts in colloids and soft
matter research and have put together a program that will bring a diverse mix of
highly successful researchers together to discuss topics of interest. A
preliminary program for both the GRC and GRS includes presentations with follow-
on discussion sessions as well as two-hour poster sessions held each afternoon
to enable additional exchanges and discussion of research contributions in a
less formal setting. This meeting will provide participants with an
interdisciplinary forum to exchange knowledge and to discuss convergent
solutions to global problems that require the insight of the colloids,
macromolecules and polyelectrolyte communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.