* 1940655
* Workshop: Broadening participation of persons with disabilities in STEM, October 14-16 2019, National Federation for the Blind, Baltimore, MD
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Susan Renoe, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,748.00

This award provides participant support for a workshop to be held October 14-16,
2019 at the National Federation for the Blind Headquarters in Baltimore, MD. The
purpose of the meeting is to convene stakeholders from the broader impacts and
disability services communities to discuss challenges and possible solutions to
increase participation of persons with disabilities, who continue to be
significantly underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM). The format of the meeting will be a combination of keynote
talks, panel discussions, and small-group brainstorming. Outcomes will include a
report on the current status of efforts being undertaken to promote meaningful
engagement of persons with disabilities in STEM, e.g., what is being done and
what remains to be done. In addition to identifying the areas of need, the
report will consider potential ways to move forward toward meaningful solutions.
The meeting and the report are expected to spur further research on issues
related to improving accessibility to STEM careers for persons with
disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is motivated by the need for
new resources to help researchers and others in academic and private sector
institutions increase their ability to include persons with disabilities in STEM
careers. The meeting is expected to catalyze formation of new collaborations and
to build a network of individuals with a shared interest in working together to
address this critical national need. Special attention has been given to
involving persons with disabilities as organizers and participants in the
meeting. The meeting will be accessible for all, and outcomes of the meeting
will be widely disseminated via future workshops and resources of the sponsoring
organizations, including the National Alliance for Broader Impacts, the Center
for Advancing Research Impacts in Society, and the American Federation for the
Blind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the following: Office
of Integrative Activities in the Office of the Director; the Programs in Genetic
Mechanisms and in Cellular Dynamics and Function in the Division of Molecular
Biosciences in the Biological Sciences Directorate; the Division of Emerging
Frontiers and Multidisciplinary Activities in the Engineering Directorate; and
NSF INCLUDES, which focuses on catalyzing the Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) enterprise to collaboratively work for inclusive
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.