* 1940128
* RCN: The Climate and Governance Variability in the Great Lakes (CGVG) Project
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Robert Sterner, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 03/31/2024
* USD 499,989.00

The Great Lakes have more shoreline in the continental US than the combined
coasts of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, and millions of people depend on
these lakes for their livelihoods. Climate-driven disturbances, including
changing water levels, warming water temperatures, cyanobacterial blooms, and
intensified storms are increasingly threatening the sustainability of coastal
communities in the Great Lakes. Communities struggle to respond to the
unpredictable timing, intensity, and number of disturbances. The variability of
these perturbations occurs over time scales from hours to centuries and
different social responses are involved across these time scales. The
intensification of disturbances impacting coastal systems requires that
community capacities and governance structures must match the temporal and
spatial scale of climate-driven disturbances, as the most sustainable social and
economic systems will be those that can respond at similar frequencies to key
natural system drivers. The RCN will have four key benefits to the scientific
community and coastal communities at large: (1) Training early career scholars
how to conduct interdisciplinary research in the integration of social and
ecological systems, with a particular focus on mentoring postdoctoral scholars.
(2) Broader training for participants through collaborative and synergistic
activities associated with the RCN. (3) Synergy with other networks. (4)
Relevance to decision making. Because one of the primary goals of this RCN is to
provide decision makers and stakeholders with information that can solve
tangible community problems, the RCN will work closely with practitioners from
private and non-profit industry, and local, state, federal, and tribal
governments and agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CoPe RCN will
address pressing questions about the nature of climate-driven variability on
Great Lakes shorelines; the synchronicity between natural variability and social
change; and the feedbacks and couplings between one of Earthâ€™s largest fresh
water sources and the human socio-economic system on its shores. This RCN will
catalyze innovative research to advance the understanding of freshwater coastal
systems by hosting a series of three workshops to facilitate networking, publish
collaborative manuscripts, and foster an interdisciplinary framework for
researching Great Lakes socio-ecological systems. When the RCN is complete, the
scientific knowledge of how coastal communities in the Great Lakes Basin
interact with climate-driven disturbances will have progressed significantly,
and a new framework for understanding coastal variability at a wide range of
scales will have been produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.