* 1940785
* Chromosomal inversions and gene expression in Mimulus
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* John Kelly, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 01/31/2024
* USD 749,581.00

Chromosomal inversions are a type of mutation in which a section of a chromosome
is flipped in orientation. This research project will provide a broad,
quantitative evaluation of this important class of mutations to gene expression
variation in several species of monkeyflower. It will provide essential genetic
and bioinformatic training to a graduate student and a post-doctoral research
scientist. The project will also extend ongoing efforts to engage Kansas high-
school students in genetics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inversions alter the
DNA sequence in a way that is fundamentally different from nucleotide
substitutions (the most commonly studied kind of mutation) and have been
implicated in a remarkable range of natural phenomena including adaptation to
novel environments and speciation. In humans, they cause of a number of diseases
and also contribute to variation in non-disease traits. However, despite
countless examples, there still is no quantitative understanding for how much
inversions contribute to natural genetic variation and genome evolution. This
research project will provide a quantitative evaluation within a species complex
of monkeyflowers (Mimulus guttatus) where many of the disparate phenomena
associated with inversions have been demonstrated. The importance of inversions,
relative to other mutation types causing differences in gene expression, will be
estimated at three different levels of biological organization: between
individuals within a population, between populations of a species, and between
species. The results are expected to provide new insights into how chromosomal
inversions influence gene expression, adaptation, population divergence, and
speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by
the Evolutionary Processes Program in the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.