* 1940068
* I-Corps:  Commercialization Plan for a High Performance Piezoelectric Pneumatic Valve
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Thomas Chase, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in the
field of pneumatic valves, which control the flow of compressed gases through
tubes or channels in industrial equipment and medical devices. Examples of
equipment which incorporate pneumatic valves include mass flow controllers,
which are used to meter the flow of gases into chambers where electronic
integrated circuits are fabricated, and medical devices, such as ventilators and
portable oxygen systems. Valves developed as an outcome of this project have the
potential to largely displace current pneumatic valve technology, as they
require less electric power to operate them, they respond faster, they generate
less heat, and they may be cost-competitive. Improved performance in mass flow
controllers, enabled by the new valves, may make it possible to increase the
production rate of computer processors and memory which are now ubiquitous in
consumer products. The low power consumption of the new valves expand the
horizons for utilizing pneumatics in portable and wireless devices, such as
human assist robotic devices. The new valves are potentially suitable for usage
in evolving fusion reactors for power generation, where powerful magnetic fields
interfere with the utilization of conventional valves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on a new architecture for
pneumatic valves. Pneumatic valves typically meter flow by moving a plate closer
to an orifice to reduce flow or away from the orifice to increase flow. The
actuator used to move the plate in a conventional valve typically consists of an
electromagnetic coil and plunger. The new architecture replaces the
electromagnetic actuator with a piezoelectric actuator. Previous attempts at
utilizing piezoelectric actuators have been limited by the fact that actuators
with good displacement capacity produce very low force, which limits the
pressure capacity of the valve, and actuators with good force capacity produce
very low displacement, which limits the flow capacity of the valve. This
research is based on the discovery, in a prior NSF project, that the flow
capacity of a valve which incorporates a low displacement actuator can be
increased dramatically by replacing a single orifice with an array of micro-
orifices. Market research will be performed in this project to develop a value
proposition of the new technology in a target market of mass flow controllers.
The outcomes will be enlisted to guide future development of the new
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.