* 1940317
* GeoPRISMS Data Legacy Workshop: New York, NY - Spring 2020
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Vicki Ferrini, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2022
* USD 30,000.00

This workshop, to take place Spring 2020, brings together the scientific
community, data facilities and computer specialists to develop practices for
building a lasting legacy for all data from the GeoPRISMS program. As part of
the NSF-funded GeoPRISMS decadal program, researchers have collected and
generated diverse, shoreline-crossing data sets, from the field, lab, and
numerical models. The data sets cover a remarkably wide range of data types
reflecting the interdisciplinary nature of the GeoPRISMS community and the many
funded projects. The broader impacts of the workshop include the promotion of
data and information sharing and a publically available report on the workshop
outcomes. The workshop will support early-career attendees as well as those from
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of GeoPRISMS data sets
already reside in NSF-approved repositories. Although some data sets are well-
positioned, there are questions and challenges that must be addressed to ensure
a lasting, robust, well-documented and easily accessible legacy for all
GeoPRISMS data. The benefits of preserving and making accessible all of these
GeoPRISMS data sets include supporting scientific reproducibility, enabling the
re-use of data, including for unanticipated purposes, and facilitating new
science through convenient access to aggregations of data. In addition, storing
the data in community-recognized repositories promotes the principles of FAIR
data (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Re-usable), complies with NSF data
management requirements, and serves the data access demands of some journal
publishers. The agenda and goals will be refined by a GeoPRISMS-sponsored mini-
workshop on the same topic at the 2019 AGU Fall Meeting. The recommendations
resulting from this 2.5-day workshop will promote convenient public access to
and long-term preservation of all GeoPRISMS-funded data sets to secure a lasting
data legacy for the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.