* 1940302
* CoPe: RCN: A Coastal Alliance Network for Visualization, Assessment, Science, and Stakeholders (CANVASS) for Convergent Environmental Problem Solving
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Arie Kaufman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 02/29/2024
* USD 499,808.00

Climate change requires that humans adapt to new and unprecedented weather
extremes and build resilience in natural and human-made ecosystems, especially
in and near coastal areas. CANVASS (Coastal Alliance Network for Visualization,
Assessment, Science, and Stakeholders) is a network led by Stony Brook
University's (SBU’s) School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, in collaboration
with Co-PIs at Howard University, Northeastern University, SBU’s Department of
Computer Science and Alan Alda Center for Communicating Science, and
interdisciplinary partners from across the Northeast and mid-Atlantic coastal
United States. The goals of CANVASS are twofold: (1) to spread innovative
approaches from these fields within an integrated network of scientists, policy-
makers, educators, and stakeholders; and (2) to grow the network into a hub that
connects high-impact research, community participation, and educational
approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach integrates state-of-the-art
visualization and interactive techniques to support the understanding of data
and risk, along with the use of an "ethical matrix" for stakeholders to
systematically represent, discuss, understand, and weigh tradeoffs and
perspectives. SBU’s data visualization center, the Reality Deck, the world’s
largest immersive display, will be used along with other visualization
approaches to connect partners and stakeholders to large, multidimensional
datasets and models that will help them view, manipulate, analyze, understand,
and communicate about data. The project will focus initially on coastal-urban
flood risk from sea level rise, storm surge, and heavy rainfall. Workshops will
explore how visualizations can scaffold both scientific advances and effective
stakeholder interactions. Approaches and methods that are developed through this
work will be exportable to other coastal urban areas, and can thus be used to
mitigate other sorts of climate risk beyond flooding, as well as human-
environmental problems more broadly. CANVASS will recruit students, including
those underrepresented in the climate sciences, to learn first-hand how
predictive science can translate into actionable decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.