* 1940962
* Collaborative Research: Determining climate related changes in water mass structure, paleoventilation, and paleocirculation in the Southeast Indian and Southern Oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Elisabeth Sikes, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2023
* USD 115,015.00

The modern oceans hold about fifty times more CO2 than the atmosphere, but
scientists think this may have been even greater during glacial periods causing
a significant reduction in the amount found in the atmosphere. Reduced
atmospheric CO2 concentration during ice ages likely contributed to colder
global temperatures. Much of the atmospheric-oceanic CO2 exchange takes place in
the Southern Ocean and is associated with processes of oceanic and atmospheric
circulation. By studying the water mass structure and chemical characteristics,
scientists hope to define key controls over the exchange of CO2, namely where
water masses rise and sink from the surface and the pathways they travel in the
deeper ocean. This study will establish age models and allow detailed
correlations between a unique set of sediment cores previously collected from
the Indian Ocean. These cores span a range of depths and locations that will
support associated efforts of an international team of researchers to study and
track important water masses in the area using a variety of chemical tracers
found in the sediments deposited as the Earth transitioned out of the last
glacial ice age into the modern climate. This work provides undergraduate
student research opportunities and supports an early career post-doctoral
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The circulation and ventilation of water masses
at intermediate depths (~500-1400 m) in the Southern Indian Ocean are central to
atmosphere-ocean CO2 partitioning. During glaciations, changes in both
thermohaline circulation and wind-driven Southern Ocean ventilation are believed
to have played an important role in sequestering atmospheric CO2. A detailed
understanding of the interaction between the physical mechanisms of thermohaline
overturning circulation and wind-driven ventilation requires precise definition
of changes in water mass boundaries and properties across the deglaciation. The
use of vertical and horizontal transects of sediment core material has been
fundamental in identifying past variations in the structure of the ocean.
Published transects of paleo-proxies in the glacial South Atlantic differ
substantially from the Southwest Pacific, leading to the idea that processes in
the Southeast Indian Ocean had a significant influence on glacial CO2 exchange.
Consequently, this proposed work will provide foundational stratigraphy in a
selected suite of six cores obtained on the CROCCA-2S cruise in 2018 (Coring to
Reconstruct Ocean Circulation and Carbon-dioxide Across 2 Seas). These 6 cores
have been selected to create depth and latitudinal transects underlying both
subantarctic and subtropical waters in the Southeast Indian Ocean from a region
west and south of Australia. Provisional multi-sensor core logger and CaCO3 data
suggest coherent glacial-interglacial stratigraphies between these core sites.
Efforts will concentrate on expanding this initial stratigraphy, principally via
planktonic and benthic Î´18O analyses. Associated efforts will constrain surface
frontal locations that shift in response to changes in atmospheric circulation,
as well as deep water mass boundaries and properties that vary with ocean
circulation patterns. The ultimate scientific objective is to determine the
temporal evolution of the horizontal and vertical distribution of proxies
(e.g.13C, 18O, Nd isotopes) that will reconstruct the water source and
ventilation history of this critical region of the Southern
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.