* 1940827
* RESEARCH-PGR: Sieve Tube Proteomics - Unraveling the Physiology and Cell Biology of an Arcane Cell Type
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Thomas Okita, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 01/31/2024
* USD 801,119.00

The food consumed by humans is produced in plants by photosynthesis, either
directly (think of potatoes) or indirectly (meat from plant-eating animals).
Photosynthesis occurs in the green parts of plants, but, with exceptions such as
lettuce, hungry humans are more interested in non-photosynthesizing storage
organs of plants including grain, tubers, and fruits. Plants transfer the
products of photosynthesis (sugars, chemically speaking) from their green parts
to storage organs via a network of microscopic pipes, the so-called sieve tubes,
in the phloem tissue. Due to their extreme sensitivity, the function of live
sieve tubes is notoriously hard to study, and our understanding of sieve tube
transport and its regulation has remained lamentably poor. This is unfortunate,
especially since numerous phloem-sucking pests, for instance aphids, exploit the
continuous stream of energy-rich substances in the sieve tubes. What often is
worse are the many pathogenic viruses and bacteria that hitch rides in this
stream to infest the entire plant, starting from a single point of entry. As
these factors cause massive crop losses every year, the critical function of
phloem in plant performance translates into an economic significance that can
hardly be overstated. This project will make important contributions to
comprehension of fundamental mechanisms of sieve tube function, which will
facilitate the design of treatments and preventive measures targeting pests and
pathogens. Proteins potentially involved in sieve tube physiology will be
identified by a large-scale biochemical approach (‘proteomics’), and then
further analyzed one by one through directed modification of the genes that
encode them. With regard to Broader Impacts, the project will engage public
interest with an artistic exhibition that incorporates large format photographs
of phloem cells displayed in the terminal of the Pullman/Moscow regional airport
and will also continue updating a “Phloem” webpage. In addition the PI will work
with the Office of Multicultural Student Services at Washington State University
to recruit minority undergraduate students to work in the
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vascular systems allow organisms to distribute
resources internally by bulk flow, thus overcoming size limitations set by
diffusion. The development of vascular tissues including sieve tubes drove the
evolution of large land plants (tracheophytes) which caused a major increase in
the productivity of terrestrial ecosystems. This productivity supports life on
earth in its various forms. The largest photoautotroph marine organisms, kelps,
have convergently evolved transporting sieve tubes, highlighting the
significance of this transport and communication system for large photosynthetic
and sessile life forms. This project aims at elucidating open questions in the
cell biology and physiology of sieve tubes. State-of-the-art proteomics
approaches will be applied to identify proteins potentially involved in
transport regulation, by comparing the proteomes of vascular tissue and isolated
sieve elements. Candidate proteins will be fluorescently tagged by modifications
of their encoding genes, and the subcellular localization of the proteins in
transporting tubes will be determined. Advanced bioimaging tools will be applied
to assign sieve tube proteins to specific organelles or membrane systems, to
generate 3D models of sieve tube organelle interactions, and to characterize the
responses of protein distribution to stress. The insights gained are expected to
provide essential information for the generation of more robust and pest-
resistant crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.