* 1940870
* I-Corps: Meta-material Impact Protection Units
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Mohamed ElGawady, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
significant pathways for the commercialization of unique impact panels that can
be deployed to protect our nation's critical transportation infrastructure, as
well as the people and equipment that navigate U.S. highways and waterways.
Vehicle impact is the second-highest cause of bridge/overpass failures. Over-
height-truck impacts on bridge girders occurs on a weekly basis. These
collisions cause severe injuries and causalities, in addition to economic losses
including critical damage and collapses, downtime, expensive detours, and
traffic congestion. The developed technology will save human lives and reduce
the damage to vehicles and infrastructure whenever a collision happens. Fifteen
percent of total fatal crashes (10,230 fatalities and $655,000 property damage)
in 2017 were collisions with fixed objects. Our solution will be beneficial for
multiple customer segments from car owners to state and federal agencies who are
responsible for our highways, overpasses, waterways and bridges. Our panels will
also save hundreds of thousands of dollars as they can survive dozens of impacts
before they need to be replaced. This project presents a new paradigm in the
design of impact barriers thanks to recent advancements in structural mechanics,
material science, and industrial manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project aims to introduce a unique technology for energy dissipation and
impact protection to be used in wide-spectrum of applications. Our technology is
comprised of a metamaterial unit cell that can be arranged in an array to
produce an impact panel that can be tailored to fit different impact loads.
Therefore, the panels can be produced and assembled into systems of any height,
width and depth. This system of panels has the ability to dissipate energy
through non-linear elastic behavior which allows the system to protect vital
infrastructure from damage as well as protect vehicles and passengers from harm
during a collision. Both experimental and finite element models of small-scale
units showed the potential of the developed system to dissipate impact energy
while remain elastic. Our research has resulted in a provisional patent being
filed and we anticipate a few more patents being added to the portfolio during
the next few months. The results we have achieve from our research and testing
clearly demonstrate that we can affordably build protective panel systems
capable of dissipating high levels of impact energy. This same platform
technology will also be used to develop more products that require high levels
of energy dissipation such as shock absorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.