* 1940020
* EAGER: (ST1) Motile Matter- Reconstituting Cell Motility using Osmotic Robots
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Atul Parikh, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,991.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Biological cells are a fundamental unit of
life that can harvest energy from the environment in various form, use that
energy to sustain their metabolism, and direct that energy to power cellular
tasks. Motility, i.e., the ability to produce controlled directional motion of a
cell as a whole, is of paramount importance for the cell's ability to survive
and explore its environment. Just like man-made machines use motors to enable
them to move, cells use ATP-powered molecular motors to generate mechanical
work. A much less explored, yet surprisingly powerful motility pathway involves
propulsion-powered by osmotic energy, in which a cell directs water channels to
defined regions of its membrane, and uses the resulting water fluxes in presence
of external, even uniform, osmotic gradient to propel itself like a mini-rocket
through aqueous environment. This project will explore the fundamental physical
principles of this process by recapitulating the key elements of this motility
apparatus in a model synthetic system comprised from large enclosed proto-
cellular membrane compartments- giant unilamellar vesicles- and efficient
synthetic water channels- carbon nanotube porins. Precisely controlled phase
segregation in the vesicle shell will drive the water channels to a particular
vesicle region and generate asymmetric propulsion. This project will explore the
possibility of generating sustained propulsion by using multiple recharge
cycles, as well as explore the effects of crowding and emergent collective
behavior in the ensembles of these osmotically-propelled proto-cells. In
addition, this project will provide research, training and educational
opportunities to high school and undergraduate students for a better
understanding of modern biomaterials research. In particular, the project will
offer opportunities in biomimetic materials research through targeted outreach
efforts and presentations to K-12 STEM summer program participants in California
Central Valley region. It will also enable participation by undergraduate
researchers through the Vertically Integrated Program (https://vip.ucdavis.edu),
which allows them to work in single labs for several
quarters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Cell migration is
ubiquitous in biology. During motility, cells acquire a spatial asymmetry - a
polarized morphology characterized by a clear distinction between the cell front
and the rear - allowing them to convert energy-dissipative intracellular forces,
generated in response to environmental stimuli, into net movement. In addition
to ATP-consuming cytoskeleton remodeling to drive polarity and cell motility, an
alternate process involves the emergence of cell polarity through active
positioning of membrane channels, which in conjunction with asymmetric water
fluxes under osmotic gradients generate a net propulsive force. This EAGER
proposal seeks to recapitulate this essential mechanism into synthetic giant
vesicles towards developing design principles for a broad general class of far-
from-equilibrium materials that move, flow, or swim in response to changes in
their environment. The investigators articulate a high-risk, high-reward
experiments that test their central hypothesis that directional fluxes of water
across vesicular compartments facilitated by asymmetric spatial distribution of
highly-efficient water channels (aquaporins or carbon nanotube porins) can
isothermally transduce osmotic energy into a vectorial propulsion. To address
this hypothesis, three aims will be pursued: (1) Preparation and
characterization of water-channel embedding vesicular compartments that exhibit
cell-like polarity; (2) demonstration of self-propulsion of polarized giant
vesicles in response to imposed osmotic gradients; and (3) study emergent,
cooperative behaviors in populations of closely interacting, motile giant
vesicles. The broader technical impact of this project benefits from a
combination of concepts from the fields of soft matter, membrane biophysics, and
bio-inspired materials that address fundamental interdisciplinary questions
surrounding the design of model protocellular configurations, biomimicry, novel
principles for material synthesis, and understanding the rules of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.