* 1940552
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a bioprocess technology for the production of a non-corrosive and environmentally benign deicing chemical from waste byproducts
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Samuel Degife, NATIONAL RESOURCE CONSULTANTS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
reduced costs of road and highway infrastructure repairs and environmental
benefits from the use of a low-cost biodegradable and non-corrosive deicer
substitute for salts. Deicing chemicals are applied to roads in winter for
safety. Typical salts are highly corrosive to concrete, reinforcing steel, and
bridge decks, and hence cause billions of dollars in road repair and
infrastructure rehabilitation costs. Because these salts do not biodegrade, they
accumulate in the environment and increase salinity in lakes and ground waters,
as well as in water supplies. Acetate-based chemicals are effective deicers with
minimal corrosion and environmental effects, but they can be expensive to
produce. This project will repurpose wastes to produce a low-cost deicer for
reduced infrastructure costs and enhanced environmental quality.

The proposed project will provide a new cost-effective low pH bioconversion
process for the production of acetic and lactic acids from carbohydrate wastes.
There are currently no industrial bioconversion facilities for the production of
acetic acid due to the high recovery costs for the sorption or extraction of the
acid from the broth at neutral pH. This project will advance bioconversion of
sugars at sufficiently low pH values where the product recovery efficiency is
high. Acid recovery by adsorption on resins or liquid-liquid extraction is about
twelve times more efficient with the proposed process than with anaerobic
fermentations that operate at neutral pH. This project will develop a process to
utilize abundantly available organic and inorganic wastes in the production of
the acetate deicer. Hemicellulose, the second most abundant carbohydrate in
nature, is not utilized in ethanol fermentations due to the low efficiency of
bioconversion. Hemicellulose hydrolysate will be used as substrate in the
proposed process. Continuous fermentations at low pH values will be optimized
for high organic acids productivities. Multicomponent adsorption studies will be
conducted to optimize the schemes for the recovery of the organic acids from the
fermentation broth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.