* 1940573
* Engaging indigenous students in research through the National Conference on Undergraduate Research (NCUR 2020); March, 2020, Bozeman, MT
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Colin Shaw, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 48,784.00

Native American undergraduates face many challenges, including limited
opportunities to participate in undergraduate research and little to no
opportunity to present their work at national conferences. This project will
enable students from the seven tribal colleges in Montana and other Native
students in the region to receive training in the preparation and submission of
conference abstracts and in the development of effective communication skills
for presentation of student research work. At least 60 Native students will be
provided financial and technical support that will allow them to participate in
the 34th National Conference on Undergraduate Research (NCUR), hosted by Montana
State University (MSU) in March 2020. A pre-conference workshop will be held at
MSU to enable students to work with faculty mentors to construct an abstract for
submission to NCUR. Students will then be able to actively engage at the
Conference by giving an oral/poster paper of their research. A special
orientation session at NCUR will introduce students to the conference to
maximize interaction and networking and to enhance the impact of the conference
on student academic work and pursuit of a STEM career. This project will make it
possible for most tribal college students in Montana and neighboring states to
present their undergraduate research at NCUR 2020. The goal is to use the
enthusiasm generated by the Nation?s premier undergraduate research event to
advance knowledge, increase awareness, and foster the interest of Native
students in graduate school and research-related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshops, both pre-conference and at NCUR, will
engage Native students to discussions on graduate education thru the Graduate
Research Fellowship Program (GRFP) panel, on STEM careers thru the Native
professionals career panel, and on other Native student academic opportunities
thru the Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR) topical sessions and
affinity group social events. These events will build a sense of belonging and
community for Native students during the conference. A post-conference
assessment will evaluate the impact of the NCUR 2020 conference on the research
engagement of Native participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.