* 1940174
* CoPe Conference: Sustainable Coastal Development on Lake Superior's South Shore: Marquette, MI 2019-2020
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Jessica Thompson, Northern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 09/30/2020
* USD 95,334.00

The Great Lakes provide the largest freshwater resource in the world, and Lake
Superior is at the top of this critical watershed. Recent weather fluctuations,
increases in surface and lake temperatures, ice cover and lake levels have had a
tremendous impact on infrastructure in the Great Lakes region. Collaboration and
interdisciplinary science is necessary to understand the dynamic relationships
between ecosystem health, commerce and development. The goal of this project is
to conduct a conference series that will engage (1) interdisciplinary experts in
coastal geography, geohazards, water quality, climate science, livelihoods,
tourism, environmental history, sustainable business and adaptation planning;
(2) practitioners, including local and regional planning staff, public sector
stakeholders, and local and regional non-governmental organizations; and (3)
industry leaders in tourism, mining, education, and real estate development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcomes for this series include: 1)
integrated stakeholder input to create multiple scenarios for sustainable
coastal community development; 2) visualizations of those scenarios created by
landscape architects; and 3) new ways to achieve sustainable development along
the south shore of Lake Superior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.