* 1940349
* SBIR Phase I:  Taekion Defense-hardened Blockchain File System using aBFT Consensus
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* David Cohen, GRID7 LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,646.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project include the ability to enhance the security and trust of
critical infrastructure networks for applications including defense, electric
grids, health care, and emerging autonomous systems (i.e., self-driving vehicles
and robotics). As billions of internet connected things are added to our
existing infrastructure, providing a trusted data layer will rise in importance
to maintain reliability and security of our critical infrastructure, as many of
these systems are mission and life-critical. Our proposed innovation will allow
highly distributed and autonomous systems the ability to make decisions based on
highly trusted data sources. Our innovation will enhance the practical
applications of distributed computing fault tolerance and consensus (agreement)
mechanisms by applying them to real-world, critically needed defense networks
initially and to other critical infrastructure areas later. The commercial
opportunity is to provide a missing piece of the puzzle to support a trusted
data layer in the next generation, or Internet evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to prototype a novel,
next-generation Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) consensus algorithm to be
plugged into open source DLTs to enhance the data and transaction integrity
aspects under asynchronous (disconnected, flaky, or malicious) networking
scenarios. The challenge is to provide the ability to maintain agreement and
decision finality (or integrity) among consensus nodes operating in asynchronous
(network partition, crash fault, byzantine fault) networking environments. In
simpler terms, this means the ability to keep and store a file or update within
a DLT node, even though the fault keeps the DLT update from taking place over an
extended period of time. This capability is highly important when running DLTs
in critical infrastructure networks. The research objectives are to combine
local, hash-chained write-ahead journaling methods with state-of-the-art
asynchronous byzantine fault tolerant (aBFT) consensus to prototype high data
integrity (ability to retain all transactions, provide liveness guarantees,
maintain local node state integrity, and maintain data ordering and timestamps)
under asynchronous network conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.