* 1940100
* CoPe: EAGER: Collaborative Research: Development of A Novel, Mobile Coastal Observatory for Quantifying Coastal Carbon Cycling by Professional and Citizen Scientists
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Peter Girguis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2023
* USD 91,417.00

Coastal zones provide a host of ecosystem services, including sequestering
carbon dioxide produced by human activities. To date, quantification of coastal
carbon sequestration (e.g., "Blue Carbon") and emissions are limited by an
inability to adequately resolve spatial and temporal patterns of carbon
concentrations and fluxes. This project embraces a new approach for the
deployment, collection, and analysis of data for the goals of increasing our
understanding of the spatial and temporal dynamics of coastal carbon cycling
while simultaneously reducing barriers to accessing new technologies and
empowering a range of stakeholders to collect and share data. This project will
address the challenge of broader access by developing a local/regional HUB for
sharing in situ sensors. This project leverages the "Share-Economy" human-
technology relationship as a model (e.g., Zipcar, Airbnb) that may be adapted
with "goods" and "services" re-defined by the activities of scientific data
collection, instruments, and knowledge dissemination. The success of this model
has wide ranging implications for how we develop and use other sensors and
technology for understanding central processes in the functioning of our planet.
This project will contribute not only an increased understanding of coastal
carbon cycling, but also a new model for sensor sharing that will be widely
applicable to other ecosystems and data collection needs. The results of this
project will be disseminated widely through publications, conference
presentations, press releases, and outreach to the public. For example, this
project will engage a variety of users through sensor development workshops held
at relevant conferences, and will engage the public through a free public
lecture series at the Harvard Museum of Natural History (HMNH) on "ZipScience: A
21st century approach to enabling the broad community to access emerging
technologies." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to quantify spatial and
temporal patterns of carbon concentrations and fluxes in coastal ecosystems and
to share this ability with a wide variety of end users. To do so, this project
will develop novel "sensor systems" that leverage state-of-the-art, off-the
shelf, commercial detectors and communication technologies. During this effort,
this project will also entail the explicit recruitment and engagement of
stakeholders (as well as computer scientists who specialize in online data
management / presentation) to assess the value and sustainability of a "sensor-
sharing" program that would allow stakeholders to check out, deploy, and return
these systems to the local/regional hubs. Specifically, this project will
develop wireless, easily portable sensor networks that: 1) quantify in situ
inorganic carbon concentrations and fluxes as well as pH, temperature, oxygen,
and other factors in coastal environments using industrial sensor technologies;
2) collect and preserve water, enabling a variety of lab-based investigations
from microbiology to microplastic quantification; 3) use widespread cellular
communications to pass data to a cloud-based web platform that will complete
first-pass online data processing for rapid, online, and open-access
visualizations. This project also includes a robust needs-based assessment to
plan the next phase of coastal in situ sensor networks. As part of this
assessment, these sensors will be employed by many different stakeholders for
widespread data collection and processing. This project will then assess if a
"rental and/or loan model" is a practical solution to meet broader community
needs. Through workshops at relevant scientific meetings, and individual
stakeholder interviews, this project will assess opportunities and challenges to
widespread adoption of these core sensor packages, and develop a long-term
strategy for inclusion of other sensors as well as sensor needs beyond what this
project covers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.