* 1940680
* Workshop for Industry-Academia Collaboration in Advanced Manufacturing; 2020 ASME International MSEC and 48th NAMRC; Cincinnati, Ohio; 22-23 June 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Hitomi Yamaguchi Greenslet, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2022
* USD 85,000.00

This award provides a forum to facilitate collaboration between industry and
academia in advanced-manufacturing research, education, and workforce
development. The workshop will be held in conjunction with the North American
Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC) and the Manufacturing Science and
Engineering Conference (MSEC) held 22-23 June 2020, in Cincinnati, Ohio.
Attendees from industry, academia and government will come together to identify
research needs to advance U.S. manufacturing, discuss challenges, and identify
the resources required to foster and build strong collaborations.
Representatives from select USA Manufacturing Institutes will share their
research roadmaps as an aid to identify fundamental research projects to resolve
real-world industry manufacturing problems. Presentations and a summary of the
discussions will be made publicly available on the workshop website and a
follow-up virtual meeting will be scheduled within six months of the workshop,
followed by a full report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives of the
workshop are to (1) identify the future research needs for promoting the
technical innovation ecosystem and the base capabilities and capacity of U.S.
manufacturing, (2) identify challenges and benefits of Industry-Academia
collaboration, (3) present research roadmaps for selected Manufacturing USA
Institutes, (4) formulate fundamental research projects involving real-world
problems in industry, and (5) identify resources necessary to conduct the
highlighted research projects. This workshop will help not only fill a
significant void in the formulation of Industry-Academia partnerships but also
encourage partnerships between industry, academia, and governmental agencies.
This will help maximize the impact of the governmental support on promoting the
base capabilities and capacity of U.S. manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.