* 1940949
* HSI Conference: Transforming STEM Education at Rural Hispanic-Serving Institutions Across the Nation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Caroline VanIngen-Dunn, Central Arizona College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2021
* USD 99,952.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this conference aims to identify the unique
challenges that rural HSIs face in developing effective STEM programs that have
robust student enrollment. It will also promote effective solutions that address
these challenges. Institutions of higher education in rural areas and small
towns face challenges that are uncommon to peer institutions in larger cities.
These challenges include access to high speed Internet, lack of hands-on
workforce training or undergraduate research, challenges in recruiting qualified
faculty, difficulty in meeting enrollment minimums for new STEM programs, and
problems accessing federal funding dollars. Hispanic-Serving Institutions are
seeking solutions to challenges that are unique to their status as HSIs. This
conference will document the intersecting needs, barriers, successes,
opportunities, and priorities of existing and emerging rural HSIs. The expected
outcomes include models for partnerships and collaborations among geographically
dispersed partners, frameworks for industry engagement, improved understanding
of effective practices in STEM teaching and learning, improved understanding of
cultural relevance for students in rural communities, and best practices and
approaches that improve the success of rural HSIs in obtaining external
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference aims to lay a foundation for
understanding challenges and potential solutions for rural HSIs that, when
addressed, will increase quality of life and economic success for the people of
these communities. The conference will build on the NSF-funded University of
Arizona HSI Conference: Transforming STEM Education in Hispanic Serving
Institutions - Regional Insights from the Southwest (NSF 1748526). The proposed
three-day Rural STEM HSI Conference will examine themes in undergraduate STEM
education including: (1) K-12, Two-Year, and Four-Year Partnerships; (2) Career
and Workforce Preparation; (3) Innovative STEM Teaching and Learning; (4)
Student Support Strategies; (5) Culturally Responsive Education; and (6)
External funding. The results will be compared to those from the previous
University of Arizona HSI Conference via a qualitative study that integrates
within-case and across-case analytic strategies. This comparison will augment
knowledge and understanding about the specific challenges and opportunities in
STEM undergraduate education at rural HSIs. The conference will generate a
report to provide guidance on how to best serve the needs of STEM students at
rural HSIs. The conference results will be disseminated to governmental agencies
and higher education organizations via presentations at regional and national
conferences. The long-term impact of this work will be to help rural HSIs
position themselves as drivers to increase access to high-quality educational
opportunities and develop the STEM workforce that will impact rural economic
prosperity. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.