* 1940319
* CoPe RCN: Resilient  Rural Infrastructure
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Ellen Piekalkiewicz, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2024
* USD 426,376.00

1940319 (Feiock). The RCN for Resilient Rural Infrastructure will explore and
achieve adaptive capacity and resilience for Gulf coastal communities, which has
the potential to extend to infrastructure resilience of other rural communities
in the United States. Understanding the factors that foster and support the
efficacy of hurricane resilience in varying urban and rural settings can lead to
strategies and policies that will optimize successful and all-inclusive future
and long-term strategic adaptation and implementation plans. The initial focus
is on the Florida Panhandle and will be expanded in years two and three to
communities and institutions along the Gulf of Mexico coast. The activities of
the new RCN include: Collectively develop a consensus-based mechanism for rural
reliance; create a networking mechanism to recruit additional participants and
update working groups; develop new research directions for identified subareas;
evaluate the success of the network; and develop an innovative learning program
for graduate students of diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN aims
to foster a new understanding of the complex interactions among the key elements
of community resilience in rural coastline areas. The RCN will work towards a
set of new theories to explore hypotheses regarding how to achieve adaptive
capacity and resilience in coastal communities. The RCN will bring together
researchers from different fields, who otherwise would not be able to network
together, to form working groups focusing on understanding within three thematic
frameworks: Resilient rural infrastructure capacity and innovation; Governance
and planning; and Community engagement. The network's research agenda will allow
researchers to work towards solutions impacting people, their communities, and
the future of lives in the communities. Through co-production of knowledge with
the RCN's organizational and community partners, the development of new theories
and methods will be enabled that could help community leaders and local
officials planning capacity building and implementation decisions in preparing
for and responding to shocks and in developing balanced sustainable solutions
for both the human and natural environments. The network management team will
implement a mechanism to promote diversity by recruiting graduate assistants and
network participants. The network participants will contribute to the
development of a unique interdisciplinary learning program, based on the concept
of an outcome-driven, diverse, and individualized learning
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.