* 1940074
* Collaborative Research: Science-Aware Computational Methods for Accelerating Data-Intensive Discovery: Astroparticle Physics as a Test Case
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Waheed Bajwa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 320,701.00

The rapid technological advances of the last two decades have ushered in an era
of data-rich science for several disciplines. One such discipline is
astroparticle physics, where researchers aim to discover what our Universe is
made of by trying to directly detect Dark Matter. This discovery can be hastened
if data science tools are used to extract significant domain-specific
information from data, and to reliably test scientific hypotheses at scale. The
overarching goal of this two-year project is to lay the groundwork for
incorporating scientific knowledge into machine learning and data science
methods in the context of scientific disciplines in which discovery requires
effective, efficient analysis of lots of noisy data gathered by multiple
imperfect sensors. In doing so, it not only advances the state-of-the-art in
data science, machine learning, and astrophysics, but it also has the potential
to accelerate data-driven discoveries in other scientific disciplines where data
shares similar characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
innovative domain-enhanced data science methods that will be based on
probabilistic graphical models and graph-regularized inverse problems. Using the
leading astroparticle experiment XENON as a test bed, the investigators will
explore and demonstrate approaches for incorporating domain knowledge into
machine learning and data science methods. In doing so, the investigators will
address major data-analysis challenges in the context of dark matter
identification. Additionally, the investigators will invest significant effort
reaching out to other data-intensive science communities, such as materials
science, oceanography, and meteorology, that can benefit from the new methods
and ideas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.