* 1940062
* Collaborative Research: Converging Genomics, Phenomics, and Environments Using Interpretable Machine Learning Models
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Tyson Swetnam, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 483,022.00

Mitigating the effects of climate change on public health and conservation calls
for a better understanding of the dynamic interplay between biological processes
and environmental effects. The state-of-the-art, which has led to many important
discoveries, utilizes numerical or statistical models for making predictions or
performing in silico experimentation, but these techniques struggle to capture
the nonlinear response of natural systems. Machine learning (ML) methods are
better able to cope with nonlinearity and have been used successfully in
biological applications, but several barriers still exist, including the opaque
nature of the algorithm output and the absence of ML-ready data. This project
seeks to significantly advance technologies in ML and create a new
interdisciplinary field, computational ecogenomics. This will be accomplished by
designing ML techniques for encoding heterogeneous genomic and environmental
data and mapping them to multi-level phenotypic traits, reducing the amount of
necessary training data, and then developing interactive visualizations to
better interpret ML models and their outputs. These advances will responsibly
and transparently inform policy to maximize resources during this crucial window
for planetary health, while revealing underlying biological mechanisms of
response to stress and evolutionary pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
vision for this project is to develop predictive analytics for organismal
response to environmental perturbations using innovative data science approaches
and change the way scientists think about gene expression and the environment.
The goal for this two-year award is to develop a proof-of-concept for an
institute focused on predicting emergent properties of complex systems; an
institute that would itself foster the development of many new sub-disciplines.
The core of this activity is developing a machine learning framework capable of
predicting phenotypes based on multi-scale data about genes and environments.
Available data, ranging from simple vectors to complex images to sequences, will
be ingested into this framework by applying proven semantic data integration
tools and algorithmic data transformation methods. The central hypothesis of
this research is that deep learning algorithms and biological knowledge graphs
will predict phenotypes more accurately across more taxa and more ecosystems
than do current numerical and traditional statistical modeling methods. The
rationale for this project is that a timely investment in data science will push
through a bottleneck in life science, accelerating discovery of gene-phenotype-
environment relationships, and catalyzing a new computational discipline to
uncover the complex "rules of life."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part
of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big
Idea activity, and is jointly supported by the HDR and the Division of
Biological Infrastructure within the NSF Directorate of Directorate for
Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.