* 1940018
* SBIR Phase I:  Reusable Adhesive Fasteners Using Shape Memory Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2021
* John Seo, RESPONDIC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2021
* USD 200,939.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to address the critical market pain points
and demand for damage-free, yet secure and repeatedly usable adhesive fasteners
that can perform well on both dry and wet surfaces. This project develops a
reusable adhesive fastener that is a non-tacky, quickly-reversible adhesive,
exhibiting high joining strength and reversibility. Due to the unique mechanism
the device uses to toggle its adhesion, this device leaves the underlying
surface damage-free. The fastener is easily removable, repeatedly usable, and
potentially will have low manufacturing costs. Such an adhesive fastener enables
the user to easily and securely mount and dismount moderately heavy objects
without the risk of damaging or leaving residue on the mounting surface, even on
moderately porous and rough surfaces. Furthermore, since the adhesive fastener
is water-resistant, high-performance fastening can also be applied in wet
environments, expanding the potential market applications.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
an adhesive fastener that works with high reliability and durability in diverse
environmental conditions, with effective activation methods. Shape memory
polymer (SMP) formulations and the mechanics at the adhesive contact interface
will be optimized to make the fastener more resistant to contact failure. Since
the adhesive contact failure mode of this adhesive fastener is typically
fracture, there will be significant efforts on refining the mechanical design to
retard adhesive contact fracture, and the resulting performance in terms of
joining strength and duration will be quantitatively determined. An optimized
fabrication process for conductive SMPs will be developed by incorporating
conductive fillers into the SMP material to enable continuous production,
ensuring uniform product quality and enabling scalable manufacturing. For this
purpose, the effective Joule-heating, shape memory effect, and final reversible
adhesive properties of the conductive SMP upon conductive filler composition,
concentration, and spatial concentration configuration will be investigated. The
adhesive performance in wet conditions of the SMP will be demonstrated and
systematically tested to minimum performance standards under a variety of liquid
types and thermomechanical loading conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.