* 1940990
* Travel Grant: Workshop on Research Directions for the Grid Edge, To Be Held   March 24-25, in  Alexandria, VA
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Mladen Kezunovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2022
* USD 49,984.00

This proposal requests funding to provide travel subsidies for university
professors to attend the NSF Workshop to define the Research Directions for the
Grid Edge: Interfacing the Legacy Grids Operated by Utilities with Emerging
Grids Owned and Operated by Third Parties at the Edge. The workshop focusing on
unresolved problems, technology requirements and research directions for the
time horizon of 5-10 years will be held in Washington DC on March 24-25, 2020.
This workshop intends to bring the travel grant recipients, as well as industry
and government stakeholders together to address the Grid Edge concepts,
fundamentals and vision holistically. The proposed workshop will offer a forum
to discuss and coordinate a research strategy and related action plan to meet
industry needs for new solutions in response to the new developments affecting
the grid. The grid edge is considered a crucial development for the future of
the electricity grids requires contributions from academics, engineers, policy
makers, economists, social scientists, government officials, and technology
leaders in delivering solutions for the next generation electricity grid for the
benefits of the society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental concepts needed
for advancing the grid Edge require an interdisciplinary approach involving
basic research, applied engineering, technology innovation, behavioral studies,
market economics, and policy insights. The grid edge is defined in this context
through multiple dimensions: a) the asset ownership, which entails the utility
owned and non-utility owned assets, b) the edge stakeholder role, which
encompasses the utility-centric and third party-centric view, and the view that
focuses on the need to closely collaborate across the edge boundaries, and c)
the structured operational layers covering physical grid components, control and
protection, the technology, cyber-physical security and privacy, markets,
regulatory framework, and business models. This workshop will continue the NSF
past and current efforts undertaken through a recent series of timely workshops
to offer additional research insight and a perspective focusing on the cyber and
physical aspects of energy generation and consumption at the grid
edge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.