* 1940158
* Phase II IUCRC at Virginia Commonwealth University: The Center for Rational Catalyst Synthesis
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Bernard Gupton, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2024
* USD 448,000.00

The science of catalysis drives the creation of novel materials called catalysts
that make chemical transformations occur that would otherwise be difficult or
impossible. Catalysts are perhaps best known in automobile catalytic converters
to reduce pollution in automobile exhaust. Catalysts are used to produce a wide
variety of products of societal importance such as fuels, textiles, plastics,
food and pharmaceutical products to name a few. Catalysts are used to produce
common chemicals such as fuels, textiles, plastics, food and pharmaceutical
products to name a few. It has been estimated that catalysis accounts for over
95% (by volume) of all products and over 80% of added value in the chemical
industry. About one third of the world’s economy depends directly or indirectly
on catalysis. Yet in spite of their immense importance, the development of new
catalysts is still largely done by trial-and-error, and is therefore time-
consuming and expensive. A grand challenge of catalysis research is the precise
design and controlled synthesis of catalytic structures. Discoveries which
transform catalyst synthesis from an art to a science will serve to enhance the
productivity, energy efficiency and economic impact of a very broad industry
base that involves the conversion of raw materials into finished products
through chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Rational Catalyst
Synthesis (CeRCaS) is the world's first and only research center with the focus
on understanding the chemical fundamentals of catalyst synthesis. CeRCaS brings
to bear powerful, complementary expertise at the University of South Carolina
and Virginia Commonwealth University, and in Phase II. CeRCaS research projects,
which the industrial partners help develop, select and mentor, are in three
thrusts. First, the Fundamentals of Metal Deposition including in-situ
observation of metal deposition mechanisms and a variety of methods for
nanoparticle genesis; second, Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Solid-Solid
Bonding, using theory and experiment to allow prediction of the wetting or
sintering of metal oxides on support surfaces, and prediction of the size, shape
and, in the case of bimetallics, composition of supported nanoparticles; and
third, Precision Site Synthesis for Specific Reactions, in which nanoparticles
will be synthesized with specific size, content (single or multi-metals) and
shape and so be optimized for particular reactions or to minimize the content of
expensive precious metal ingredients. Graduate students will be actively
mentored with a practical mindset. Educational outreach will include the active
recruitment and eventual industrial placement of underrepresented groups in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.