* 1940054
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a portable, sensitive, user-friendly electrochemical biosensor for detecting Pesticide residues
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Lance Ford, Attogene Corp
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a portable, faster, cheaper, more
sensitive, more consistent user-friendly electrochemical biosensor for detection
of organophosphate and carbamate pesticide (OPaC) residues. While OPaC chemicals
have greatly improved crop yields, they have also (1) caused accumulation of
pesticide residues in the food chain, (2) promoted the generation of pesticide-
resistant insects, and (3) contaminated the air, water and soil. OPaC residues,
therefore, are a significant public health concern. The proposed sensor will:
increase the sensitivity and specificity for monitoring OPaCs (2) reduce costs
associated with pesticide monitoring, and (3) improve portability of monitoring
devices. Finally, the proposed biosensor technology could be adaptable for
analyzing biofluids, making it transformative in monitoring environmental
exposures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project proposes to develop a more sensitive, field-deployable electrochemical
biosensor for the detection of organophosphate and carbamate pesticide (OPaC)
residues. The system’s principle is that OPaCs bind/inhibit the activity of a
highly sensitive designer acetylcholinesterase (AChE) enzyme, diminishing a
readily detectable electrochemical current. At the system’s core is a novel AChE
enzyme more sensitive to OPaC residues than those currently in use. The approach
will further optimize the performance of this novel enzyme by rationally
designing variants that decrease aggregation and increase/improve thermal
stability, core packing, surface polarity, and backbone rigidity. Finally, the
approach will enhance OPaC detection sensitivity even further by increasing the
surface area of the electrochemical sensory apparatus. Briefly, the procedure is
to submerge the sensor into a buffer to acquire and assign baseline data, add
test samples to allow any OPaCs to bind to the optimized AChE enzyme on the
sensor, add the AChE substrate acetylthiocholine to the sample, and measure
electrochemical inhibition. Taken together, this novel biosensor will result in
a major shift in the way OPaC analysis is performed and pave the way for
reliable, sensitive, and low-cost field analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.