* 1940647
* NSF-BSF: Natural selection on the social interactions that mediate collective behavior: ecological pressures and genomic architecture
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Deborah Gordon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 399,602.00

The project investigates how evolution shapes resilience to changing conditions.
Ant colonies operate without central control. Ants use brief local interactions
that in the aggregate, allow colonies to adjust to changing conditions. The
project will continue a unique long-term study tracking a population of
harvester ant colonies in the desert of the southwest US over 30 years,
including periods of heavy rainfall and a long drought that now appears to be
ending. Colonies regulate foraging activity in response to changes in food
availability and water stress. Colonies differ in how they regulate foraging;
some are more likely than others to restrict foraging activity in dry weather so
as to conserve water. The project will use genetic methods to find genetic
differences among colonies that differ in behavior, to learn whether the
regulation of foraging behavior is inherited from parent to offspring colonies,
and to examine how colony behavior is associated with its reproductive success
in numbers of offspring colonies. This work will show how natural selection is
shaping the collective behavior of colonies, and how selection can shift in
response to changing drought conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collective
behavior occurs at every level of biological organization, from cells to
animals. It operates without central control, using local interactions that in
the aggregate produce a collective outcome. Natural selection on collective
behavior, as on any trait, acts in relation to ecological pressures. The project
investigates the evolution of collective behavior in a natural population,
linking the individual and collective levels, how selection pressure on
collective behavior shifts in changing ecological conditions. The project draws
on and continues a 30-year study of the demography, behavior, ecology and
evolution of a population of colonies of the red harvester ant (Pogonomyrmex
barbatus) in the desert of southwestern US, and develops a database that makes
these data available for analysis. Previous work shows that desert harvester ant
colonies regulate foraging activity to manage water stress, using brief
olfactory interactions between outgoing and returning foragers inside the nest.
Colonies vary in how they regulate foraging activity, and previous work
conducted in drought conditions, shows this is associated with colony
reproductive success in offspring colonies. The project examines how changing
ecological conditions, especially rainfall, lead to shifts in the selection
pressures that link foraging activity and reproductive success. Reduced
representation genomic sequencing will be used to identify parent-offspring
pairs of colonies, and thus measure reproductive success in number of offspring
colonies. The heritability from parent to offspring colonies of the regulation
of foraging will be investigated. A genome-wide association study will be
conducted to investigate the genetic architecture underlying this variation in
collective behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.