* 1940070
* RUI: From Greenhouse to Icehouse: Documenting evolutionary trends in freshwater siliceous organisms over 80 million years of environmental change
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Peter Siver, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 286,615.00

Over geologic time, shifts in global temperatures from warm to cold and vice
versa have influenced the evolution and extinction of species, and caused large-
scale reorganizations of ecosystems worldwide. The latest swing from Greenhouse
to the current Icehouse began over 55 million years ago, concurrent with
declines in atmospheric carbon dioxide. The objective of this project is to use
the fossil record to examine the evolutionary trends of selected freshwater
organisms during the shift from Greenhouse to Icehouse conditions. The project
will build a foundation for understanding what freshwater ecosystems were like
under globally warm conditions, especially in northern latitudes, and how they
responded to cooling temperatures. This will provide a framework for
understanding ecosystem responses under future climate warming scenarios. The
project will advance evolutionary knowledge of the target lineages, uncover new
species, examine the oldest localities harboring freshwater diatoms, provide
time-specific markers for calibrating components of the Tree of Life to geologic
time, and enhance the value of museum specimens. The project will provide
undergraduate research internships, and educational opportunities for the
general public through presentations at libraries and senior
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to expand knowledge of
North American freshwater fossil synurophytes, chrysophytes, diatoms,
euglyphids, heliozoans and sponges through documentation of species spanning 80
million years from the Late Cretaceous through the Miocene. Microfossils will be
documented in several hundred samples from nine localities, and merged with
historical information from the literature and museum records to assemble a
database to test specific hypotheses on evolutionary history. The suite of
fossil localities will yield an abundance of new species that, in turn, will
advance an understanding of biodiversity, biogeography, and evolution of
morphological traits for all of the organisms over a critical time period
spanning the transition from a Greenhouse to Icehouse
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.