* 1940290
* Collaborative Research: C1: Learning the Universal Free Energy Function
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Alexander Urban, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2023
* USD 483,170.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award brings materials science and materials
engineering together with data science to develop data-intensive methods to
create phase diagrams or "roadmaps" of materials. The discovery and design of
new materials requires the ability to predict how different chemical elements
can combine to make different compounds depending on the temperature. One
example of great technological relevance are metallic alloys that form by
combining multiple metallic elements at elevated temperatures. Over the past
century, materials scientists have measured such compound-formation processes
for many materials systems, but the available data still represents only a tiny
fraction of the entire space of all possible combinations of chemical elements
and temperatures. Meanwhile, machine-learning and data science have made great
strides in discovering new patterns and connections, and being able to “fill in”
missing information from large data sets. The research team will extend and
develop state-of-the-art machine learning approaches to apply to mathematical
models and data for metallic alloys to learn new connections between chemical
elements and discover new alloys. If successful, the research team will enable
the development of new and improved lightweight structural alloys and longer-
lived, higher power density batteries. All of the developed software tools will
have publicly available implementations throughout the funding period to
accelerate such developments. The research team’s approach uses close
collaboration between domain and data scientists with strong “cross-training” to
develop the next generation of scientists and engineers, and data scientists
enabling convergent approaches to the challenging problems of science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award brings
together materials science and engineering, and data science to develop data-
intensive methods to determine materials phase diagrams. Design and discovery of
new materials relies extensively on phase diagrams that quantify what phase(s)
are stable at a given temperature and chemical composition, which is determined
by the free energy of different phases. Moreover, many equilibrium material
properties are derived from free energies or free-energy differences. Extensive
resources have been devoted to experimental determination of phase diagrams for
many material systems, but despite these efforts only a tiny fraction of the
entire space of possible materials has been explored. High-throughput
computational approaches have added to our knowledge, but it is time-consuming
to extrapolate from the easy-to-compute zero temperature results to
experimentally relevant finite temperature results. While some qualitative
chemical and structural trends have been identified—the periodic table being the
most well-known example—leveraging this for quantitative predictions is
difficult. Simultaneously, significant developments in machine learning have
expanded the range of non-linear functions that can be interpolated with
uncertainty quantification, advanced the field of dimensionality reduction, and
revealed new underlying patterns in data. Continual expansion of computational
and experimental open data sets of materials thermodynamics presents a tipping
point where constructing machine-learned models for thermodynamic extrapolation
becomes feasible, and offers a significant advance beyond high-throughput
methods alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop a novel
thermodynamic machine learning engine and demonstrate it for the modeling of
materials at relevant conditions with a focus on: (1) lightweight metallic
alloys to predict of phase diagrams at new compositions, and (2) extending to
native oxide thermodynamics. The PIs will employ a combination of semi-
supervised learning, a generative adversarial network framework for
discriminative and generative learning, and functional quantile learning
including uncertainty quantification. If successful, the thermodynamic machine
learning engine can be expanded to other material spaces including high-
temperature alloys, and battery and fuel cell materials. It can drive future
high-throughput computation and experiment. The team will interact with TRIPODS
centers for dissemination, discussions, and collaborations as it develops deeper
connections with data science driven by the challenges of domain science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing an accurate, predictive, and
computationally efficient free energy function for the full range of materials
space is a transformative innovation for the design and discovery of materials.
The underlying dimensionality reduction inherent in the universal free energy
function permits the discovery of new relationships between chemical elements
and solid phases, beyond existing qualitative relationships. Uncertainty
quantification can identify unexplored but valuable regions of chemical and
structure space to provide a new paradigm for high-throughput computation and
experimental methods to optimally expand our knowledge of materials and chemical
relationships. The data science innovations will extend the scope of Gaussian
process-based modeling, enable machine learning with functional data and couple
it with recent advances in data-depth, advance generative adversarial networks
and related Bayesian studies for functional data generative models with
uncertainty quantification, and extend quantile regression to function-valued
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research, the Division
of Mathematical Sciences, the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation
Division, and the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to
this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.