* 1940967
* Workshop on Finding Datasets for Empirical Research in the Social Sciences: Washington, D.C. - November 2019
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2020
* julia lane, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Senay Agca
* 08/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a workshop that will explore how
to use methods from computer science to an important issue in the social
sciences. The great challenges of our time are human in nature - terrorism,
climate change, the use of natural resources, and the nature of work - and
require robust social science to understand the sources and consequences. But
social science researchers face issues in finding data that can be used for
important questions. This is in part because of the difficulty of sharing
confidential data and because of the lack of scientific infrastructure that
describes how the data can be used and applied to common problems. A major
challenge is search and discovery. Many social science data and outputs cannot
be easily discovered by other researchers even when deposited in the public
domain. A new generation of automated search tools could help researchers
discover how data are being used, in what research fields, with what methods,
with what code and with what findings. And automation can be used to reward
researchers who validate the results and contribute additional information about
use, fields, methods, code, and findings. This workshop will bring together an
interdisciplinary expert community to develop an agenda for
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring together experts in a
project that automates the collection and codification of knowledge from
publications and people. The goal is to advance technological approaches to
applying text analysis and machine learning techniques on a series of different
publication corpora to identify the datasets referenced in each publication and
draw out the required elements. the use of data depends critically on knowing
how it has been produced and used before: the required elements what do the data
measure, what research has been done by what researchers, with what code, and
with what results. Acquiring that knowledge has historically been manual and
inadequate. The challenge is particularly acute in the case of confidential data
on human subjects, since it is impossible to provide fully open access to the
source files. The experts who attend this workshop will work to develop an
agenda for future efforts to use new technologies to solve this important
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.