* 1940055
* A National Initiative to Develop Diversity and Inclusion Infrastructure for STEM Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Robinson, The National GEM Consortium
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2024
* USD 6,997,425.00

Recent years have seen a rapid rise in the creation of STEM entrepreneurship
curricula, programs, and centers. Launched in 2012, the NSF I-Corps Program
seeks to train faculty and graduate students in entrepreneurship and innovation.
This program has succeeded masterfully, currently disseminated across government
agencies. As society works towards cultivating a diverse and innovative STEM
workforce for the future, it is critical to examine how I-Corps engages and
influences members of diverse communities. Only about 8% of "U.S. innovators"
are members of U.S. minority groups (including Asians, African Americans,
Hispanics, Native Americans, and other ethnicities). This lack of diversity in
the scientific workforce implies that considerable talent is being left out of
the innovation eco-system. This situation begs the question, "What technology
innovations are we leaving on the table with these barriers to
entrepreneurship?" GEM proposes the development of a three-year pilot program
based on research findings and utilizing the existing I-Corps Network, that
demonstrates and evaluates new approaches to achieving diversity in technology
entrepreneurship and commercialization. The proposed initiative has the
potential to transform diversity in the I-Corps Program at all levels, enhance
the underrepresented minority (URM) SBIR/STTR pipeline, and ultimately increase
the number of URM STEM entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, most I-Corps
instruction is led by individual STEM practitioners who started their own
ventures or have been involved in the venture capital community. While well-
intentioned, many of these practitioners are unaware of research in
entrepreneurship education and are unfamiliar with methods for constructing
effective pedagogy and inclusive teaching. Instead, drawing from their own
experiences, practitioners focus their instructional efforts on building start-
up companies. Without informed design to enhance the experiences of participants
with varied backgrounds and goals, I-Corps may not be promoting inclusive and
diverse participation, thus restricting the pipeline of the modern
entrepreneurial STEM workforce. If I-Corps seeks to promote a more inclusive
entrepreneurship and innovation program, URM perceptions of the I-Corps Program
must be understood. Specifically, discovery is needed on 1) why members of the
URM community have specifically chosen to not to engage with the I-Corps
program; 2) how members of the URM community who have chosen to engage with
I-Corps program perceive their experience; 3) how I-Corps faculty perceive
I-Corps programming with respect to the diversity, equity, and inclusion
climate. Results from this research will help I-Corps leadership refine and
support evidence-based entrepreneurship and innovation programs that encourage
inclusive engagement for all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.