* 1940959
* CAREER: Intelligent Synthesis of Colloidal Nanocrystals Enabled by Microreaction Engineering in Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Milad Abolhasani, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 558,779.00

The goal of this CAREER project is to develop the fundamental scientific
knowledge that will enable the design of modular flow reactors for the synthesis
of nanocrystals (quantum dots) of perovskites. The target materials will be lead
halide perovskite quantum dots that have potential applications in high-
efficiency solar cells, high-definition color displays, and photocatalysis. This
project will employ modular flow reactors to study the complex nucleation and
growth mechanisms of these materials and develop the necessary process-
structure-property relations required for optimal synthesis of perovskite
quantum dots with tailored properties. The research program will be integrated
with education and outreach programs aimed at training graduate and
undergraduate students on flow chemistry, engaging grade 6-12 students through a
modular reactor competition, educating the general public through YouTube
videos, and recruiting members of underrepresented groups into STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be focused on studying
the nucleation process, growth kinetics and composition tuning of perovskite
nanocrystals by deconvoluting the mixing and reaction times in a modular flow
reactor using in situ monitoring of the crystal growth process. The fundamentals
of perovskite nanocrystal nucleation will be studied under a controlled
microscale mixing environment in the presence of stabilizing surface ligands.
The reaction kinetics of crystal growth and composition tuning mediated by
halide exchange reactions in flow will be studied using machine learning
(ML)-enhanced process optimization to achieve precise tuning of emission bandgap
(between 1.7 and 3 eV) with narrow linewidth (&lt;90 meV and high
photoluminescence (PL) quantum yield (&gt;90%) to enable commercial applications
of these materials. The structure (composition)-property (PL) relationship of
lead halide perovskite nanocrystals enabled by halide exchange reactions in the
modular flow reactor will be studied with the purpose of developing a platform
for on-demand intelligent synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals with tailored
properties. In addition to training a graduate student and two undergraduate
students in research, the project will involve graduate and undergraduate
curriculum development on flow chemistry and outreach activities aimed at grade
6-12 students, the general public, and at recruiting members of underrepresented
groups into STEM careers in collaboration with the Women in Science and
Engineering (WISE) and the Summer Transition Program for incoming minority
freshmen in Engineering at North Carolina State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.