* 1940324
* Computational Studies of Solid Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Natalie Holzwarth, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research,
software development, and education aimed to investigate the properties of
materials for use in lithium and sodium batteries. The inspiration and
motivation for this research is the societal need to preserve the resources of
the planet and to find new and refine existing sustainable and efficient
technologies to develop productive and healthy lifestyles. In small measure
toward this goal, it is likely that this basic research effort will have a
positive impact on the development of energy storage devices. In particular,
recent developments in all-solid-state battery technology shows increasing
promise in terms of improving the stability and efficiency of rechargeable
batteries. These technological advances depend on performing basic research
focused on understanding fundamental materials processes and on developing
computational tools to reliably model and analyze them. Specifically, this
research provides a detailed study of several materials, electrolytes, that
enable lithium or sodium ions to flow between the battery electrodes. The PI
aims to optimize the stability of these electrolytes, both their bulk forms and
their interfaces with pure lithium or sodium electrodes, more specially, anodes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work relies on using several public domain software
packages that can be used for computation to predict the properties of
materials. These software tools implement formal theories known as density
functional theory and density functional perturbation theory. A component of the
work is devoted to further develop and extend software tools that are widely
used by the materials research community. Educating students in the field of
materials research and in computational techniques is an essential component of
the project. This project also includes student and faculty activities aimed to
address societal needs with respect to energy efficiency and sustainability, for
example assessing the recyclability of single-use
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
project supports computational research and education focusing on the
development of materials for energy storage, particularly all-solid-state
rechargeable batteries. The work involves using and developing computational
modeling tools to reliably predict and explain the detailed properties of the
materials, particularly their stability and ionic conductivity during battery
operations. The work focuses on solid state electrolyte materials designed to
work with Li or Na anodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, several solid-
state electrolyte systems and their interfaces will be examined in order to
determine their stability as a function of temperature in the harmonic phonon
approximation, using density functional theory and density functional
perturbation theory using the ABINIT and QUANTUM ESPRESSO codes. The study will
continue work from previous grants on lithium and sodium thiophosphates and will
examine new families of candidate electrolyte materials, possibly borates and
boracites. The research will be carried out in collaboration with an
experimentalist. The promising electrolytes will be further analyzed in terms of
their ionic conductivities using first principles molecular dynamics
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Included in this work is the further
development of the ATOMPAW code used to generate atomic datasets for use in
several electronic structure codes such as ABINIT and QUANTUM ESPRESSO. For
example, within the “generalized density functional” methodology, a self-
consistent treatment of the so-called meta-GGA exchange-correlation functionals
will be implemented in the atomic solver in order to generate atomic datasets
consistent with the meta-GGA treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A component of the
work is devoted to further develop and extend these community software tools.
Educating students in the field of materials research and in computational
techniques is an essential component of the project. This project also includes
student and faculty activities aimed to address societal needs with respect to
energy efficiency and sustainability, for example assessing the recyclability of
single-use batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.