* 1940975
* Evolutionary modification of AGS protein contributes to micromere formation in sea urchins
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Mamiko Yajima, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 12/31/2024
* USD 947,500.00

Acquisition of a novel developmental program during evolution has been proposed
to have important contributions to the diversity of life on earth. This research
addresses fundamental problems in developmental biology: 1) how a new cell type
arises in development and 2) how the evolutionary modifications of the protein
could change the cell and developmental program. Specifically, this study will
identify how evolutionary modifications of a protein called AGS contributed to
the formation of a new cell type in the sea urchin, which is distinct from the
developmental program of its relatives, such as sea stars. These questions are
fundamentally applicable to any multi-cellular organism. Therefore, outcomes of
this study are expected to inform the research field of cell and developmental
biology. This research will also have an impact to society through various
outreach programs. Those activities include providing lab tours to local
students and the public, as well as active involvement in the University-wide
outreach program, which brings local high school students and Brown students to
explore science through interactive lessons with real-world applications.
Further, this project will involve minority students in the lab where they will
engage in independent research. Through these activities there will be a
continuous sharing of scientific contributions to promote an interest in science
among students at many levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on
Activator of G-protein signaling (AGS) to identify how evolutionary
modifications contributed to the formation of micromeres that are formed through
an asymmetric cell division at the 16-cell stage in the sea urchin embryo. AGS
protein is a polarity factor present in various organisms, including humans.
Previous research demonstrated that AGS is responsible for facilitating an
asymmetric cell division at the 16-cell stage, which results in the formation of
micromeresâ€”a major signaling center that induces endomesodermal specification
and thus considered as an organizer in this embryo. This fundamentally changes
the mechanism of development by making it more organized. Importantly,
introduction of sea urchin AGS, but not sea star AGS, induced asymmetric cell
divisions and formation of organizer-like cells in the sea star embryo. Based on
these observations, the project will test how AGS modification contributed to
evolutionary introduction of micromeres as a new cell type, leading to the
current developmental program of sea urchins. Specifically, molecular mechanisms
of AGS function in micromere formation, evolutionary transition of AGS protein
in the process of sea urchin diversification, and contribution of AGS protein
modifications to creation of a new cell type, will be investigated using cell
and embryological approaches. Experimental system of echinoderm embryos is
suitable for this research program because it offers the optical transparency of
the material, the ability to manipulate the cells, and the well-described
developmental consequences of the unequal cell division that can be
assayed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.