* 1940087
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and optimization of a novel lightweight and impact-resistant composite
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Emily Parisi, PARISI TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a unique continuous-fiber composite that is
lightweight and offers enhanced impact resistance and energy absorbance compared
to commercially available carbon fiber composites. The demand for advanced
composite materials is expected to steadily increase both in the United States
and worldwide due to rapid growth in aerospace and automotive applications, as
well as defense and clean energy applications. Though valued for their high
strength-to-weight and lightweight properties, traditional and commonly-utilized
fiber-reinforced composites composed of carbon fiber or fiberglass tend to
exhibit brittle properties and low impact tolerance. Lack of damage tolerance
leads to various forms of localized and nonlocalized material failure,
compromising the material's structural integrity and incurring replacement costs
and scrap waste. Developing composite materials that can withstand impact
scenarios and possess damage tolerance is necessary to enable more widespread
adoption of these materials across a variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will explore material development and processing
methodologies to progress and optimize the performance of the proposed novel
composite material. The project will evaluate the feasibility of formulations
composed of different iterations of this material technology while evaluating
pre- and post-processing techniques for performance and scalability. Additional
refinement strategies such as enhancing the fiber-matrix bond for enhanced anti-
crack propagation and energy distribution will also be explored. This will be
coupled with testing methodologies demonstrating various material property
classifications as well as application-specific, proof-of-concept testing to
demonstrate performance effectiveness. The goal is to approach the isotropic
properties and impact resistance of high-performance metal alloys while
retaining the lightweight, high strength-to-weight performance of carbon fiber
composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.