* 1940867
* EAGER: Rapid Selective Sintering of Metallic Nanoparticles via a Microheater Array
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Wenchao Zhou, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

The electronics industry is searching for new manufacturing methods in order to
meet high market demand for customizable, light weight, environmentally
friendly, flexible electronics. This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) award supports an exploratory study of an early-stage digital
manufacturing method that has significant potential to offer fast, customizable,
energy efficient manufacturing of flexible printed electronics. The unique
microheater array powder sintering process uses an array of digitally controlled
microheaters to rapidly (millisecond time scale) deliver a user-defined focused
heat pattern for selective sintering of metallic nanoparticles on polymer
substrates. This award will support fundamental research on the underlying
physics of microscale heat transfer, mass transfer, and sintering required to
bond the metallic nanoparticles to each other and to adhere them to the flexible
substrate. If successful, this project will enable further development of the
microheater array powder sintering process to provide a viable, high speed,
scalable, digital manufacturing technology, with the potential to significantly
lower manufacturing costs and improve the printing quality over existing
manufacturing methods for printed electronics, such as flexible printed circuits
and printed antennas. Successfully achieving this will increase the
competitiveness of industries in this field, and advance national prosperity.
Students involved in this research will gain knowledge and research capabilities
in multi-physics modeling, digital manufacturing, materials, and printed
electronics, thus providing excellent preparation for the advanced manufacturing
workforce. Education and outreach activities will focus on broadening the
participation of students from underrepresented groups and increase awareness of
the career opportunities in manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this project is to study the interactions of the multiple underlying physics
of the rapid localized heating and sintering of metallic nanoparticle based inks
via direct heat transfer from a microscale heat source, which is critical for
understanding the potential and limitations of the microheater array powdering
sintering process for printed electronics. Specifically, this project aims to:
a) model the coupling of the heat transfer and the evaporation of the
nanoparticle suspension when subjected to intense heat from a microheater in
millisecond timescale to identify processing rate limitations; b) understand the
interaction between the microscale heat transfer and the sintering kinetics of
the metallic nanoparticles; c) verify the limits of heater induced heat
penetration to ensure robust adhesion of the sintered nanoparticles to the
plastic substrate. Upon successful completion of the project, experimentally
validated models will be available for identification of optimal processing
conditions that can be extended to a full scale, fully digital version of the
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.