* 1940743
* Dissecting An Intrinsic Regulatory Program For Neuronal Polarization In An Invertebrate Chordate
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Alberto Stolfi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2024
* USD 863,885.00

This project examines the processes by which brain cells form and ultimately
connect to one another to ensure proper brain function. The experiments use
tunicates, the invertebrate animals most closely related to vertebrates, both
because they are especially suitable for the technical aspects of this work, and
because their neurons share many genes and structural features in common with
vertebrates, including humans. The work will be carried out using novel genetic
engineering techniques that specifically target brain cells in order to collect
novel information about the development of nerve cell features that control the
directionality of information flow in nervous systems. This project will also
engage high school and college students by teaching them to use these advanced
genetic techniques to better understand the networks of genes involved in animal
brain development and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will study the
functions of both intracellular and extracellular components of an intrinsic,
potentially conserved regulatory program for neuronal polarization and axon
outgrowth in the simple chordate Ciona. This project is designed to achieve two
main objectives: 1) To arrive at a better mechanistic understanding of the
way(s) that intracellular and extracellular cues are integrated to instruct
neuronal polarity in vivo; and 2) To elucidate the transcriptional network(s)
regulating neuronal polarity in development. This project will deepen our
understanding of evolutionarily conserved molecular pathways that coordinating
polarized morphogenetic processes in differentiating neurons, as well as the
regulatory mechanisms that control cellular morphogenesis in neural development.
This research plan is integrated with specific research-related activities to
enhance both the biological education that university undergraduates and high
school students receive, as well as their appreciation for how fundamental
research and comparative animal studies contribute to scientific
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.