* 1940952
* PFI-TT: Paving the way to the commercialization of additives that boost battery performance
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Lorenzo Mangolini, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 02/28/2023
* USD 299,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnership for Innovation –
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project comes from the development of additives
that provide an immediate boost in battery capacity without introducing any
changes to their manufacturing scheme. The lack of affordable higher-capacity
batteries is recognized as a barrier to the broad utilization of, for instance,
electric vehicles and renewable energy sources. Improved batteries are needed to
support a transition to a greener and more sustainable society. The development
of additives that can be easily integrated in current battery designs will
facilitate their implementation and future commercialization, giving them a
crucial advantage at a time when the battery market is both rapidly expanding
and becoming increasingly competitive. This NSF PFI-TT grant will support
technological validation and the development of prototypes for field-testing,
both necessary step towards successful commercialization. The PI will leverage
both the existing close collaboration with the Entrepreneurial Proof of Concept
and Innovation Center (EPIC) and the presence of a large population of students
from under-represented minorities at UCR Riverside, an accredited Hispanic
Serving Institution, to provide unique training opportunities not only in
science and engineering but also in entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will target additives based on silicon, which, while having
much higher lithiation capacity than broadly utilized graphite, has yet to be
adopted by battery manufacturers on a large scale. This is due to both technical
(silicon alone has poor stability over many charge-discharge cycles) and
economic (silicon can be made stable but this requires complex designs) issues.
This project will overcome these limitations. A simple, single-stage carbon
coating step enables the integration of silicon powders into graphite-dominant
anodes. Careful control of the process parameters allows realizing a high-
quality carbon coating, which is crucial for the successful utilization of the
additives. By developing a “drop-in” additive, this technology enables an
increase in battery capacity without requiring any capital intensive investment
for the battery manufacturers. As part of this project, this core technology
will be advanced and the results in terms of capacity improvement and cycle
stability will be validated by independent testing facilities. By the completion
of this project, battery prototypes that incorporate silicon-based additives
will be field-tested under real-life conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.