* 1940525
* CAREER:Linking individual variation in behavior to plant community dynamics within disturbed landscapes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Alessio Mortelliti, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 770,675.00

In many animal species, individuals differ in their behavior in ways that are
consistent over time and across contexts, a phenomenon that is referred to as
“animal personality.” An increasing number of studies show that behavioral
traits, such as boldness or aggression, can influence life history traits, such
as survival. A key question that remains is whether these individual-level
traits can have larger-scale effects. The goal of this study is to quantify the
ecological consequences of individual variation in behavior in wild populations
subject to various degrees of human disturbance, and in turn, how individual
variation in animal behavior can affect community-level processes. This project
will be conducted through an integrated research and education plan, in which
the principal investigator will lead a team of graduate and undergraduate
students along with citizen scientists to collect data on wild populations of
small mammals. The team will quantify individual variation in traits such as
boldness and aggression in populations of wild small mammals that are subject to
various degrees of human disturbance, and determine how survival relates to
variation in these traits. Concurrently, researchers will study the dispersal of
seeds by individuals with different behavioral traits, quantifying the effects
of animal actions on plant community dynamics. Undergraduate students will learn
how to quantify personality (in animals and humans) and will participate in
workshops focused on improving their scientific communication skills. Using
approaches targeted for their own personalities, undergraduate students will
then engage high school students in two citizen science projects, which will
become critical components of the research program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent individual differences in behavior, or
personality, play a key role in determining how individual animals experience
and interact with their changing environment. The extent to which the
distribution of behavioral types in a population affects larger-scale ecological
processes such as population dynamics and forest regeneration is poorly
understood. To contribute to filling these knowledge gaps this project will
focus on: 1) Assessing the response of individuals with different, yet
consistent behavioral repertoires to land-use change and 2) Quantifying the
effects of the diversity of behaviors within a population on the demographics
and structure of plant communities within disturbed landscapes. The study will
be conducted through a large-scale field experiment in Maine using small mammal
species as a model system. Through the field experiment the team will assess the
effects of land-use change (i.e., silvicultural practices) on survival of
animals with different personality types, concurrently assessing the capacity
for diversity in animal behavior to influence population dynamics. The
researchers will also characterize how personality-driven seed predation and
dispersal decisions affect the seed bank composition and how these decisions may
interact with climate change to affect range shifts of plants. The insights and
models generated by this project will illuminate the link between individual
variation and population, community, and ecosystem
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.