* 1940112
* 2020 Symposium "Smart Materials: From Stimuli to Response"; 259th ACS National Meeting; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 24 March 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Robert Kennedy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 10/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides support for the Graduate Student Symposium to be held at the
259th National Meeting of the American Chemical Society (ACS) in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; March 24, 2020. The Graduate Student Symposium is organized
entirely by graduate students and is held at each ACS National Meeting. The
symposium, titled "Smart Materials: From Stimuli to Response," will highlight
the fundamental science enabling smart materials discovery, synthesis,
processing and application. The symposium will accomplish two primary
objectives: to provide a forum for the discussion of the current state of smart
materials research and to promote diversity and inclusion in the Chemical and
Materials Science and Engineering communities. The symposium will consist of a
series of lectures featuring ten speakers with diverse backgrounds who will
discuss the underlying principles of smart materials and their applications, as
well as a networking session for speakers and attendees. This award supports
travel to the ACS National Meeting in Philadelphia for graduate student
organizing committee members, ten speakers, and ten undergraduate students, with
priority given to undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented and
socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smart
materials are materials that were designed to elicit a particular response when
exposed to stimuli such as temperature or light. These responses can be tuned
for specific applications. Attendees of this symposium will hear from
distinguished speakers whose research collectively includes both the
foundational science as well as various applications of smart materials in
medicine, renewable energy, wearable electronics, and other burgeoning fields. A
primary objective of this symposium is the promotion of diversity in science.
The organizers have assembled a diverse list of speakers, and this award will
provide travel support to these speakers as well as to undergraduate students
from traditionally underrepresented and socioeconomically disadvantaged
backgrounds. The symposium will provide the opportunity for students to interact
with scientists at all career stages, from fellow undergraduate students to
tenured faculty members, with the aim of providing a network of mentorship and
support to a broad, diverse pipeline of researchers in Chemistry and Materials
Science and Engineering and enhancing the future workforce. This award is co-
funded by the Division of Materials Research's Crosscutting Program and the
Advanced Manufacturing program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.