* 1940315
* NSF Student Travel Grant for IEEE VTS "Diversity in VTS" Workshop 2019 (VTS "Diversity in VTS" 2019)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Sarah Wilson, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 10/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

Current trends in automotive technology crucially involve connectivity and
autonomy as the major drivers of safety, reliability, and energy efficiency in
future road transportation. The goal of the inaugural Diversity in VTS" workshop
at VTC2019-Fall in Honolulu, Hawaii, Sept. 22 - 25, 2019, is to engage industry
researchers, academic faculty members, and graduate students in
interdisciplinary discussions on connected vehicles and autonomy. The IEEE
Vehicular Technology Society (VTS) "Diversity in VTS" workshop will provide a
common platform to enhance diversity in IEEE VTS and in the Engineering
Community as a whole, by fostering the connection of women and other groups that
represent minorities. The workshop is intended to create an opportunity to share
experiences about the challenges that are faced by women and minorities in the
engineering world and views on how to enhance diversity and increase the
presence of minorities at all stages of their engineering
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of $10,000 will be used to support up to
10 under-represented students. One third of the travel grants will be reserved
for first-time attendees of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference where the
workshop is co-located. One third of the travel grants will be reserved for
women and other under-represented students attending the conference. It is
anticipated that this conference will be the first of many to be held at the
twice-annual IEEE Vehicular Technology Conferences and will be a venue where
students can learn and find mentors, both from peers and more well-established
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.