* 1940679
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Cryptographic Provenance for Digital Publishing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kelly Caine, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 467,530.00

Much online news content lacks verifiable information about its provenance,
including who wrote and published it, what organization distributed it, and when
it was published. Without provenance, readers have no guarantees that the
content they accessed originated with the stated publisher. Readers also cannot
be sure when the content was published, or if it has been altered or updated.
This project will develop a new system to cryptographically verify the
provenance of digital news content. This system includes tools to attribute
digital content to its publisher, confirm its publication date and show its
revision history. This system will improve publisher credibility, help readers
hold publishers accountable, and help archivists preserve correct digital
content. Ultimately, the system will improve the security and trustworthiness of
the online information ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance knowledge through the design, development, and distribution of novel
technical authentication mechanisms for digital media. This project's work
involves designing, testing, and implementing cryptographic tools to secure
modern digital publication systems. The team will integrate cryptography with
user interface design to create a prototype that accurately and verifiably
conveys provenance and integrity guarantees. Through iterative development of
applied cryptography, standards-development, and user-experience research, the
researchers will create tools to provide solutions to significant research
challenges in information authenticity, applied cryptography, and human-computer
interaction. The system will enable verification of publication dates and
version history, and check integrity of embedded elements of content such as
images and social media posts. By engaging users in the design of the new
publishing protocol, this work will bridge the gap between user-centric and
cryptographic notions of authenticity. The work will facilitate the creation and
adoption of these technologies by general and specialized publishers, and will
mitigate security threats and improve assurance that the public can trust online
news sources and content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.