* 1940186
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a pad and sensor system for a dynamic scoliosis brace
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2020
* Matthew Thompson, GREEN SUN MEDICAL, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,883.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I project will advance the
development of embedded sensors to support treatment for the most prevalent form
of spinal deformity, adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS). AIS complications
cause more than 440,000 office visits, 130,000 hospital visits, and 17,000
emergency room visits each year in the United States. This disorder is addressed
by reducing spine curve progression through passive brace treatment, which is
painful for users and does not correct the deformity, and eventually, over one-
third of brace users stop wearing the brace. To improve use, comfort, and
effectiveness of braces at halting curve progression, this project will develop
a brace that applies corrective pressure to the spine to treat AIS with
integrated sensors measuring the duration of brace use and the corrective forces
applied to the spine in real time. This sensor will allow parents, patients, and
clinicians to monitor compliance; more importantly it will trigger an alert when
corrective forces fall below a threshold so that clinicians can schedule
adjustments in a timely manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable the development of an
accurate method to measure corrective forces in a sensor for a scoliosis dynamic
brace. The technical hurdles that will be addressed in this proposal are the
development of an embedded brace methodology for accurate measurements of
corrective forces, as the sensor system of the brace must be able to reliably
detect a change in the direction or magnitude of corrective force delivered to
the patient's torso. This will require the development of a system of sensors
that can accurately resolve these forces. The first technical objective will be
to optimize the number and pattern of force sensors on each pad. The second
technical objective will develop a method for identifying and acquiring
meaningful force measurements. These aims will develop a novel dynamic scoliosis
brace for further enhancement through addition of a sensor in the prototype and
use in human subjects in Phase II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.