* 1940212
* SBIR Phase I: Automated detection, classification, and motion tracking of precipitation and insects for agricultural, health, and transport safety applications.
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Allan Reaburn, Particle Flux Analytics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2021
* USD 223,956.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to address consumer weather, and agricultural information needs as an
advanced precipitation sensor and as a fully automated detector and classifier
of insect species. Information on hydrometeor rate and type is critical for
transportation safety and weather prediction. Wet snow and freezing rain events
count among the worst natural disasters in North American history; the proposed
device will be the first with the unambiguous capability for providing reliable
remote detection of particles in a semi-frozen state for transportation
management. Further, insect number, species, and motion vectors are critical for
targeted pesticide applications that prevent the spread of disease and crop
damage while preventing off-target damages to vulnerable species, such as bees.
The combined commercial damages from precipitation and agricultural pests in the
United States exceed $100 billion annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will exploit recent advances in lighting, digital imaging, motion
detection, and image processing to develop a new Small Airborne Particle Imager
for obtaining high-resolution forward-illuminated photography of precipitation
particles, as well as insects and their trajectories. The goal is to create a
device capable of detecting and photographing objects moving up to 10 m/s at
resolutions as fine as 0.01 mm. Primary components of the Phase I effort involve
the integration of multi-spectral, multi-polarization photography and design of
a novel motion detection system capable of providing 3D motion vectors of
objects 0.1 mm across.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.