* 1940948
* Slug-Flow Reactor Manufacturing of Uniform Nickel-Cobalt-Manganese Oxide Microparticles for Battery Cathodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Ram Gupta, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2023
* USD 529,011.00

With expanding demand of lithium-ion batteries in portable electronic devices,
such as smartphones and iPads and environmental-friendly vehicles (e.g.,
electric and hybrid vehicles), it is important to further improve safety, extend
battery life, increase charge capacity, and reduce cost. A key missing component
is effective and efficient manufacturing of complex active cathode materials,
such as nickel-cobalt-manganese oxide micron-sized particles, at needed
production scales. Cathode microparticle quality and uniformity are difficult to
control with current reactor technologies, requiring post-synthesis procedures
such as milling and sieving to narrow the particle size distribution. This risks
product quality and reduces production efficiency. This award supports research
in an innovative slug-flow reactor manufacturing process to directly produce
well-controlled microparticles for advanced battery performance and accelerated
scale-up. The availability of controllable cathode materials makes electronic
devices using lithium-ion batteries safer and of better quality at a lower cost.
These advancements in battery technology contribute to the economic
competitiveness of the U.S. One impact of this research is reduced environmental
impact due to efficient materials use and increased battery life. The project
engages women and under-represented minorities and encourages their active
participation in the research project. The project develops education modules
for use in courses such as chemical reaction engineering and senior design.
Participation in the Dean’s Undergraduate Research Initiative, Early Research
Initiative, and Discovery Program helps train undergraduate and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is to develop a new process for the
manufacture of uniform nickel-cobalt-manganese (NCM) oxide microparticles to
serve as cathodes in lithium-ion batteries. It explores a continuous slug-flow
manufacturing technology. Microscopically, in a slug-flow reactor, each particle
experiences the same environment with spatially uniform reaction kinetics and
hydrodynamics conditions throughout the nucleation and growth process, leading
to uniform particles with controlled compositions, microstructures and
properties. Macroscopically, the manufacturing setup and conditions can remain
the same while allowing convenient tuning of the production rate, i.e., scaling
up or scaling down. The slug flow process is also equipped with in-line bright-
field imaging for microparticle monitoring and quality control. The research
advances the fundamental understanding of microparticle nucleation, growth, and
reaction engineering. It also studies the link between microparticles with high
uniformity and controlled spatial composition and battery performance, which
sheds light on a rational way to produce next-generation battery
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.