* 1940266
* Collaborative Research: Beyond the big ones: Petrochronologic investigation of Quaternary small-volume volcanism in the Black Rock Desert, Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Brian Jicha, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 100,969.00

Utah has experienced dozens of volcanic eruptions over the last 3 million years.
The chemical compositions of these lavas has varied, and eruptions have been
both explosive and effusive. These differences in composition and eruptive style
often have occurred within the small geographic area over narrow timespans. This
work seeks to resolve the timing of eruptions and understand the processes
associated with the magma bodies that ultimately produced such a wide variety of
compositions. The project will provide opportunities for undergraduate students
to participate in research, including sample collection, traveling to multiple
laboratories, and presenting their work at international meetings. It will also
provide training to K-12 educators in Utah; these will focus on volcanic
processes and will be held in conjunction with the Utah Society for
Environmental Education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last decade, improved
accuracy and precision of Ar/Ar dating coupled with zircon petrochronology (the
combination of morphological, textural, geochemical, and geochronologic data)
has allowed for improved understanding of the evolution of magma chambers prior
to eruption, and connecting these processes to bimodal volcanic fields. Most of
the recent petrochronology studies have focused on understanding melt extraction
and differentiation trends in large-volume magmas or magmas within large silicic
volcanic fields, both of which often result in super-eruptions or solidified
batholiths. This project will expand the scope of petrochronologic applications
by examining magmatic processes in small, monogenetic volcanic fields in central
Utah, and by comparing those to the proposed magma dynamics that drive super-
eruptions like those at Yellowstone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.