* 1940757
* CAREER: Advancing Open-Ended Crowdsourcing: The Next Frontier in Crowdsourced Data Management
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Aditya Parameswaran, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 413,416.00

Machine learning on big data is finally having an impact on our daily lives,
from small triumphs like Siri and Google Translate to much tougher emerging
applications like driverless cars and computer-assisted medical image diagnosis.
From mundane online fraud detection to the most sophisticated uses of computer
vision, these applications share an insatiable appetite for massive labeled
training data. The primary source of high-quality labels is crowdsourcing, and
research to date on crowdsourcing has focused on the key problem of how to
maximize the production of high-quality crowdsourced labels per dollar spent,
for problems where workers must choose between just a few predefined labels.
However, more open-ended labeling problems have grown to constitute almost half
of crowdsourced tasks today, and open-ended tasks raise an entirely new set of
research challenges for crowdsourced data management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
activity addresses the key new research challenges in managing and optimizing
open-ended crowdsourcing. Since open-ended crowdsourcing employs tasks with a
large number of alternatives, humans struggle to select error-free ones.
Additional challenges emerge in determining the open-ended task types
appropriate for a specific problem, developing schemes to ascertain the right
answer given open-ended worker responses, and inferring the hidden perspectives
behind worker answers. The activity targets open-ended crowdsourcing problems
that span nearly 90% of those used in practice today, with wide applicability in
computer vision, natural language processing, and machine learning in general.
The technical outcomes of the activity include the first foundational principles
for open-ended crowdsourced data management, which in turn will expand the reach
of machine learning into new and more challenging domains and more effective
solutions in existing applications that impact our everyday lives. The
pedagogical outcomes of the activity include a course on human-in-the-loop data
analytics, crowdsourcing education modules for school teachers, as well as a
quantification and dissemination of how crowdsourcing is performed in practice,
along with a benchmark to accelerate crowdsourcing research in the future.