* 1940318
* 2020 International Symposium on Olfaction and Taste (ISOT, Portland, Oregon, June 20 - 24, 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jay Gottfried, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2022
* USD 25,000.00

The main goal of this project is to provide sponsorship for a research
conference, The International Symposium on Olfaction and Taste ("ISOT"). The
ISOT conference is a truly international assembly hosting cutting-edge research
on the chemical senses of smell and taste, which play a critical role in
behavior in most animal species. ISOT convenes every four years, rotating
locations between the United States, Europe, and Japan, reflecting the close
international cooperation of the three major societies that spotlight the
chemical senses. The 18th ISOT meeting is hosted in Portland, Oregon, June
20-24, 2020, with an expected attendance of 1,000 participants. As the largest
gathering of chemosensory scientists under one roof, ISOT provides a forum for
communicating the latest advances in the field. The 2020 research program
features more than 25 symposium presentations and plenary sessions, highlighting
the theoretical, behavioral, biological, ecological, and computational
underpinnings of the olfactory and gustatory systems. The breadth of topics
featured at the conference, and the opportunity for interactions and dialogue
among so many attendees, has a broad scientific impact on promoting basic
research knowledge on the chemical senses and inspiring new ideas and
collaborations. Another important aim of the conference is the promotion of
thematic, gender, and geographic diversity, as well as diversity across levels
of career stage. To achieve these goals, the project provides support for
participation of junior scientists to attend ISOT, and also emphasizes inclusion
of women, underrepresented minorities, and persons with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ISOT is the flagship international research
conference on the chemical senses, where attendees are hosted to cutting-edge
olfactory and gustatory research that crosses species, methods, and levels of
analysis from the microscopic to the macroscopic and from the synthetic to the
naturalistic. A major goal is to focus support on topical and timely areas of
research that oftentimes fall between the cracks, with four symposia that have
been carefully tailored to fit the express mission of the NSF, with topics
featuring the importance of invertebrate neuroscience, big data approaches,
theory and modeling, and the ethology of real-world behavior. Importantly, the
high caliber and concentration of scientists expected at ISOT 2020, across all
training levels, provides a fertile medium for education and career development.
In line with this aim, the project provides support for two ISOT workshops
("Learning How to Communicate Your Chemosensory Research" and "Addressing Career
Issues Facing Women in Science"), which are both designed to highlight specific
obstacles -- and solutions -- as junior scientists develop into independent
investigators. Together these opportunities should have a broad societal impact
on cultivating the next generation of scientists and ambassadors in the chemical
senses, in line with the goals of the NSF to enhance full participation of
women, URMs, and persons with disabilities in STEM fields, and to provide
educational techniques in how to advance public engagement with science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.