* 1940072
* CoPe EAGER: Using Undergraduate Engineers and Community Engagement to Build Resilient Coastal Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* J. Randall Etheridge, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 12/31/2022
* USD 299,454.00

In contrast to large metropolitan areas that have resources to prepare for sea
level rise, there are many small underserved coastal communities that do not
have the resources to design and implement engineering solutions to address the
challenges caused by sea level rise. In this project, the expertise of community
members will be linked with the expertise of undergraduate engineering students
to create a framework to help a small community develop plans for adapting to
sea level rise. The research team and students will interact with members of the
community through various community engagement techniques. The resulting
generalizable model has the potential to improve community involvement in the
design process for building more resilient coastal communities. Additionally,
the framework will support the design of plans at a significantly reduced
financial cost, which will further promote sustainability in the community. This
community-driven design framework will provide undergraduate engineering
students experience designing real-world projects with societal benefit. This
project will also demonstrate the value of linking university expertise and
community engineering needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will link the
knowledge embedded in rural coastal communities with the engineering expertise
of undergraduate students to design solutions that build resilience and bolster
the participation of marginalized communities in adaptation planning. Through
the interdisciplinary efforts of engineers and social scientists, the objectives
of this work are: (1) develop a framework where the research team engages
community members and engineering students to advance a community-based design
process focused on generating solutions to issues caused by sea level rise; (2)
document local community members' perceptions of the contributions of the
framework to resiliency; and (3) assess how community interaction affects
engineering student outcomes. This framework will involve citizens to identify
the critical problems and determine how to best address community needs. The
research team will hold small focus groups to foster detailed discussions with
knowledgeable stakeholders, conduct frequent meetings with a core stakeholder
group that represents the many interests in the community, and host quarterly
public meetings to keep the broader community informed and gather additional
feedback. The involvement of engineering students and community engagement
techniques to advance engineering design will result in a low-cost approach for
resource-limited coastal communities that will promote community
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.