* 1940268
* CoPe Conference:  Identification and Prioritization of Recurrent Flooding Research Foci Workshop: A Synergistic Approach: Norfolk, VA - June 2020
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* H. Rodger Harvey, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 09/30/2021
* USD 87,674.00

Recurrent flooding, which is flooding that occurs repeatedly related to
precipitation events, high tides and storm surge, is increasing in coastal
areas. Although characterized as a temporary nuisance it may result in
cumulative local economic losses to both residents and businesses. This project
will conduct a workshop which will identify research questions related to the
impact of and responses to recurrent flooding in a coastal region. The workshop
is designed to broaden participation across sectors, to include community
stakeholders, researchers, decision makers, and practitioners, and will allow
for new and diverse perspectives and co-production of knowledge that can advance
awareness of existing adaptation behaviors, potential adaptive response
strategies, and real-world constraints faced by vulnerable populations and
communities. By 2020 it is estimated that 47 percent of the United States
population will be living along coastlines, this workshop will provide the main
societal benefit of advancing inclusive, collaborative adaptation opportunities
which are needed to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop focus is recurrent flooding, linking natural
systems and population-based systems, in the Hampton Roads urban environment.
The workshop approach is designed specifically to develop research questions
within five themed-topic areas of manage coastal flooding, safeguard vulnerable
populations, protect and sustain economic vitality, promote and enhance public
health, and increase adaptive capacity, and frame these within the context of
longer-term dynamics that facilitate the migration of human and economic
activities away from risk. The 2-day workshop includes plenary and thematic
information sessions, five thematic charrette sessions and a roundtable session,
followed by a researcher work session for synthesis of research topics, which
will result in a prescriptive-based white paper that identifies high priority
research topics for coastal environments and natural hazards in populated
coastal regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.