* 1940692
* Future directions for synthesis in ecological and environmental science:  Learning from the past 25 years to chart the next generation of synthesis
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2021
* Benjamin Halpern, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 10/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The practice of synthesis in ecology and environmental science is now routinely
used to address many of the most pressing scientific and societal environmental
research questions. The rapid growth in big data is accelerating advances in
synthesis, creating new opportunities for novel research questions, disciplines,
perspectives, and data techniques to address a variety of ecological and
environmental challenges. This award will support a workshop aimed at reflecting
on the current status of synthesis science and exploring emerging needs,
opportunities and frontiers in ecological synthesis by facilitating expansive
and convergent discourse. A diverse community of scientists will collectively
identify priority research directions and develop a research agenda for the next
decade that incorporates bold new thinking and strategic
prioritization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this synthesis workshop, a
multidisciplinary, diverse group of nearly 100 experts will convene in Santa
Barbara, CA to brainstorm opportunities and needs and produce a forward-looking
agenda for synthesis in ecology and environmental science. Participants will
engage in charrette-style breakout sessions of structured idea sharing that
focus on expansive thinking with an outcome objective. Plenary discussions will
be interspersed, and the selection of keynote speakers will prioritize diversity
across a number of measures, particularly gender equity and career stage
representation. The workshop will address a range of topics that are relevant to
the future of synthesis in environmental science including ecological
forecasting, cyberinfrastructure for synthesis, data-driven conservation
decision making, the role and future of artificial intelligence (AI) in ecology,
coproduction of synthesis science with stakeholders, and the role of synthesis
in social-ecological systems research and promoting diversity and inclusion. At
the conclusion of the workshop, ideas will be synthesized into a peer-reviewed
publication on the frontiers of ecological and environmental synthesis science
to communicate important insights to a broader
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.