* 1940774
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the Programming Languages Mentoring Workshop at International Conference on Functional Programming, 2019 (PLMW@ICFP)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2021
* David Van Horn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 04/30/2021
* USD 15,000.00

This award seeks to support U.S. student participation in the Programming
Languages Mentoring Workshop (PLMW), being organized as part of the 24th ACM
International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP), the premier
conference on the design, implementations, principles, and uses of functional
programming. The event is in Berlin, Germany during 18-23 August 2019. This
award specifically supports students from underrepresented groups and gives
priority to US citizens and permanent residents to attend the mentoring workshop
in addition to the ICFP conference. The impact of the award relates to
broadening participation in computing, providing opportunities for students to
receive mentoring from leading researchers, and building the next generation of
researchers and knowledgeable practitioners with general expertise in
programming languages, and specific expertise in functional
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students attending the PLMW workshop with
support from this grant will hear eminent researchers in the field talk about
the latest trends in the field, and get one-on-one mentoring from these speakers
and other mentors in research and pursuing their career aspirations. The
connections formed at this event will help create lasting connections between
researchers and students, thereby shaping emerging innovations in computer
programming languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.