* 1940660
* SBIR Phase I:  Hardware Acceleration for Verifiable Delay Functions for use in Distributed Ledger Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Simon Peffers, Supranational LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2020
* USD 224,663.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project is
to design and develop a custom processor for performing cryptographic
operations. This research will develop algorithms and implement them in hardware
to improve their speed. The result of this research will be a design for a
cryptographic accelerator that can be manufactured and used by the blockchain
industry. These improvements will accelerate the practicality of blockchain for
daily financial use, promoting low-cost open financial networks. These networks
can reduce the cost of financial services and enable improved financial
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to increase
the throughput, and reduce the cost, of blockchain consensus protocols. Through
the use of a purpose-built cryptographic accelerator it will be possible to make
many novel cryptographic techniques practical. These techniques include
Verifiable Delay Functions (VDF), RSA Accumulators, and Succinct Non-Interactive
Argument of Knowledge (SNARKs). In particular, this processor will focus on
improving the efficiency of generating VDF proofs. VDFs and related
cryptographic techniques hold great promise for improving the scalability and
security of blockchain protocols, but are currently too slow on standard
processors to provide the desired improvements. These techniques will enable the
blockchain to be scaled to tens or even hundreds of times its current
transaction throughput. Furthermore, these techniques will simultaneously reduce
the computational and energy requirements of most modern blockchains
dramatically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.