* 1940082
* CoPe RCN: People on the Move in a Changing Climate
* GEO,ICER
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Lawrence Risse, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 01/31/2024
* USD 499,976.00

This Research Coordination Network (RCN) will leverage Sea Grant’s trusted,
long-standing relationships with local communities to facilitate
transdisciplinary collaborations among the broader scientific enterprise,
practitioners, resource managers, and coastal stakeholders to understand
climate-induced human mobility (inclusive of displacement, migration, and
planned relocation), its socioeconomic consequences, and its role in building
resilience. Sea level rise could force millions of U.S. residents from their
homes by 2100, but researchers have paid relatively little attention to the
impact of climate-induced human mobility on the receiving communities. And few
coastal communities appear to be preparing for the projected influxes of people
from sudden disaster-induced relocations and more slowly in response to the
progressive impacts of sea level rise. Critical knowledge gaps also exist in
understanding how shifts in population patterns intersect with underlying
socioeconomic, cultural, political, and environmental processes and resources
that either enable or constrain the ability of people to cope where they are,
force them to move because support is lacking, and/or encourage relocation due
to availability of resources in other regions. This RCN will provide the
scientific infrastructure that is required to conduct place-based, use-inspired
collaborative research on climate-induced human mobility, and regionally
tailored educational and engagement strategies.

Modeled partially after the approach developed by key synthesis centers, this
RCN will: 1) foster analysis and synthesis research on climate-induced human
mobility using existing data sets (including demographic, socioeconomic, and
environmental datasets) and legal and policy frameworks; 2) stimulate
collaborative problem-solving across disciplines of natural and social sciences,
and broaden participation in research and education by engaging diverse
individuals and stakeholders from U.S. coastal communities; and 3) identify and
tailor existing products and/or generate usable tools and knowledge for building
community resilience and adaptation. It will create a locally relevant program
that is national in scale by leveraging Sea Grant’s demonstrated ability to
stimulate innovative use-inspired research. It will develop robust and
sustainable networks of researchers, increase community participation in
research, identify place-based research priorities, develop new education and
outreach programs, and produce a nuanced understanding of the intersection of
climate change with the socioeconomic, environmental, political, and cultural
needs of underserved and underrepresented communities in the U.S.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.