* 1940788
* CAREER: Capturing Biological Behavior in Three-Terminal Magnetic Tunnel Junction Synapses and Neurons for Fully Spintronic Neuromorphic Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Jean Anne Incorvia, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2025
* USD 524,000.00

Brain-inspired computing is a revolution in computing that is already seeing
applications in a myriad of areas, from image recognition to developing learning
rules that allow computers to intelligently process big data sets. This field is
inspired by the human brain, which is very efficient at certain tasks. For
example, the brain can recognize a face or voice using a million times less
power than a modern supercomputer. But, so far machine learning has largely
focused on restructuring how the computer is put together, but where the
building blocks themselves are silicon transistors. Neuroscientists have
recognized certain behaviors of neurons and synapses that are central to
processing and learning. This is an opportunity to use new materials and new
physics to capture the biological behavior of the brain in artificial neurons
and synapses. In the proposed work, physics present in nanoscale magnetic
devices will be used to model, build, and measure artificial magnetic neurons
and synapses that capture biological behavior, such as neurons that build up
energy over time, relax that energy when they are not stimulated, and have
inter-neuron interactions. Synapses, the connection between neurons, will be
designed, built, and measured where the strength of the connection will be
adjusted based on the timing of signals from the neurons. The neurons and
synapses will then be connected into circuits that make use of the more advanced
biological behavior. The performance will be compared to silicon and other
emerging materials. This research will further the understanding of one solution
for next-generation computing. It will lead to broad impacts in all areas of big
data, from biology (e.g. genome sequencing) to defense (e.g. tracking a flying
object in real time) to Internet of Things (e.g. sensors in smart cities). In
addition to training the next generation of scientists and engineers, the
proposed education program emphasizes exposing young scientists to the creative
process of research. This will be accomplished by creating nanotechnology hands-
on activity events for K-12 students, hosting high school summer research
students, and creating graduate course curricula on the creative design of new
magnetic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER proposal is to
model, build, and measure three-terminal magnetic tunnel junction (3T-MTJ)
devices that can, as closely as possible, capture the biological behavior of the
brain. Like the brain, compared to traditional computers, magnetic materials
have relatively slow switching but with low voltage, nonvolatility, and with
digital, analog, stochastic, and oscillatory behavior. Little research has moved
beyond simple multi-weight synapses and stochastic neurons to capture more
robust biology that allows the brain to perform data-intensive tasks with low
power consumption and in real time. The proposed research method to address this
problem is to understand the biological behavior by working with
neuroscientists; map the biological behavior onto magnetic properties; develop
and simulate the device; fabricate and test the device; and then measure the
switching energy and probability in comparison to biology and other artificial
neurons and synapses (e.g. silicon and other resistive memories). Neuromorphic
computing is a promising approach to the ever-increasing present and future
demands for real-time processing of massive amounts of data. The proposed work
will test the hypothesis that the similar properties of magnetic materials to
the brain make magnetic devices suitable for neuromorphic computing. It will
also show how the magnetic behaviors differ from the brain, which will enable
new circuit and architecture design. The proposed work will provide a monolithic
platform, where the same magnetic thin film stack will be used for both synapses
and neurons, and which can be extended beyond the scope of this work to new and
creative devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.