* 1940760
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Systems, Programming, Languages and Applications: Software for Humanity (SPLASH)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Jonathan Bell, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 30,000.00

The ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Systems, Programming, Languages and Applications:
Software for Humanity (SPLASH) embraces all aspects of software construction and
delivery to make it one of the premier conferences at the intersection of
programming languages and software engineering. This grant provides travel funds
to support student attendance to the conference, held at Athens, Greece during
20 - 25 October 2019. The support will cover attendance at a mentoring workshop
as well as attendance at the main conference. The grant will be used for US
citizens/residents, giving priority to underrepresented groups, first-time
attendees, and those in need of economic support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
grant will enable the technical exchange of information and research
conversations/collaborations made possible by the conference, as well as
advances in the field made possible by these interactions. The proposal also
provides education, training and mentoring received by the participants. The
international nature of this conference helps develop a globally-aware workforce
of research and educators within the US and helps build the community of
researchers in the field of Software Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.