* 1940826
* EAGER: Phononic Amplification for Active Filtering at Radio Frequency
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Siavash Pourkamali Anaraki, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 02/28/2023
* USD 129,205.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an ever-growing need for speed and
reliability of wireless communication systems. Addressing the complexity of such
systems is therefore a much more daunting task than it was a decade ago. For
example, there are multiple radios operating at the same time in a state of the
art smartphone. With the imminent advent of 5G wireless communication networks
and beyond, transmission frequencies are expected to reach beyond 10 GHz. Low-
noise amplification and selection of specific frequencies (filtering) are
crucial processes on signals received from the antenna. Conventional passive
acoustic filter technologies are not capable of efficiently addressing the needs
of such complex systems, especially at high frequencies. The proposed work
investigates a new class of devices that will provide simultaneous low-noise
amplification and filtering of radio frequency (RF) signals. The ability to
integrate multiple RF front-ends on a single chip will enable a host of
unprecedented possibilities in wireless communication systems. Individual
devices can revolutionize receiver front-end architectures and pave the way to
more sophisticated radio systems. This new class of electronic devices can open
up a new area of research and development with great potential for commercial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
focus of this project is to further explore and enhance the concept of phononic
amplification in electromechanical resonant devices for development of narrow-
band active filters with frequencies in the GHz range. Such devices can
significantly simplify and improve RF front-ends by eliminating the conventional
semiconductor amplifiers and moving the amplification into the acoustic domain,
where frequency selection takes place simultaneously. Phononic amplification is
based on carrier-phonon constructive interference effect in micro to nanoscale
mechanical resonant cavities and is in many ways the acoustic equivalent of
LASER and Optical Amplification. Absorbing power from an external electrical
power source, mechanical vibrations (phonons) can be amplified due to carrier-
phonon interactions. The result in the electrical domain is a negative
electrical equivalent resistance within a narrow bandwidth around the resonance
frequency of the mechanical structure. A negative resistance in combination with
a resistive load can act as an amplifier absorbing power from the pump source
and delivering amplified RF power to the load. Highly selective filtering
provided by the phononic amplifiers can significantly relax the dynamic range
requirement and therefore power consumption of RF analog to digital converters.
Phononic amplifiers are therefore well suited for modern RF transceivers with
direct sampling architectures, in which the RF signal is processed without being
down-converted. To meet the linearity and power handling requirements, two-
dimensional mechanically coupled (electrically parallel) arrays of such devices
will be designed and implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.