* 1940269
* CoPe RCN: New Technology to Inform Coastal Science and Management
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Emanuele Di Lorenzo, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,997.00

This grant is for the planning and development of Regional Ecosystem Services
Observation Networks. RESONs are regionally-focused networks of sensors and data
sources necessary to take the pulse of coastal ecosystems, spanning their
structure, function, and services provided to people. They extend the framework
of the regional Ocean Observing Systems (OOSs) to explicitly consider
biodiversity, ecosystem function, and species migration in the context of
fisheries and coastal infrastructure needs. This Research Coordination Network
(RCN) will bring together marine scientists, modelers, engineers, spatial
statisticians, and computer scientists from academia and industry in
collaboration with stakeholders and managers. In order to broaden participation
in these activities, the team will coordinate with the NSF GOLD Active Societal
Participation In Research and Education (ASPIRE) program, which aims to
cultivate a generation of geoscientists with the leadership knowledge and
skills, scholarship, and material support to reframe and rebrand the geosciences
as socially relevant. They will also work with the UCSB Engineering Capstone
program, a year-long, project-based course offered to students that pairs
fourth-year engineering students with research projects to create an engineered
solution for real and meaningful problems across the disciplines of mechanical,
electrical and computer engineering. UCSB is a Hispanic Serving Institution and
an Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander Serving Institution with
a population of over 40 percent first generation college students that is
uniquely located directly on the coast, which, together with its strengths in
marine science, engineering, and environmental science and management, makes it
an ideal location as an inclusive national network hub for coastal science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN is needed because time series data have been
collected in coastal systems at great expense, but the spatial and temporal
scales of these monitoring efforts are inadequate to address regional and global
shifts in coastal communities, biodiversity and ecosystem services that result
from climate change, pollution, and fishing. Urgently needed are cheaper,
faster, higher-quality ways to collect time series data with broad spatial
coverage that captures time scales of ecosystem processes and moving marine
animals. Filling this need will greatly accelerate progress on Rules of Life and
climate change research in marine ecosystems and enable management responses and
community adaptation to change. This effort will focus on three data targets:
biodiversity, ecosystem function, and species migration, using the California
Current Large Marine Ecosystem (CC LME) as an initial model, and will leverage
existing networks including Southern California Coastal OOS, LTER, MBON (Marine
Biodiversity Observation Network) and ATN (Animal Telemetry Network). Variables
considered will include sound, imagery, environmental DNA, biomass, movement,
and physiological performance. The goals of the RCN will be to 1) develop a
series of workshops to identify effective combinations of sensors and
measurements and plan spatial and temporal sampling regimes necessary for
building and validating models adequate to forecast future ecosystem change; 2)
identify specific data products, sensor and sensor platforms needed to address
gaps, engaging stakeholders and managers to ensure relevance to policy; and 3)
build a sustained collaborative network with the technology sector focused on
coastal ecosystem health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.