* 1941317
* CAREER: The Role of Ice-Nucleating Particles and Their Feedback on Clouds in Warming Arctic Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Naruki Hiranuma, West Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic is
warming rapidly – faster than the rest of the world. A number of processes have
been proposed for this so-called Arctic polar amplification. While sea ice is
known to play an important role on reflecting solar radiation and altering the
Earth’s surface temperature, the roles of other processes are difficult to
quantify. Especially, contributions from atmospheric mechanisms associated with
ice-nucleating particles (INP; a few in a million aerosol particles below -20
°C) and ice-involved clouds remain uncertain in the Arctic. This project aims to
fill the gap by investigating the sources (natural/manmade), atmospheric
abundance/budget, chemical composition and physical properties of INPs in the
Atlantic sector of the Arctic. Moreover, the large measurement uncertainties in
number concentrations, chemical composition and sources of INPs are problematic
for modeling real-life phenomena. This research targets minimizing the
measurement uncertainties and addresses this critical deficiency through a
series of studies that involve direct collection of ice-nucleating particles and
their residuals. To characterize Arctic ice-nucleating particles, a novel
portable ice nucleation experiment chamber and a cold stage-supported droplet
freezing assay will be used to obtain freezing temperature spectra of airborne
particle samples. A new inertial ice particle separation technique will be used
to collect ice crystal residuals relevant to the Arctic ice-involved clouds. The
subsequent offline microspectroscopic characterization of ice crystal residuals
and ambient aerosol particles will reveal the relative importance of aerosol
physicochemical properties to particle size in ice nucleation. Ultimately, the
measurements of INPs and ice crystal residuals from this research will be
parameterized and translated to describe the time-resolved freezing ability of
the particles as a function of temperature, their composition, water activity
parameters and other physicochemical properties. Finally, an integration of
research and education is the most important target of this project. This
project will involve two graduate and several undergraduate students in
research, curriculum development and outreach, as these are learning experiences
that can aid in their professional development. This project will also develop
hands-on curricular modules integrated with the proposed research to teach
environmental and climate science to the general public, promote college courses
and train future scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, there is a critical
deficiency in Arctic field data regarding the abundance and composition of
atmospheric ice-nucleating particles at temperatures above -15 °C. This project
will fill this gap by experimentally elucidating abundance and physicochemical
properties of ice-nucleating particles. State-of-the-art representations of
high-temperature INPs from the Atlantic sector of the Arctic will advance the
atmospheric modeling community’s knowledge of the ice nucleation processes and
its formulation in the Earth’s energy balance. The project also aims to provide
robust and well-characterized INP measurements that will be archived in the
publicly available university database. The measurements from this project, in
collaboration with the existing transnational Arctic research community, will
improve the understanding of the nature of aerosols, and the INP
parameterizations representative of the Ny-Ålesund site will dramatically
improve the understanding of ice formation processes that are currently very
poorly represented in climate models. In addition, this research activity
directly aligns with one of the NSF’s 10 priority research areas, “Navigating
the New Arctic”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.