* 1941569
* CAREER: The Fate of Topology in Disordered Three-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Jedediah Pixley, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2025
* USD 490,672.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and educational activities in the study of new topological states of matter.
Electrons in some materials self-organize into topological states of matter
which are predicted to exist from the application of new ideas forged from the
fusion of concepts from theoretical condensed matter physics and topology, the
branch of mathematics that describes the properties of objects that remain
unchanged under deformation, twisting, and bending. The existence of these
states leads to intriguing quantum mechanical properties that are unaffected by
small changes in the material. Dissipationless electrical conduction channels
and bulk insulators that are spontaneously covered by essential metallic states
at their surfaces and edges are among the interesting features of topological
materials. They hold promise for future technological application in
electronics, spintronics and quantum computers. However, all materials have
imperfections, impurities, and defects, together referred to as disorder. This
research project will focus on the interplay of disorder and topology in three-
dimensional materials. The properties of topological materials are insensitive
to disorder, but they are not immune. This project is aimed to advance
understanding of the effects of disorder in topological materials and to
determine the appropriate protocols for robust and practical applications in
electronic devices, quantum computers and other
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to develop an internationally
competitive technical workforce, it is essential to educate the next generation
of scientists. The principal investigator will help achieve this goal by
developing a strong mentorship program that includes students that are K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate, as well as postdoctoral scholars. The PI will
provide graduate students and postdocs with professional development experiences
through research and exposure to industrial job opportunities. Lastly, the PI
will develop powerful open source scientific software that will be made freely
accessible in order to study disordered topological
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
in theoretical condensed matter physics focusing on the interplay of disorder,
strong correlation, and topology in three-dimensional quantum phases of
matter.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Topological materials hold great promise for
future technological applications ranging from low-loss electronics to quantum
computers. However, all materials contain disorder and it is therefore essential
to ascertain what useful topological properties remain robust away from the
idealized clean limit. Therefore, the objectives of this research activity are
threefold: (1) Determine if non-perturbative effects of disorder generically
destabilize the quantum critical point that separates three-dimensional
topological and trivial insulators into a metallic phase. (2) Develop an
efficient numerical method to compute nonlinear optical responses to detect and
characterize topological properties of three-dimensional materials. (3)
Determine if disorder affects the formation of emergent topological band
structures in strongly correlated materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
employ large scale numerical calculations that utilize the kernel polynomial
method and diagonalization techniques to efficiently simulate large lattice
models without translational symmetry. This research activity utilizes a cross
fertilization of ideas from statistical physics, topological field theories,
critical phenomena, and computational physics. The ultimate goal of this
research is to determine how disorder fundamentally alters gapless topological
phases of matter. The planned fundamental research will help to establish the
theoretical framework for evaluating the impact of disorder on gapless
topological phases of matter, which will quantify the required levels of purity
for use in technological applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s education
plan aims to develop a competitive technical workforce through active
mentorship, research opportunities, meeting with industry partners, and
developing open source scientific software. In particular, the PI’s education
activities will focus on three main areas: (1) The PI will integrate research
with teaching through mentorship to improve STEM education for students from
K-12, undergraduates, and graduates, as well as postdoctoral scholars. (2) The
PI will develop a diverse, competitive workforce by fostering graduate student
professional development through a combination of research exposure and industry
exchanges. (3) The PI will develop an open source scientific software package to
simulate disordered quantum systems that is made publicly available to enhance
the infrastructure for research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.