* 1941680
* CAREER: Transfer of Momentum and Energy in the Nanoscale Using Quantum and Thermal Fluctuations
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2027
* Alejandro Manjavacas, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 04/30/2027
* USD 205,293.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction between light and
matter at the nanoscale can be very different from our daily macroscopic
experience. When the dimensions of material structures, or the space separating
them, reach the range of nanometers, the quantum nature of light and matter
emerges and gives rise to new phenomena. This award supports theoretical
research that is aimed at investigating various new phenomena involving the
transfer of momentum and energy between nanoscale objects within the context of
two novel concepts that have recently emerged in the field of nanophotonics:
structures with atomic thickness and spin-orbit interactions of light. The
investigation of these phenomena within a common theoretical framework will
allow the PI and his team to establish the foundations for new paradigms
enabling noncontact transfer of momentum and energy at the nanoscale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award can, in the long run,
help in developing novel approaches for manipulating nanoscale objects,
including biologically relevant structures. The results on energy transfer can
have an impact on the improvement of thermal devices and heat management
strategies in nanoelectronics. This award also supports educational and outreach
activities aimed at improving the recruitment and retention of students in the
fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), with a
special emphasis on first-generation and low-income students from
underrepresented minorities. The PI and his team will implement a range of
activities targeting students, from middle school to the graduate level, which
aim to generate and foster interest in STEM disciplines, preserve that interest,
and mold it into essential skills and experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research with an overarching goal of investigating the transfer of
momentum and energy at the nanoscale mediated by the quantum and thermal
fluctuations of the electromagnetic field. To that end, the PI and his team will
implement a robust theoretical framework by investigating and overcoming the
limits of the fluctuational electrodynamics approach, and use it to study two
novel nanophotonics concepts within the context of fluctuation-induced
phenomena: low-dimensional systems and spin-orbit interactions of light. The
investigation will be organized around four research thrusts addressing the
following specific goals: (1) explore the limits of the fluctuational
electrodynamics approach and implement the necessary improvements to describe
fluctuation-induced phenomena involving low-dimensional nanostructures and spin-
orbit interactions of light, (2) investigate the Casimir torque between
different rotating nanostructures as a mechanism to transfer angular momentum in
the nanoscale, paying special attention to low-dimensional systems, and exploit
the spin-orbit interactions of light to achieve unidirectional transfer of
angular momentum, (3) investigate the Casimir forces acting on low-dimensional
nanostructures and their interplay with other relevant interactions, such as
electrostatic forces, and (4) study the thermalization of ensembles of
nanostructures mediated by radiative heat transfer and explore low-dimensional
structures and spin-orbit interactions of light as a path to achieve full
temporal control over the transfer of energy at the
nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award can, in the
long run, help in developing novel approaches for manipulating nanoscale
objects, including biologically relevant structures. The results on energy
transfer can have an impact on the improvement of thermal devices and heat
management strategies in nanoelectronics. This award also supports educational
and outreach activities aimed at improving the recruitment and retention of
students in the fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM), with a special emphasis on first-generation and low-income students from
underrepresented minorities. The PI and his team will implement a range of
activities targeting students, from middle school to the graduate level, which
aim to generate and foster interest in STEM disciplines, preserve that interest,
and mold it into essential skills and experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.