* 1941415
* CyberCorps SFS Renewal: Supporting the Federal Government Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2026
* Craig Wills, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,766,075.00

Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI), a National Center of Academic Excellence
in Cyber Defense Research, proposes to continue its participation in the
CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to educate security
professionals to support the federal government workforce. At WPI, cybersecurity
is recognized as one of five priority research areas across the university, due
to its critical importance to society. WPI’s SFS program provides students with
a project-based learning experience that includes a hands-on experiential
learning environment and formal undergraduate and graduate degree designations
in cybersecurity. The SFS program also provides a cohort experience to students
enabling them to explore opportunities together, gain peer mentorship, and
identify enriching professional development opportunities. This project will
strengthen the security of federal cyber operations by increasing the number of
highly qualified cybersecurity professionals hired at federal
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To bolster the federal cybersecurity workforce,
WPI’s SFS program has the following specific goals: 1) recruit highly-qualified
students who show a genuine commitment to serving the national need; 2) prepare
students for the needs of the federal workforce through a high-quality
education; 3) support students who otherwise might not be able to afford their
studies; and 4) broaden participation in cybersecurity among women and
underrepresented minorities. The WPI SFS program incorporates service learning,
in which SFS scholars engage in outreach that benefits others while reinforcing
their own learning. The SFS program helps its students engage in outreach
through opportunities like on-campus Capture the Flag competitions, mentorship
of high school CyberPatriot teams, and events to help the Worcester-area
community learn how to keep their computers safe. Students earn formal degree
designations in cybersecurity through an undergraduate concentration and a
graduate specialization. WPI’s project-based curriculum provides a hands-on
learning environment where students explore topics in-depth, engage in research,
and publish in peer-reviewed venues. WPI partners with eligible federal and
state government agencies, and with federally funded research and development
centers, to help students pursue post-graduation employment at SFS-eligible
government agencies. To support this hiring process, WPI hosts speakers to
describe the research and employment benefits at a variety of agencies. WPI
builds relationships with potential employers and maintains strong ties with
alumni at these organizations who can help mentor and recruit future
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.