* 1941896
* CAREER: Synthesis of Feedback-based  Online  Algorithms for Power Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Emiliano Dall'Anese, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER proposal focuses on power grids, and aims to translate foundational
theory and algorithms into breakthrough real-time optimization and control
approaches for distributed energy resources (DERs). In this context, the
overarching goal is to overcome current technological and operational barriers
associated with the large-scale integration of DERs, where: (a) the deployment
of DERs with business-as-usual practices has decreased power-quality and
reliability, (b) existing network optimization approaches may fail to provide
solutions at a time scale that matches the dynamics of power systems with DERs,
and (c) synthetic models for users’ preferences and comfort may not capture the
users’ goals truthfully. The research plan seeks a shift from a paradigm with a
time-scale separation between economic optimization and local control –
predominant in today's distribution grids, where corrective and localized rules
serve as a basis for real-time voltage regulation and ancillary-service
provisioning – to operations where DERs actively partake into grid operations
and leverage real-time network-level coordination to seek increased efficiency
and reliability. DER coordination is engineered so that DERs can learn to
maximize users' preferences, while aiding system-level frequency and voltage
control. An integrated education and outreach plan will engage middle- and high-
school students through a summer Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) Research Academy and lectures for the Pre-Collegiate
Development Program. To bridge research and education, the PI will develop
courses on the themes of online optimization for networks and optimization of
power systems, and will promote undergraduate student research. A working group
on optimization and learning will be created at the University of Colorado
Boulder in synergy with the Autonomous Systems Interdisciplinary Research Theme,
to bring together faculty and students across the campus and stimulate multi-
disciplinary research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research leverages time-varying optimization models for networks
operating in dynamic environments, and seeks to develop real-time optimization
architectures with tightly-integrated feedback and learning components. The
proposed feedback-based online algorithms have the following key attributes: i)
Principled algorithmic steps employ measurements from the network to bypass the
need for a network model; ii) Algorithms include humans in the loop by learning
the users' utility functions from users' feedback during the execution of the
online decision algorithm; iii) Algorithms are implemented in closed loop with
the power network to acknowledge dynamics and effectively act as feedback
controllers; and, iv) Algorithms promote low-complexity, distributed, and
scalable architectures. Fundamental tradeoffs between convergence rate, tracking
of time-varying optimal solutions, maximum constraint violation, and
computational complexity of the algorithms will be
offered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.