* 1941410
* CAREER: Molecular Tools to Tune the Structure-Function Properties of Nanoscale Objects by Reconfiguration of pi-Conjugated Superstructures
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Jean Hubert Olivier, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2025
* USD 658,742.00

The research group of Jean-Hubert Olivier at The University of Miami seeks to
develop new strategies to manipulate the interactions of organic molecules and
polymers in nanoscale architectures (with dimensions of 1/1,000,000 meter). The
overarching goal is to understand how one can precisely control assembly
pathways to reconfigure the structure of organic materials and promote efficient
energy transport. The results of this fundamental research have implications in
solar cell design and optoelectronic devices. This project also nurtures the
development of training platforms to prepare students to tackle social
challenges and complex scientific problems. To achieve these goals, the Olivier
group develops a Science Discovery Program: “Create and Assemble: How Nature
Builds “Stuff””. The program seeks to ignite a curiosity for science and
technology in younger generations, creates an environment that promotes critical
thinking, motivates students across all age groups to pursue scientific careers,
and sensitizes a more mature audience to the extent to which science and
education can greatly contribute to a more sustainable
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry, this
project develops a new set of tools to navigate the aggregation free-energy
landscape and create energetically trapped architectures equipped with
structure-function properties unattainable at equilibrium. The Olivier groups
seeks to establish rules and principles to manipulate the electronic structures
of π-conjugated building blocks and form out-of-equilibrium states (n-doped) to
tune the non-covalent interactions between superstructure precursors. From
solution-phase studies that exploit spectroscopy and electrochemistry, this
project seeks to understand how reconfigured superstructures promote exciton
delocalization and transport. Furthermore, strategies are being developed to
“lock-in” supramolecular architectures both at equilibrium, and when placed out-
of-equilibrium (n-doped). Well-defined nanoscale objects created in this manner
unearth a new understanding of the electronic properties enforced by
electronically perturbed out-of-equilibrium states. Rules and principles are
elucidated to enable, at the solid/liquid interface, the formation of
hierarchical nanostructures derived from energetically trapped
superstructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.