* 1941820
* CAREER: Novel Electrodeposition Method using Water-In-Salt Electrolytes for Superconductor Thin Film Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Qiang Huang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2025
* USD 519,882.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will investigate the newly
discovered “water-in-salt” electrolytes, which will potentially enable the
fabrication of superconductors for applications in quantum devices. A
superconductor is a unique material that allows an electrical current to flow
without experiencing any resistance, providing for tremendous advances in energy
efficiency and computing applications. Low temperature quantum computers and
other cryogenic electronic devices require superconducting wirings to avoid
resistive heating, which increases the temperature and perturbs the performance
of those devices. The wiring in conventional integrated circuits has been
manufactured using electrodeposition processes, but such a process is not
available for superconductors. Films electrodeposited from conventional
electrolytes lack structural precision, and the superconductivity degrades when
the films are further processed into complete circuits. This project will focus
on the development of a new “water-in-salt” electrolyte that is expected to
improve the film structures. This work will provide a fundamental understanding
of the deposition chemistry and the process, as well as how these factors impact
the morphology and superconductivity of the films. The goal is to enable such
electrodeposition processes for the industrial manufacturing of superconducting
circuits. Collaborations with a local children’s museum and local high schools
will be established and strengthened, in order to promote the awareness of
science and engineering education and careers among K-12 students and parents,
particularly from underrepresented groups. In addition, the research results
will contribute to the development of new class modules for the
undergraduate/graduate-level course: “Electrochemical Engineering and
Microfabrication.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water-in-salt can be viewed as an
aqueous electrolyte without free water, as the hydration of a super high
concentration of salt depletes the water molecules. This is due to the formation
of sheaths of water around the ions, resulting in a much suppressed reduction of
protons and water. This project takes advantage of such water-in-salt
electrolytes to enable new electrodeposition processes for superconducting film
fabrication, aiming to provide fundamental understandings of: i) how the
speciation and concentration of solutes impact the incorporation and
distribution of hydrogen and other impurity elements; ii) how electrodeposition
processes such as voltage bias, pulse duration, and hydrodynamics influence the
nucleation and growth, film stress, and grain structure; and iii) how the
substrates, stress layers, capping layers, and thermal annealing processes may
change the grain structure, impurity distribution, outgassing, film stress, and
superconductivity. This project also aims to integrate this knowledge into the
design of deposition processes, in conjunction with the electrolyte, to enable
superconductor circuit manufacturing. This project will allow the Principal
Investigator to advance the knowledge base in Electrochemical Engineering,
Material Sciences, Superconducting and Electronic Devices, and establish his
long-term career in advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.