* 1941530
* AF: Small: Motion Planning Techniques for Protein Motion
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Nancy Amato, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 208,067.00

Protein motions play an essential role in many biochemical processes. For
example, as proteins fold to their native, functional state, they sometimes
undergo critical conformational changes that affect their functionality, e.g.,
diseases such as Mad Cow disease or Alzheimer's disease are associated with
protein misfolding and aggregation. Proteins also undergo conformational change
when interacting with other molecules as they transition between bound and
unbound states. Knowledge of the mechanics of these motion processes may help
provide insight into how and why proteins misfold, how binding regulation is
communicated through the protein structure, and how to design more effective
drugs. For example, a better understanding of protein misfolding and aggregation
has the potential to provide insight into neurodegenerative diseases such as
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, prion diseases, and related diseases
that have a major impact on society. An important, and more immediate, goal of
the project is to share detailed results generated by the new methods with the
community in a publicly available database of protein motions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new modeling, simulation and
analysis tools that specialize and apply a novel computational method for
studying molecular motions that has been developed and validated against
experimental data in preliminary work. This method represents a trade-off
between methods such as molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations that
provide detailed individual folding trajectories and techniques such as
statistical mechanical methods that provide global landscape statistics. The
approach, derived from robotic motion planning methods, builds a graph that
encodes many (typically thousands) of motion pathways. The proposed work
involves both algorithmic research to further develop and optimize the
techniques and research necessary to apply them to study issues of current
interest in protein science. While the algorithmic research will be performed by
computer scientists, the application and testing of the techniques will benefit
from collaborations with labs currently studying these problems. The main
research goals include: (i) The development of new and/or improved metrics and
analysis techniques for conformations, pathways, and roadmaps that can be
applied to modeling more complex motion applications. These methods will be
validated and applied to protein transitions, decoy database improvement, and
ligand binding. (ii) New methods for modeling and simulating constrained motion
and incorporating greater bond flexibility in areas of legitimate need (neither
supported by current framework). These methods will be applied to modeling
protein transitions, and ligand binding. (iii) Strategies for employing high-
performance computing to increase the size and complexity of the systems that
can be studied.