* 1941796
* CAREER: Dose-dependent genetic mechanisms driving X versus Y chromosomal competition
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Jacob Mueller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 11/30/2024
* USD 818,618.00

In mammals, males typically have a 50:50 chance of fathering male or female
offspring due to the equal likelihood of passing an X or a Y chromosome from
sperm. However, cases exist in which the 50:50 sex ratio is distorted towards
more male or more female offspring. The basis for this distortion is not
understood. Evidence suggests that some of the genes on the X and Y chromosomes
compete against each other in an ‘evolutionary arms race’ that leads to
differences in the ability of X- versus Y-containing sperm to fertilize an egg.
This project aims to understand the molecular details of this competition, using
mouse as the study organism. Success will contribute to an exciting new field of
sex chromosome biology by explaining the genetic basis for normal and distorted
sex ratios in mammals. Graduate and undergraduate students participating in this
research will develop new experimental skills in mouse molecular genetics and
computational skills in analyzing large DNA sequencing datasets. In combination
with the research directions of this project, educational and outreach
components will promote learning experiences in genetics and evolution. Graduate
and post-doctoral researchers will provide continuing education to high school
teachers, via a dedicated seminar series, and interactive engagement with high
school students by participation in a state-wide Michigan DNA Day. The general
public will gain exposure to the research via an exhibit at the University of
Michigan Natural History Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary theory posits
that highly differentiated sex chromosomes provide an ideal battleground for
genes to compete against each other. Indeed, across animals, there are a few
examples of X- and Y-linked genes in genetic conflict that distort the sex
ratio. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms governing how X- versus
Y-linked gene competition drives sex ratio distortion remain unclear. Recent
studies have identified X-linked, newly acquired and massively amplified gene
families present only in the mouse lineage that contributes to sex ratio
distortion. This X-linked gene family, called Slxl1, is considered to be in
conflict with a related, co-amplified, Y-linked gene family, called Sly. Slxl1
versus Sly genetic conflict appears to be dose-dependent due to massive changes
in gene dosage on the X and Y chromosome over the last 20 million years since
mice diverged from rats. Using a combination of advanced mouse molecular
genetics techniques and computational analyses, the project will address three
important questions to learn how Slxl1 versus Sly genetic conflict contributes
to sex ratio distortion. 1) Is Slxl1 gene expression level important for
mediating sex ratio distortion? 2) Is communication between X- and Y-bearing
haploid sperm cells necessary for Slxl1 and Sly to compete? 3) How might other
massively duplicated, sex-linked genes influence Slxl1-dependent sex ratio
distortion? The results are expected to provide insights into a new model of
dose-dependent genetic conflict and may reveal a common mechanism by which X-
and Y-linked gene families distort the sex ratio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.