* 1941348
* CRII: NeTS: Towards Joint Mobile Broadband and Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communications for Connected Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 08/19/2019,04/30/2022
* Omid Semiari, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2022
* USD 197,511.00

Cellular vehicle-to-everything communication (C-V2X) is a promising solution to
reduce road incidents and traffic in future smart cities by communicating
critical safety and road information with connected and autonomous vehicles
(CAVs). To guarantee safe and efficient operation of CAVs, emerging cellular
networks must support services with ultra-reliability and low-latency
requirements (e.g., emergency braking) together with mobile broadband
applications that need very high data rates (e.g., high-definition maps).
Meeting such stringent requirements for large number of CAVs is beyond the
capacity of existing networks that operate at scarce sub-6 gigahertz
frequencies. Furthermore, while high-frequency millimeter wave (mmWave) bands
offer large bandwidth, mmWave communications pose new challenges in terms of
reliability that stem from inherent propagation characteristics of mmWave
signals. To address these challenges, the goal of this research is to develop a
holistic framework that enables seamless multiplexing of heterogeneous C-V2X
traffic over aggregated mmWave and sub-6 GHz frequencies, while taking into
account unique limitations and complementary features of communications at each
frequency band. This research is accompanied by a comprehensive educational plan
that includes mentoring graduate and undergraduate students to participate in
research and testbed development, as well as various outreach events for
underserved students at local schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental
research enables inter-frequency range carrier aggregation to manage the
heterogeneous vehicle-to-everything communication (C-V2X) traffic jointly over
mmWave and sub-6 GHz bands and to optimize mobility management for connected and
autonomous vehicles (CAVs), while addressing key challenges of mmWave links such
as reliability and sparsity. Given the ongoing efforts by standardization groups
are primarily focused on carrier aggregation over a single frequency range, new
schemes for modeling, optimization, and performance analysis of C-V2X
communications are required that account for fundamental differences between
mmWave and sub-6 GHz communications. To this end, this framework brings forward
novel solutions at the intersections of wireless networking, edge computing,
graph theory, and reliability theory, to achieve the following key innovations:
1) Designing new flexible frame structures to dynamically manage the
heterogeneous C-V2X traffic over the aggregated mmWave and sub-6 GHz frequency
ranges; 2) Analyzing the end-to-end performance of the proposed multi-band radio
access network (RAN) with advanced features such as RAN function splitting and
edge computing capabilities; 3) Optimizing the mobility management for CAVs
based on the derived end-to-end performance metrics; and 4) Developing a
comprehensive simulation testbed to evaluate the proposed schemes. The
anticipated results of the proposed research will advance C-V2X networks and
expedite the deployment of CAVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.