* 1941727
* CAREER:Understanding sustainable stormwater management via an Internet of Things-based green infrastructure network and a coupled Agent-Based Modeling approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Yi-Chen Yang, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 509,178.00

As urban flooding becomes more severe and frequent, communities are increasingly
promoting the adoption of distributed green infrastructure (GI) to manage
stormwater, such as rain barrels, rain gardens, and green roofs. However, the
effects of distributed GI on the entire stormwater management system, or the
factors that influence those effects, are unclear. The overarching goal of this
CAREER project is to better understand decentralized sustainable stormwater
management using a framework that combines an Internet of Things (IoT)-based
green infrastructure (GI) network and a computational model, called the coupled
agent-based model-StormWater Management Model (ABM-SWMM). The IoT-based GI
network will allow data such as field measurements, timing, and frequency of GI
maintenance to be collected in real-time. The coupled ABM-SWMM model will
quantify effects on potential flood mitigation under various scenarios of GI
installation and maintenance, policy, economic, and climate. The combination of
these two approaches is designed to make it possible to identify and analyze
technical, social, economic and policy barriers to acceptance and effective
implementation of GI at multiple community scales, and to explore potential
solutions to overcome them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the
principal investigator's previous experience in ABM coupled with process-based
hydrological models, shared vision planning with practitioners, and online
platforms for stakeholder engagement. The project is organized around four
objectives: 1) Analyze barriers that underlie local property owners' acceptance
or rejection of GI via a social survey, providing behavioral data for the ABM,
2) Assess the effect of information sharing, via smart home devices and the IoT-
based GI network, on property owners' diligence in maintaining their GIs, 3)
Evaluate the runoff reduction effectiveness of decentralized GI implementation
at multiple scales under various scenarios using coupled ABM-SWMM to provide
technical and policy insights, and 4) Form an academic-public-private
partnership to create a collaborative learning environment that allows students
from middle school to graduate school to participate in collaborations among the
university, local government, and private sectors. The human-cyberinfrastructure
framework is targeted to advance the principal investigator's long-term career
goal to understand complex interactions between humans and nature at different
spatial scales, advance urban environmental sustainability through green
infrastructure, and create a culture of learning for citizens of all ages about
sustainable stormwater management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.