* 1941286
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (IEEE DySPAN)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Xiaonan Guo, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

IEEE International Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, IEEE DySPAN
2019, will be held between November 11 and November 14, 2019, in Newark, NJ,
USA. DySPAN is a unique symposium that gathers industry, academia and regulatory
communities and facilities interactions between these communities on technical,
business and policy aspects of spectrum. DySPAN 2019 offers not only technical
paper presentations but also a wide range of other educational formats,
including panels, tutorials, industry presentations, posters and keynote
speeches by leaders from academia and industry. Spectrum engineering and policy
are crucial for the continued advancement of future wireless networks that
provide enormous societal benefits and DySPAN is well positioned to provide a
venue for exchange of research ideas and training of the future workforce in
this multi-disciplinary area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to support approximately 12 U.S.-based students with travel grants to attend
DySPAN 2019. The students will have the opportunity to present their work or
attend this symposium without accepted papers. Most students attending the
symposium will be working on topics related to communications, spectrum,
protocol and modeling. They may discover new directions for their research that
can lead to new intellectual contributions. Announcement for the Student Travel
Grant will be posted on the DySPAN 2019 website and the committee will conduct
outreach (e.g. to N2Women and other minority groups) to attract potential
attendees. The announcement specifically encourages the participation of women,
undergraduates and beginning graduate students, and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.