* 1941966
* CAREER: ATP-driven Spatial Regulation of a Biomolecular Condensate in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Anthony Vecchiarelli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 11/30/2024
* USD 962,430.00

Atmospheric carbon dioxide levels are higher today than at any point in the past
800,000 years, therefore, understanding carbon fixation mechanisms has become
very important. Almost half of global carbon remediation is performed by
bacteria that package the machinery required to fix carbon dioxide into
organelles made entirely of protein called carboxysomes. Despite their
importance to the global carbon cycle, how a carboxysome is organized in the
cell is unclear. This research will elucidate the mechanisms of carboxysome
organization to understand how this vital organelle is maintained in a cell
population. An understanding of the basic biological mechanisms by which
carboxysomes are organized will provide a means to utilize them for synthetic
biology applications. This project will further NSFâ€™s mission of expanding
science and engineering research potential by improving natural carbon fixation
and has broad impacts on education, engaging the public, and increasing
scientific literacy by giving the public an appreciation for how bacterial
function can have global implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organelles are
traditionally thought of as lipid bound and restricted to eukaryotic cells. It
is now appreciated that membraneless organelles are present in all cell types. A
recently identified way to form a membraneless organelle is by Liquid-Liquid
Phase Separation, where proteins condense into droplets. Little is known about
how membraneless organelles are organized in a cell. Several recent studies
suggest the carboxysome has liquid-like properties - a paradigm shift in our
understanding of these carbon-fixing organelles. In the cyanobacterium
Synechococcus elongatus, carboxysomes are evenly spaced along the cell length.
The project team recently identified the system responsible for the maintenance
of carboxysome distribution, but the mechanism remains unknown. This research
will contribute the first mechanistic understanding of how liquid-like
organelles are spatially organized in bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Cellular Dynamics and Function and Molecular
Biophysics Clusters, Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Directorate
for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.