* 1941898
* IUCRC Proposal Phase I University of Colorado Boulder: Center for Pervasive Personalized Intelligence (PPI)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Shivakant Mishra, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 05/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to the ecosystem of computing devices (e.g.
cellphones, household appliances, vehicles, etc.) connected to each other via
the internet. The goal of the Center is to enable the next generation of IoT
systems to be more proactive and personalized without compromising security and
privacy, thereby improving decision making, increasing efficiency and enabling
new types of computing applications. This Pervasive Personalized Intelligence
(PPI) will be brought about by collaborative research efforts between industry
and the University of Colorado Boulder (CU), which will advance the areas of
Computing Systems, Programming Languages and Verification, and
Visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at CU will investigate
foundational research under three thrusts. First, under the Computing Systems
thrust, investigators will develop fundamental, developer-friendly, system-level
services at the middleware layer to integrate mobile nodes, IoT devices and edge
servers. Second, for the Programmability thrust, investigators will create new
techniques that enable software developers to effectively create and evolve rich
PPI applications that, by construction, are secure, privacy-preserving and
reliable. Finally, under the Visualization thrust, investigators will explore
methods to help data stakeholders, research scientists, and policymakers to
understand their data and/or make sense of decisions made by Artificial
Intelligence (AI) systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in IoT impact many
facets of everyday life. The PPI Center explores research thrusts in Artificial
Intelligence, Computing Systems, Programmability, Visualization, and Computer
Security and Privacy that are broadly applicable beyond IoT systems to a variety
of other scientific domains such as environmental science, agriculture, biology
and robotics. The research outputs will be disseminated through publications,
research presentations to industry and academia, open-source code and industrial
collaborations. The Center will train graduate students through hands-on
experience on projects relevant to industrial collaborators. The educational
activities include summer schools for industry engineers and K-12 outreach
through partnerships with CUâ€™s programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PPI Center
will maintain a publicly-accessible project repository that will store open-
source code, publicly available datasets, papers and other research outputs that
can be disseminated to the general public. This repository will be maintained
for the lifetime of the center and the URL will be
http://ppicenter.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.