* 1941006
* Collaborative Research: Connecting linguistic and perceptual development through symmetry
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Lila Gleitman, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 549,133.00

The extent of children's knowledge of language at school entry predicts their
later academic success, even for those disciplines not commonly associated with
language skills, such as science and mathematics. For example, teachers tell
children that “two and two is equal to four”, and that “the earth is similar to
(or “is like”) a ball”. Our ultimate understanding of mathematical symbols and
their combination are supported by language, through words and their syntactic
combination. This research examines how children come to understand the abstract
meaning of logical words such as “equal”, “similar”, and “and”. How do children
learn that if X is similar to Y, Y must be similar to X? These examples have in
common the key concept that is the focus of the planned research, the concept of
symmetry – a central idea in perception, language and thought. Symmetry is a
relation that remains the same even when reversed logically or physically. Thus,
if X equals Y, Y must equal X, and if the button matches the shirt, so must the
shirt match the button. Symmetry seems an exotic topic but in fact is
foundational in reasoning, geometry, algebra, biology, and physics, and is
threaded through the vocabulary, including nouns (“cousin”), verbs (“meet”), and
adjectives (“similar”). Despite the ubiquity of symmetry in language and its
formative connection to STEM, little is known about how preschoolers acquire an
understanding of symmetrical words, or how they perceive symmetrical
interactions. Answering these questions will help explain children’s differences
in language abilities and STEM-related learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
experiments examine how humans perceive, think and/or communicate about symmetry
at different stages of development, from infancy to adulthood. Most employ real-
time measures, in which eye gaze is recorded as participants hear speech
describing scenes of individuals engaged in (a-)symmetrical interactions. A
moment-by-moment record is obtained for how participants link scene and syntax
and engage in learning of words with potentially (a-)symmetrical meanings. Study
1 examines whether preverbal infants distinguish between perceptually
symmetrical vs. asymmetrical interactions, and how older children link
perception to abstract symmetry. Study 2 examines when children come to have an
adult understanding of symmetrical vs. asymmetrical syntax in language. Study 3
examines how learners combine evidence about symmetrical relations from
perceptual and linguistic input. Research incorporates significant education and
outreach: undergraduates are involved in research and trained in eyetracking;
research occurs at museums and local preschools, where parents learn about
developmental research, its importance, and outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.