* 1941546
* CAREER: Connecting behavioral phenomes with functional genomes in ants, manipulated by a fungal parasite
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Graham Worthy, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2025
* USD 685,820.00

Infected animals generally behave differently from healthy animals. These
changes can go beyond mere sickness behaviors to reflect precise manipulations
induced by parasites to increase that parasite’s chances to spread. How
manipulative parasites can alter host behavior is currently unknown. The
behaviorally tractable “zombie ant system” has the potential to expose the
mechanisms underlying parasitic behavioral manipulation and fundamentally
transform perceptions of parasite-host interactions and their behavioral ecology
effects. This project uses fungus-infected “zombie ants” as a model to
systematically quantify disease progression and accompanying behavioral
phenotypes, to determine where sickness behavior ends, where manipulation
begins, and which intricate molecular mechanisms are involved. Knowledge of the
regulation of insect behavior and how to effectively disrupt it can be used in
evolutionarily more robust methods to battle pests. Additionally, the novel
fungal effectors discovered are potentially applicable in human medicine. The
project will leverage the public’s interest in zombie-making parasites to create
immersive pedagogies for teaching biology to a diverse student population. As
such, the investigators will develop a research-based, educational virtual
reality experience about microbial infections and insects to take to K-12
schools, museums and fairs. Undergraduate students at a large, ethnically and
socio-economically diverse university will get the opportunity to involve
themselves in the scientific process through a research-intensive course on
insect behavior and manipulation. Multiple graduate and undergraduate students
will also be involved in the integrative research activities of this project,
preparing them for an increasingly cross-disciplinary STEM job
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to 1) examine how ant behavior
changes throughout infection; 2) how ant and fungal tissues interact throughout
this progression; 3) reveal which genes and pathways from both parasite and host
give rise to behavioral phenotypes; and 4) elucidate the exact functions of
these genes and pathways. The work spans the integration of multiple
technological approaches to understand how zombie-making fungi of the genus
Ophiocordyceps interact with ants from the molecular level to the behavioral
output displayed by the whole organism. Manipulated climbing and biting of
Ophiocordyceps-infected ants represent common behavioral phenotypes among zombie
makers. Thus, answering how these fungal parasites modify host behavioral
pathways will also form a springboard for mechanistic hypotheses in other model
systems. Specifically: 1) Comparative infection studies and quantifiable
behavioral assays will reveal how normal behavior progresses beyond mere
sickness phenotypes to parasite-adaptive manipulation phenotypes. 2) Three-
dimensional X-ray microtomography models of whole ants will show how fungal
cells physically interact with ant tissues throughout the disease progression.
3) Mixed RNA-Seq will provide accompanying gene expression profiles of both
organisms that underlie these detailed morphological and behavioral phenotypes.
This will lead to the discovery of novel fungal effectors, and the insect
pathways they potentially target. 4) The genetic modification of fungal
effectors of interest, followed by functional behavioral assays with those
modified strains or their produced compounds, will expose their true function
and involvement in the manipulation of host behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.