* 1941309
* CAREER: Can material costs contribute to the structuring of biodiversity patterns from genomes and transcriptomes to multispecies communities?
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Erika Hersch-Green, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,192,740.00

Understanding the connections between an organism’s genes, their appearance, and
their environment is key to both understanding how organisms, populations, and
communities will respond to environmental changes and the challenges to
preserving biodiversity. This research investigates how changes in soil nitrogen
and phosphorus levels in areas with characteristically different temperature and
moisture regimes alters the genetic and functional trait attributes of plants,
their presence and performance in ecological communities, and ultimately
patterns of biodiversity across levels from genes to communities. This research
uses techniques from the fields of genetics, physiology, ecology, evolutionary
biology, and mathematical modelling to comprehensively investigate these
linkages. This project integrates K-12 grade and undergraduate students in
course- and field-based research experiences to enhance student excitement,
learning, and involvement of science and the scientific method. By working with
students and professionals trained in scientific communication and media
generation, this project also will increase both scientific literacy and
engagement on critical topics related to nutrient eutrophication, conservation
of biodiversity, and evolutionary adaptation and the awareness of related STEM
career pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to enhance
understanding of whether increased ecosystem nutrient availability results in
the relaxation of material cost constraints associated with nucleic acids and
building genomes and transcriptomes, thereby affecting the structure of primary
producer’s genomes and transcriptomes and the ecological communities in which
they are embedded. This research will: (1) Characterize the relationships among
genome size, transcriptome expression patterns and elemental composition, and
functional/physiological traits in cytotypes of a non-model allopolyploid and an
autopolyploid species; (2) Engage in field research to broadly elucidate
relationships between genome size and traits related to photosynthesis, growth,
and nutrient usage in multiple plants and plant assemblages under different
nutrient supplies and climatic conditions; and (3) Combine species occurrence
data from multiple plant and consumer community assemblages in different
nutrient treatment plots and climate conditions with time series phylogenetic
modelling approaches and manipulative field experiments to obtain mechanistic
insights into the roles of material costs and genome size in bottom-up and top-
down controls of biodiversity patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.