* 1941002
* The Development of Number Concepts in Deaf and Hard of Hearing Children
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2024
* Sara Cordes, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 668,841.00

Over the last 50+ years research has established that deaf and hard of hearing
(DHH) children fall behind their age-matched hearing peers in math achievement,
starting as early as 3 years of age. Assessments of math knowledge (counting,
fractions, geometrical concepts, number reasoning, etc.) have revealed DHH
children fall behind their hearing peers by approximately two years, with lags
remaining throughout high school and adulthood, potentially limiting DHH
children’s future pursuits in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematical
(STEM). While many researchers have described these differences in mathematical
performance of DHH children, few have attempted to explain why these differences
exist. Given the demonstrated links between numeracy and academic, health, and
financial outcomes, it is critical to identify the source of these difficulties
in order to promote numeracy in DHH children. The purpose of this research is to
inform our understanding of the role of language in the learning of numerical
concepts while providing the groundwork for curriculum development that
maximizes math learning in DHH children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
explores the role of language experience and abilities in the acquisition of
symbolic and non-symbolic numerical concepts in deaf and hard of hearing
children and their hearing peers. Through five behavioral studies with 400
participants, this work aims to characterize math abilities in DHH children
relative to their hearing peers, and to explore whether limited language access
or abilities may account for observed math difficulties. Series 1 will
investigate the relationship between singular/plural language learning and
numerical tracking abilities for small sets of objects in DHH and hearing
toddlers (18-30 months). Series 2 will explore the development of non-symbolic
number abilities in DHH and hearing infants and children (7 months – 5 years
old). Studies in series 3 address non-symbolic and symbolic proportional
understanding in 6-12 year old DHH and hearing children. Findings from this work
will inform current theories of math cognition, providing an in-depth
characterization of the role that linguistic experience and abilities play in
the development of numerical abilities throughout childhood. This project is co-
funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12), which seeks to
enhance preK-12 teaching and learning of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics through the research and development of new innovations and
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.