* 1941419
* Causal Inference and Machine Learning Methods
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Rajarshi Mukherjee, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 01/31/2022
* USD 120,700.00

Causal Inference is a broad area of statistical research where investigators are
interested in the quantitative exploration of cause and effect relationships
between exposures and outcomes. Questions that fall under this framework range
across a vast canvass of applications, including, medical sciences and biology,
economics, social sciences, and environmental health. Specific examples can
include understanding the efficacy of treatments for a disease, the importance
of genes and proteins on deciding biological functions, the interplay between
environmental factors and genetic variations on human mortality, and the role of
careful product placements to modulate market behaviors. This immense breadth of
the statistical paradigm naturally comes with its share of subtleties and
pitfalls. One of the major challenges in a statistically principled analysis of
cause and effects is the presence of other factors, known as confounders, which
often mislead investigators in falsely believing spurious relationships.
Accounting for such confounders, therefore, becomes of great importance. The
increasing ability of human beings to collect more and more data has made
measurements of many such factors possible in common examples of causal
inference studies. Although in principle, this has made causal inference a more
feasible and exciting field, the mathematical formalism of such studies still
come with a burden of assumptions to deal with these confounders -- which can
often be extremely restrictive for practical applications. It is widely believed
that tools from machine learning and artificial intelligence are natural choices
to alleviate the burden of these assumptions. This project is aimed at
understanding the role of these tools in disentangling causal inference related
questions in a statistically principled and mathematically sound manner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As mentioned above, it is often argued that the use of
machine-learning methods to nonparametrically estimate nuisance parameters
alleviates the burden of the assumptions made in observational studies. Although
true at heart, most machine learning methods are geared to attain low prediction
errors in regression type problems -- whereas estimation of quantities like
causal effects might require a somewhat different understanding. This project
is, therefore, aimed at disentangling some machine learning algorithms used in
the study of causal effects. The major goals of this project can be divided into
the following regimes -- (i) exploring the crucial, and often overlooked, need
of formal statistical methods for inferring causal effects which are adaptive
over standard assumptions made in practice, (ii) a causal mediation analysis
framework which paves the way for seamless application of state of the art
machine learning methods, and (iii) the mathematical exploration of machine
learning algorithms such as deep neural networks and generative adversarial
networks in the context of these inferential problems. The developed
understanding will be used to explore the effect of early life exposure to metal
mixtures (like lead, arsenic, and cadmium exposures through drinking water) on
late-life neurological diseases (such as Alzheimer's disease) and the potential
role of high dimensional biomarkers such as EV miRNA's that might modulate such
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.