* 1941568
* CAREER: Identifying primary and secondary drivers of cyanotoxin production utilizing the sediment record and paleolimnology
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Matthew Waters, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 06/30/2025
* USD 639,971.00

Lakes around the world are experiencing the excessive growth of algae and
cyanobacteria. The causes for these changes are not fully known. In many lakes,
the cyanobacteria are capable of producing toxins (cyanotoxins), which can
negatively affect lake organisms and human health. While monitoring programs and
laboratory experiments have increased in recent years, very little is known
about the cyanotoxin ecology and the history of cyanotoxin production prior to
human disturbances. This CAREER award will analyze sediment cores collected from
over 25 lakes throughout the SE USA and Mexico and used to reconstruct
cyanotoxin production and other lake important ecological factors through time.
Three timescales will be investigated including modern human disturbance (past
~100 years), pre-modern disturbance (500 to 5000 years), and ancient human
disturbance during Maya occupation around lakes in Mexico. This award will also
provide educational materials, mentoring, and training to students from high
school through graduate school with a focus on students from rural areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will test fundamental theories about
state changes in lake ecosystems and the potential for early warning signs
termed flickering by using paleolimnology to establish baseline conditions and
past trajectories of cyanotoxin production in lake ecosystems throughout the
Holocene. Unique experiments will be conducted using sediment-recorded historic
disturbances of humans, nutrients, temperature and combinations of each to
determine historic drivers of cyanotoxin production. A better understanding of
cyanotoxin ecology during cultural and natural ecosystem change will improve the
ability of forecasting models to predict how future climate, land use change,
and lake management will influence cyanotoxin production as well as establish
paleo-histories of cyanotoxin production. The establishment of cyanotoxins as a
sedimentary tool could improve global paleolimnological investigations focusing
on eutrophication as well as the monitoring of sediments for cyanotoxins.
Finally, the measurement of cyanotoxins on Maya-occupied lakes could provide new
understanding to the relationship between ancient societies and water quality as
an analog to modern cultural eutrophication. A tier-mentoring system will be
implemented to train high school, undergraduate and graduate students that will
integrate various aspects of the project into educational curriculum including a
study abroad trip to lake sites in Mexico, an undergraduate lab course on
sediment analysis, and connections with high school students through classroom
exercises. Results from this research will aid in the understanding, prediction,
and impact of cyanotoxins linked to humans and lake
eutrophication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.