* 1941748
* CAREER: Ultrafast molecular separation and integrated near-field light-metal-fluorophore interactions for biomarker detection at point-of-care
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Dharmakeerthi Nawarathna, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2023
* USD 481,939.00

Cancer, obesity, and opioid abuse pose a combined threat to the health of the
people in the United States, affecting a significant portion and costing more
than $250 billion per year in medical expenses. The unavailability of sensing
technologies addressing the fundamental molecular changes related to disease
initiation, progression, and therapeutic interventions is a critical roadblock
for successfully combating these diseases. MicroRNA (miRNAs) are short non-
coding RNA fragments (~17–25 nucleotides) that are involved in post-
transcriptional regulation of gene expression either by degrading or repressing
translation of multiple target mRNAs. Since miRNAs are involved in early gene
regulations that initiate biochemical cascades for many diseases, they could
provide reliable and clinically relevant information earlier than other
downstream biomarkers (e.g., antigens). Also, miRNA biomarkers are stably
expressed in circulating blood and, therefore, miRNA detection could be used to
develop sensitive, minimally invasive, and low-cost diagnostics tests.
Unfortunately, miRNAs have not yet been translated or utilized in the clinical
diagnosis of any disease. This is in part due to the lack of sensitive and low-
cost miRNA detection approaches that are applicable at clinics, hospitals, and
medical centers. The outcome of this research plan will be a complete, ready-to-
go miRNA detection platform that includes data collection, quality control, and
built-in statistical methods for data analysis. In addition, proposed broader
impact activities aim to introduce research into the undergraduate electrical
engineering curriculum of North Dakota State University. Also, outreach efforts
will aim to attract underrepresented groups (middle school girls and Native
American community college students) to the field of engineering by introducing
biosensor concepts and providing an opportunity to produce a technical solution
to a societal or community problem. The PI will also work with high school STEM
teachers in Native American schools to help them develop learning plans for
their students. These activities will broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM education and the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of this project are to study three
fundamental concepts in the areas of small nucleic acid-field (electric and
temperature) interactions and near-field light-to-metal-to-fluorophore energy
transfer: (1) study of fundamental nucleic acid and field (electric and
temperature) interactions to selectively separate fluorophore-labeled short
(~17–25 nucleotide) miRNA-DNA duplex molecules from other single-stranded
nucleic acid molecules of similar lengths and concentrate them near electrodes,
(2) study of AC electric fields to maximize each near-field light-metal-
fluorophore interaction that contributes to enhancing the fluorescence intensity
of fluorophores, and 3) integration of multiple interactions to enhance the
fluorescence intensity well beyond current capabilities. This new knowledge will
be used to develop a template for a universal biosensor that detects any
individual or combination of biomarker-types in any buffer. Specifically, the
proposed 5-year project will develop miRNA-based point-of-care technology to
address the critical need for the analysis of clinical samples.This project is
jointly funded by the Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems Division
(ECCS), and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.