* 1941062
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Petrochronology, Magma Dynamics, and Volcanic Unrest at the Three Sisters Volcanic Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Helene Le Mevel, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2024
* USD 19,223.00

Volcanic eruptions have to potential to threaten agriculture, infrastructure,
aviation, and human life at local to global scales. These events represent the
intersection of geologic processes that proceed over thousands to millions of
years and destabilization of the volcanic reservoir which may occur rapidly over
only days to years. These processes may be interrogated through retrospective
geologic studies of past eruptions and geophysical monitoring, respectively.
This project is focused on integrating these approaches at the Three Sisters
Volcanic Complex, a “very high threat potential” volcanic system located in the
western United States. The goals are to elucidate hazards specific to the Three
Sisters through the investigation of recent eruptions and volcanic unrest and
produce new conceptual and quantitative models that can be applied to understand
the hazards and improve eruption forecasting for active volcanoes globally. The
results of this project will be disseminated to the general public through
animation and videos published on-line and a self-guided geology hiking guide
made available to the many recreational visitors to the Three Sister’s
Wilderness Area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linking the processes that catalyze the
growth, evolution, destabilization, and eruption of magma reservoirs to their
expression as observable unrest represents an important scientific frontier that
requires inter-disciplinary collaborations across the geosciences. Parallel
advances in geophysics, petrochronology, and numerical modeling have made
substantial contributions to the understanding of magma reservoir processes.
Yet, these methods remain poorly integrated. The unusual confluence of frequent
late Pleistocene to late Holocene eruptions, which range in composition from
basaltic andesite to rhyolite, with modern volcanic unrest make the Three
Sisters a prime natural laboratory at which to pursue this integrated approach.
This project will produce new crystal-scale petrochronologic data for lavas and
associated explosive products erupted from the Three Sisters Volcanic Complex,
central Oregon Cascades, during the last ca. 50,000 yr. These data will inform
interpretations of: 1) the petrogenesis of the rhyolite and dacite lavas erupted
at the Three Sisters and if there is a genetic relationship between these rock
types; 2) the longevity and physical integration of the magma reservoir(s) that
produced the late Pleistocene flare-up of intermediate and silicic volcanism;
and 3) the nature and tempo of the processes that preceded, and potentially
triggered, these eruptions. In parallel, a high-resolution Bouguer gravity
survey will be conducted to constrain the physical structure of the modern magma
reservoir. These new geochemical and geophysical data will be integrated with
the existing geodetic observations of recent uplift in coupled models of magma
dynamics and crustal deformation. Accordingly, these observations and models
will quantitatively test if recent unrest at Three Sisters reflects similar
processes to those associated with the late-Pleistocene
volcanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.