* 1941526
* PFI-TT: Development of a Novel Audio Technology that Applies Dynamic System Variability to Create Musical Variations for Personal and Public Applications.
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Diana Dabby, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to create a system that analyzes and
generates sequences of symbols. Symbolic systems transmit information in a
variety of applications, such as DNA sequences, synthetic biology, and
combinatorial chemistry. It also forms the backbone of music, which can be
viewed as highly context-dependent sequence of symbols where each note or event
foreshadows those yet to come. The proposed technology offers new ways of
engaging with music, for both music streaming service listeners and musicians
(comprising 26% of the US population) alike. This technology will address the
music industry and for many additional applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project exploits nonlinear chaotic system variability to generate
variations of context-dependent symbol sequences, such as those comprising
musical works. While many applications require methods to eliminate chaotic
behavior, a dissipative system operating in its `chaotic regime’ can be viewed
as offering a natural mechanism for variability, due to the sensitivity of its
solutions to initial conditions. This built-in variability can be exploited by a
chaotic mapping technique that transforms an ordered input into a variant-
ordered output with potential outcomes ranging from high similarity to the
original work to significant mutation. The method includes parsing the input
into an ordered sequence of original elements {Ni}, which are sequentially
indexed by successive integer values i=1,…, Imax. For each i, a selection
algorithm determines whether Ni is a candidate for modification or replacement,
thus becoming a “receptor element.” A substitution or modifying algorithm then
operates on at least one of the receptor elements by varying or replacing it
with a substitution element. The resulting ordered set of original and
substituted or modified elements comprises the variant
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.