* 1941330
* 2020 NSF ENG CAREER Proposal Writing Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Rosemarie Wesson, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2021
* USD 99,998.00

This award supports the organization of a National Science Foundation
Directorate for Engineering 2020 Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) Proposal Writing Workshop. The workshop will be held in the Washington,
D.C. area in the Spring of 2020, and it is expected that there will be about 300
attendees. The workshop will take place over one-and-a-half days and will
include interactive sessions on good proposal writing practices, seminars by
previous CAREER awardees, a mock CAREER proposal panel review, and a review
session during which the attendees will have a chance to obtain feedback on
project summaries of their own draft CAREER proposals. The attendees will also
have an opportunity to interact with current NSF Program Directors both in one-
on-one and in mock panel sessions.

This workshop will help to prepare CAREER program eligible faculty for careers
in education and research by giving them tools and skills of good proposal
writing for submissions to the CAREER program as well as core NSF programs. The
objectives of the workshop include training for junior faculty with an emphasis
on women and underrepresented minorities in engineering. A special additional
emphasis will be placed on encouraging CAREER program eligible faculty from
non-"Research-1" institutions to apply for participation. The workshop will
serve as an introduction to NSF for many new researchers. The workshop will help
participants to clarify their research and education career plans and to
understand the need to clearly articulate these plans to external reviewers. In
addition, the workshop includes mock panel sessions to give participants the
experience of simulated panel evaluation discussions. All of the content and
experiences will help attendees enrich their skills for writing successful
research proposals on impactful research that benefits societal needs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.