* 1941440
* SBP: Disentangling Implicit and Explicit Bias from Responses to Exemplars and Categories
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Paul Eastwick, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 377,164.00

Well-documented biases in hiring and admissions decisions often prevent
qualified individuals from participating in the workforce and in education. Many
current attempts to address this problem focus on reducing “implicit” or
“unconscious” bias. At the same time, scientists are increasingly debating and
critiquing implicit bias as a concept. While awareness of implicit biases has
become commonplace, the associated science does not yet provide a solid
foundation on which to build intervention efforts. The central goal of this
project is to strengthen the scientific understanding of implicit bias by
identifying differences in how people respond to groups and group labels, versus
specific individuals and individual targets. It will reveal whether researchers
and organizations wishing to address bias should be focusing on “unconscious”
bias, or whether more effective interventions could be designed by focusing on
bias toward groups versus individuals. The project will help address popular
misconceptions of implicit bias from our theoretical understanding of how bias
operates. In addition, it will generate valuable insights for addressing bias in
real-world settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves 12 experiments
that will tackle a key confound that obstructs the ability to draw strong
conclusions about the research on implicit bias: the confound between type of
measure (i.e., explicit vs. implicit) and stimuli type (i.e., categories vs.
exemplars). Traditionally, research examining explicit bias typically requires
participants to respond to abstract social categories (e.g., the categories
Black people and White people), whereas implicit measures typically involve
specific exemplars of those categories (e.g., faces of Black and White
individuals). The current project uses computer-based reaction time tasks and
behavioral measures to probe core themes regarding implicit-explicit relations.
For example, do low correlations between common implicit and explicit measures
of bias reflect (a) differences in processing awareness or do those low
correlations derive from (b) the differences in stimuli type? Moreover, do
category-focused evaluations and exemplar-focused evaluations have distinct
consequences? By identifying the distinction between explicit and implicit
measures on the one hand, and the distinction between categories and exemplars
on the other, we can gain new insights into the causes and consequences of bias,
with important implications for both theory, practice, and discrimination
intervention programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.