* 1941413
* Workshop on Department Plans for Broadening Participation in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nancy Amato, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 116,008.00

The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign proposes to host and facilitate a
Workshop on Department Plans for Broadening Participation in Computing.
Broadening participation in computing (BPC) is an important priority for the
National Science Foundation's Directorate for Computer and Information Science
and Engineering (CISE) and, in furtherance of that priority, CISE, for some of
its programs, is piloting a requirement that proposers include a BPC Plan with
their proposal. As part of that effort, CISE is encouraging departments to
create Department BPC Plans that their researchers can leverage in their
individual proposals. This workshop will assist departments in developing those
plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will host teams of 2-3
representatives, including the department chair, from 20-25 departments. The
workshop will allow participants to share their own experiences with BPC
activities, inform participants about the components of a BPC plan, let them
know about ongoing and successful BPC activities that they can partner with, and
assist them in developing and refining their own departmental BPC plan. After
the workshop, a small team will spend additional time developing a white paper
to provide guidance to departments in developing their BPC plans. Once the
participants' plans are completed, they will be encouraged to post them on
BPCnet.org as exemplars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.