* 1941292
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Accelerating Thwaites Ecosystem Impacts for the Southern Ocean (ARTEMIS)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Pierre St-Laurent, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2024
* USD 157,463.00

Part I: Non-technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;The Amundsen Sea is adjacent to the
West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) and hosts the most productive coastal ecosystem
in all of Antarctica, with vibrant green waters visible from space and an
atmospheric carbon dioxide uptake rate ten times higher than the Southern Ocean
average. The region is also an area highly impacted by climate change and
glacier ice loss. Upwelling of warm deep water is causing melt under the ice
sheet, which is contributing to sea level rise and added nutrient inputs to the
region. This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science
Foundationâ€™s Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment
Research Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead
Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be
submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest
proportion of the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each
Agency funds the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with
its own country. In this collaboration, the US team will undertake
biogeochemical sampling alongside a UK-funded physical oceanographic program to
evaluate the contribution of micronutrients such as iron from glacial meltwater
to ecosystem productivity and carbon cycling. Measurements will be incorporated
into computer simulations to examine ecosystem responses to further glacial
melting. Results will help predict future impacts on the region and determine
whether the climate sensitivity of the Amundsen Sea ecosystem represents the
front line of processes generalizable to the greater Antarctic. This study is
aligned with the large International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration (ITGC) and
will make data available to the full scientific community. The program will
provide training for undergraduate, graduate, post-doctoral, and early-career
scientists in both science and communication. The team will also develop out-of-
school science experiences for middle and high schoolers related to climate
change and Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical summary:
&lt;br/&gt;The Amundsen Sea hosts the most productive polynya in all of
Antarctica, with atmospheric carbon dioxide uptake rates ten times higher than
the Southern Ocean average. The region is vulnerable to climate change,
experiencing rapid losses in sea ice, a changing icescape and some of the
fastest melting glaciers flowing from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, a process
being studied by the International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration. The
biogeochemical composition of the outflow from the glaciers surrounding the
Amundsen Sea is largely unstudied. In collaboration with a UK-funded physical
oceanographic program, ARTEMIS is using shipboard sampling for trace metals,
carbonate system, nutrients, organic matter, and microorganisms, with
biogeochemical sensors on autonomous vehicles to gather data needed to
understand the impact of the melting ice sheet on both the coastal ecosystem and
the regional carbon cycle. These measurements, along with access to the advanced
physical oceanographic measurements will allow this team to 1) bridge the gap
between biogeochemistry and physics by adding estimates of fluxes and transport
of limiting micronutrients; 2) provide biogeochemical context to broaden
understanding of the global significance of ocean-ice shelf interactions; 3)
determine processes and scales of variability in micronutrient supply that drive
the ten-fold increase in carbon dioxide uptake, and 4) identify small-scale
processes key to iron and carbon cycling using optimized field sampling.
Observations will be integrated into an ocean model to enhance predictive
capabilities of regional ocean function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.