* 1941101
* PFI-RP: Increasing the stability of large-scale electric power systems through an adaptive measurement-driven controller prototype.
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Yilu Liu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 04/30/2024
* USD 540,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project, if successful, will be in the
availability of an adaptive and reliable controller for large-scale electric
power systems. The proposed controller is different from the traditional
physical-based model by using an advanced measurement-based approach that will
make it adaptive and, therefore, able to provide optimal control under different
operating conditions. The proposed controller is expected to significantly
mitigate the risk of widespread outages in electric power systems and related
economic and societal losses. The controller is also expected to enable
operators to maintain electric power system stability, increase the capacity
utilization of existing transmission lines and reduce operating and maintenance
costs. In addition, the proposed controller is expected to reduce electricity
costs for consumers in remote areas and enable the integration of renewable
energy sources electric power systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will develop an innovative adaptive wide-area damping controller (WADC)
prototype to suppress low-frequency oscillations in large-scale power systems.
The project intends to address technical challenges that prevent the application
of such a controller to power systems. A robust system identification algorithm
will be designed to eliminate the impact of measurement noise and error. A real-
time delay compensation and measurement processing technology will be developed
to handle time delay and data loss. Cyber-attack detection methods and
associated mitigation measures will be developed to ensure the security of this
real-time control. The prototype will be demonstrated on a real-time simulation
platform that mimics a realistic power system operating environment using
realistic grid models, demonstrating a new measurement-driven approach in large-
scale power system modeling and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.