* 1941613
* EAGER: Collaborative Assembly of Large and Comprehensive Causal Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Klaus Mueller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 198,971.00

People are highly motivated to find explanations and solutions to address the
pressing problems facing our country and our world, but they often lack the
proper analytical tools to move beyond limited-scope analyses, guesswork, and
instincts. This project aims to tackle this problem by developing a set of tools
that make use of the massive amount of data that is freely available on the web.
Anyone with a modern web browser will be able to run these tools and take part
in a collaborative effort to construct comprehensive causal models for complex
socio-economic and other systems. Uncovering the causal relations that exist
among the variables in multivariate datasets is one of the ultimate goals in
data analytics. A causal assertion separates cause and effect, for example, it
states that "smoking causes cancer", but not the reverse. This is what makes
causal models more definite than correlation. Causal models are attractive since
they are inherently interpretable. They are able to directly explain the complex
interactions that exist in the underlying data. The online tools developed in
this project will take causal modeling to the next level. They will support
collaboration in constructing comprehensive causal models of unprecedented scale
for complex socio-economic and other systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory project aims to develop a set of tools that use freely available,
web-scale data for the collaborative construction of comprehensive causal models
of unprecedented scale for complex socio-economic and other systems. The project
will break new grounds on how the creative energies of experts and non-experts
can be harnessed to (1) identify datasets on the web that can add novel aspects
(variables) to an evolving causal model, and (2) integrate these novel aspects
(variables) as new nodes and causal edges into the model. Since building a
complex, large-scale causal model can become difficult as the model grows in
size, the project will produce several new automated tools that will hide this
complexity from the human users, aid them in dealing with incomplete or adverse
data, and provide inspiration for possible refinements. At the same time, novel
techniques will also be developed that ensure validity and correctness of the
evolving causal model in the presence of concurrent users. In order to hide
complexity, the project will produce new techniques that can break a large
causal model into a set of human-manageable subgraphs which will nevertheless
retain sufficient information about the particular thematic aspect to be
refined. A subgraph will be visualized in the form of a causal flowchart that
can effectively show the propagation of causal relationships, and support users
who may lack sufficient domain knowledge, intuition, or other helpful
information to identify promising variables that could make the model more
expressive. The project will develop new techniques based on the paradigm of
word embeddings to assist users in this discovery process. Word embeddings map
words mentioned in similar contexts in large text corpora into close
neighborhoods in high-dimensional space. A 2D map-like visualization will be
developed that maps words (denoting candidate variables) in the causal
subgraph's thematic context near the labels of semantically related variables
already in the model. Human model editors can then inspect this visual map of
words (candidate variables), hypothesize possible new causal relations from
these new variables, search for associated data on the web or in the evolving
causal model, and test and embed the new causal relations into the subgraph
using the system's causal inference engine. Behind the scenes, an automated
causal network manager will then derive causal edges to other variables and so
fully evolve the model. Since automated causal inference in the presence of
observed data can occasionally generate wrongly directed or undirected edges,
the interface will also provide new paradigms that allow human model appraisers
to verify the generated edges and suggest changes. A set of carefully designed
user experiments will be conducted to verify and optimize all system components.
The research is expected to yield new theoretical knowledge and algorithms on
human centered computational causal reasoning and the utilization of the vast
body of data available online. It will also deliver new insights on how humans
interact with the tools for deriving and exploring causal models. The platform
and tools generated in this research will be applicable to multiple fields of
knowledge and enable construction of causal models capable of explaining how the
various aspects and fields relate in a larger context. The developed tools will
be made available as part of the online platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.