* 1941194
* PFI-RP: Advanced Nanopositioning Stages for High-Throughput Semiconductor Metrology
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Aviv Balan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 04/30/2024
* USD 764,964.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to enable high-throughput inspection
of semiconductor wafers via unprecedented positioning performance at an
economically viable price-point. Process control, such as inspection of defects
on semiconductor wafers, is currently a bottleneck for semiconductor
manufacturing yield. Market demand for higher performance, increased
functionality, smaller size, and lower prices in electronic chips has continued
the push the industry towards smaller linewidths (currently at the 7 nm node)
and more complex chip designs. This has resulted in an increasingly large number
of defects per wafer, which impacts the chip functionality and therefore overall
manufacturing yield. While it is desirable to inspect and evaluate more defects
more frequently during the fabrication process to achieve high yield, the
current slow rates of inspection lead to a throughput bottleneck. The technology
developed via this project aims to overcome this tradeoff between inspection
throughput and yield. The societal impact of this project will ultimately be in
the form of cheaper electronics (processors, memory, sensors, etc.) that will
broaden access to computers, mobile devices, automobiles, robotics, automation,
and Internet of Things (IoT) devices, among others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project aims to develop nano-positioning technology that achieves a
range of several millimeters of motion, high speed, smaller settling time,
nanometric accuracy, and low heat generation – specifications previously
considered impractical in a compact and cost-effective package. This project
will develop nano-positioning stages that meet stringent motion specifications
motivated by the needs of the semiconductor industry through innovations in
parallel kinematic design, non-linear flexure mechanics, and structural dynamics
with novel electromagnetic actuator architectures. These advanced nano-
positioning stages will be incorporated within semiconductor process control
equipment to rapidly move wafers from one defect to
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.