* 1941456
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The development of numerical cognition and linguistic number use: Insights from sign languages
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Nina Semushina, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2022
* USD 11,131.00

Early language deprivation too often characterizes the circumstances of deaf
children born in hearing families with little access to language in any form,
spoken or signed. Language deprivation has long lasting negative effects on
cognitive, educational and life outcomes. The goal of our project is to study
the effects of language deprivation on the acquisition of numeracy and
linguistic number use in sign language: an understudied and important topic. Our
research can potentially enrich theoretical understanding of the relationship
between language and number. The practical implication of the research is to
provide specialists in deaf education with more information on the strengths and
weaknesses of number cognition in students who are deaf and experience language
at a late age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the four studies of this dissertation,
quantification through sign language in native (L1) signers of American Sign
Language (ASL) is compared to that of late first-language learners (LL1),
congenitally deaf individuals who had no access to natural sign in early life.
In the first two studies, we investigate the factors that may influence number
acquisition in signers: the potential complexity of (modality-specific) number
marking in sign languages and the interaction between number systems and
simultaneous morphology (rather than sequential morphology). Study 1
investigates iconicity and the structural properties of number systems of
worldâ€™s sign languages. Study 2 investigates the interaction of iconic numeral
system and morpho-phonological constraints in plural marking in ASL. Study 3
looks at the automatic processing of number expressed both linguistically (ASL
signs) and in conventional mathematic symbols (Arabic digits) using the Number
Stroop Test paradigm. Study 4 investigates the production and comprehension of
selected simultaneous, morphological constructions used in ASL (that mark exact
and non-exact plural) in selected classifier constructions by L1 and LL1
learners in comparison to overt number marking through
numerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.