* 1941679
* CAREER: Designing for Youth Invisible Work in Families
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Jason Yip, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2025
* USD 431,151.00

This research study examines how youth in families of lower socioeconomic status
(SES) do "invisible work," based on their ability to use information
communication technologies (ICT). Socioeconomic inequalities are increasing in
US families, leading to higher pressure on lower-SES families to find ways to
make ends meet. As a result, parents and adult family members greatly rely on
their children to take care of family responsibilities and critical needs. For
some youth, high priority family responsibilities are a part of growing up, such
as acting as a caretaker for younger siblings and being a language translator
for English-language learning parents. Because of lower-SES family high reliance
on this "youth invisible work," young people are facing challenges in reducing
their own stress, anxiety, sleeplessness, and depression. The overarching
research questions guiding this project are: (1) What kinds of invisible work do
youth perform with ICTs to solve family information problems around health and
finances? (2) What design patterns, techniques, and frameworks can be used to
embody the socio-ecological supports, funds of knowledge, and family resilience
needed to promote youths' invisible work? (3) How can design patterns for
invisible work be instantiated into sociotechnical systems that meet the needs
of multiple users and designers? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will use a
value-sensitive design framework to engage in empirical, conceptual, and
technical investigations. Empirical investigations will examine two lines of
inquiry for online collaborative search by lower-SES families around (1) health
information, such as mental health resources, preventative care, chronic
illness, and medical insurance access; and (2) financial information, including
job access, online banking, taxes, and college financial aid. Conceptual
investigations will utilize participatory design methods with families, youth,
and community stakeholders to develop artifacts and models around collaborations
involving family online search and brokering. Technical investigations will
focus on technology probes in the home and field studies in community centers
and libraries to evaluate higher-fidelity prototypes. This study will result in
theory generation, design practices, design cases, teaching materials, and
professional resources to support integration of youth invisible work into ICT
research and design. Educational activities will train human-computer
interaction students in qualitative and design methods to provide future
designers with conceptual and practical tools to integrate invisible work as a
form of design practice. Assessment will focus on impacts of these activities to
prepare students to integrate invisible work as a design priority in ICT
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.