* 1941892
* Phase I IUCRC Oregon State University: Center on Pervasive Personalized Intelligence (PPI)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Eugene Zhang, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 05/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to the ecosystem of computing devices (e.g.
cellphones, household appliances, vehicles, etc.) connected to each other via
the internet. The goal of the Center is to enable the next generation of IoT
systems to be more proactive and personalized without compromising security and
privacy, thereby improving decision making, increasing efficiency and enabling
new types of computing applications. This Pervasive Personalized Intelligence
(PPI) will be brought about by collaborative research efforts between industry
and Oregon State University (OSU), which will advance the areas of Artificial
Intelligence, Computer Security and Privacy and
Visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at OSU will investigate
foundational research under three thrusts. First, under the AI thrust,
investigators will develop new AI algorithms in anomaly detection, transfer
learning, time series analysis and explainable AI. Second, for the security and
privacy thrust, investigators will explore methods for private computation, in
which several parties use private data in a computation, and learn only the
result of the computation without learning any other private information.
Finally, under the visualization thrust, investigators will explore methods to
help data stakeholders, research scientists, and policymakers to understand
their data and/or make sense of decisions made by AI
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in IoT will impact many facets of
everyday life. The PPI Center explores research thrusts in Artificial
Intelligence, Visualization and Computer Security and Privacy that are broadly
applicable beyond IoT systems to a variety of other scientific domains such as
environmental science, agriculture, biology and robotics. The research outputs
will be disseminated through publications, research presentations to industry
and academia, open-source code and industrial collaborations. The Center will
train graduate students through hands-on experience on projects relevant to
industrial collaborators. The educational activities include summer schools for
industry engineers and K-12 outreach through partnerships with OSU’s
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PPI Center will maintain a publicly-
accessible project repository that will store open source code, publicly
available datasets, papers and other research outputs that can be disseminated
to the general public. This repository will be maintained for the lifetime of
the center and the URL will be http://ppicenter.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.