* 1941073
* Regulation of glutamate receptor trafficking by VER/VEGF receptors in the nervous system of C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Peter Juo, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2024
* USD 996,523.00

This project studies how a molecule that was originally described as a blood
vessel development growth factor also controls communication between nerve cells
in the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans. While all the molecular pathways
studied here are present in vertebrate animals including humans, these
experiments are conducted in roundworms because they have a compact and defined
nervous system, are amenable to genetic manipulation and, in particular, do not
have any blood vessels. This makes it possible to avoid confounding effects that
changes in vascular development might indirectly have on neural development.
Results from this project will advance scientific understanding of nerve cell
signaling and plasticity; this research may also identify new genes and
molecular pathways important for learning and memory. A complementary outreach
plan will develop an instructional research module for use at local public high
schools, and a full-semester neurobiology lab course for undergraduates where
students have a real opportunity to generate new scientific knowledge that could
develop into an independent research project. In the process of performing the
proposed research aims, this project will also train graduate students and
provide hands-on independent research opportunities for undergraduates, for
educators, and for under-represented minorities in a dedicated summer
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modulation of synaptic strength via activity-
dependent changes in glutamate receptor (GluR) abundance at synapses is a major
mechanism underlying learning and memory. While previous work has identified the
molecular mechanisms that directly traffic GluRs to and from synapses, less is
known about in-vivo secreted factors that act on these receptor trafficking
pathways. Preliminary studies from the Principal Investigatorâ€™s laboratory have
used an optogenetic glutamatergic behavior screen in C. elegans to identify the
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor (VEGFR) homologs ver-1 and ver-4,
which are activated by the secreted VEGF homolog PVF-1. Data also suggest that
VER-1 and VER-4, and the ligand PVF-1, regulate both cell surface levels of the
GluR GLR-1 and glutamatergic behaviors in C. elegans. The goal of this proposal
is to investigate whether regulated secretion of PVF-1/VEGF activates neuronal
VER/VEGFR signaling to modulate GLR-1/GluR recycling to the cell surface,
thereby impacting behavior. C. elegans is a particularly suitable organism for
these studies because of their lack of vasculature, allowing these experiments
on the neural effects of VEGFRs to be free of confounds from the vasculature.
This work will elucidate the mechanisms by which VER signaling within neurons
regulates GLR-1 trafficking, and how PVF-1 expression or secretion are regulated
in vivo to modulate GLR-1 abundance and behavior. This study may reveal novel
details about the fundamental and conserved mechanisms through which VEGFRs
contribute to nervous system function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.