* 1941813
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Iconicity on Phonetic and Phonological Processes in American Sign Language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Amelia Becker, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2023
* USD 15,574.00

This dissertation research project examines a difference in the structure of
spoken and signed languages. Although they are gestural/visual rather than
auditory, signed languages, such as American Sign Language (ASL), are full
languages with equal expressive complexity. This has only been recently
recognized, however, so ASL research is in its infancy. Comparing signed and
spoken languages can reveal the basic cognitive principles that underlie human
language. The present study focuses on iconicity, which means that a word or
sign resembles its meaning. For example, the sounds in the English word 'pop'
mimic a popping noise, and the arrangement of the arm and fingers in the ASL
sign 'tree' resemble a tree trunk and branches. Most spoken words are not
iconic, but iconic signs are the norm rather than the exception in ASL. This
study asks whether iconicity impacts the grammatical patterns of ASL. Do iconic
and non-iconic signs function differently? Answering this question will help us
better understand how the physical form of a language (speech or sign) impacts
its mental organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer this question,
grammatical patterns that occur in natural, everyday signing are compared in how
they apply to iconic and non-iconic signs. Deaf adult participants are video
recorded responding to open-ended prompts about Deaf cultural events. They then
watch video clips of ASL signs and sentences in which specific grammatical
patterns apply to iconic and non-iconic signs. They respond to each clip,
indicating whether the ASL they saw is grammatically correct. If participants
apply grammatical patterns differently to iconic versus non-iconic signs, this
is evidence that iconicity is part of the grammatical structure of ASL, not just
of individual signs, suggesting a fundamental difference from the structure of
spoken languages. But if grammatical patterns apply in the same way to iconic
and non-iconic signs, this suggests that even though individual signs are more
iconic than spoken language words, this property does not impact the language’s
grammatical structure. These findings will deepen our understanding of human
language beyond what we can learn through spoken language research alone. This
knowledge can inform a wide range of applications, such as language acquisition
for Deaf babies and training for ASL interpreters. The video narratives
collected in the study will be made publicly available and can also serve
research in language teaching, interpretation, and Deaf cultural
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.