* 1941720
* CAREER: Investigation of Beginning Teachers' Expertise to Teach Mathematics via Reasoning and Proof
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Orly Buchbinder, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 05/31/2025
* USD 706,790.00

Supporting teachers in integrating reasoning and proving as a mathematical
practice into secondary math classes is a persistent challenge. These
disciplinary practices are challenging to learn and to teach, and are frequently
taught in a procedural way that is limited to the context of high school
geometry courses. While much is known about the robust nature of reasoning and
proving in mathematics and the content knowledge needed to teach it, less is
known about how beginning teachers develop that knowledge and how that knowledge
is translated into classroom practice. This project aims to develop the
knowledge to teach reasoning and proving with secondary teacher candidates, and
to follow them into they first years of independent practice to better
understand how they are using that knowledge. The goals of the project are to
better understand how beginning teachers' knowledge, dispositions, and proof-
related practices evolve over time, and how the sociocultural context and
support structures of the schools teachers are in influences their teaching of
reasoning and proving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three
stages: preservice teacher preparation, the teaching internship, and novice
teaching (the first two years of independent practice). During the teacher
preparation phase, preservice teachers will take part in a capstone course
focused on reasoning and proving, including enacting lessons in related to
reasoning and proving in local middle schools. Using the Mathematical Knowledge
for Teaching Proof framework, teachers' knowledge and dispositions towards
reasoning and proving will be assessed through pre- and post-course assessment
and surveys. Their example lessons will be video recorded and analyzed with
respect to proof content, and they will engage in post-course interviews. In the
next phase, during year-long student teaching internships, they will be asked to
integrate reasoning and proving into their classroom practice. A set of target
lessons will be recorded and analyzed, with full unit artifacts being collected
and analyzed and pre- and post-unit interviews with the teacher conducted. The
third phase follows teachers into their first two years of teaching practice and
asks them to identify two units related to reasoning and proving to serve as
data sources. The research team will conduct start and end of year interviews
with the teachers, collect video recordings of the units and associated
artifacts, administer a dispositions towards proof survey, and conduct pre- and
post-unit interviews. Teachers will also participate in a professional learning
community designed to support their teaching related to reasoning and proving.
Data will be analyzed across the three phases using case study methodology to
characterize patterns of knowledge, dispositions, and practice related o
reasoning and proving. The project will also make available educational
materials related to the capstone course and the professional learning community
that will further support the development of teachers' knowledge and capacity
for teaching reasoning and proving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.