* 1941329
* Conference: Increasing Participation and Competitiveness of Minority-Serving Institutions in Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Rocio Chavela Guerra, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2022
* USD 350,001.00

The American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) will host a conference
with the goal of helping Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) increase their
competitiveness to obtain public research funds, ultimately contributing to the
growth of a more capable and diverse research workforce. Serving high
proportions of nontraditional students and students of color, MSIs increase
workforce readiness and contribute to increased representation of these
underserved groups in post-baccalaureate pathways. The conference will be held
in the Washington, DC, metropolitan area in fall 2019, hosting approximately 120
representatives from MSIs across the nation. The conference program will focus
on (a) increasing awareness about funding opportunities within the computer and
information science and engineering domain (an area of ever-increasing economic
and social impact); and (b) cultivating professional relationships,
collaborations, and partnerships among conference participants.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;ASEE staff will consult a three-member planning committee,
representing different MSI types, to plan and organize the conference. The
conference program will include plenary talks, breakout sessions, and networking
sessions. The interactive components of the conference will be designed and
structured to emphasize collaboration and to maximize cross-pollination among
participants. Conference participants will provide feedback through an online
survey, distributed via email immediately following the conference. ASEE will
produce a written summary of the meeting that includes summaries of the plenary
talks, summary analyses of relevant breakout session discussions, and results
from the post-conference survey. The conference is intended to result in
emerging collaborations and partnerships among MSIs that support the development
and submission of competitive research proposals to computer and information
science and engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.