* 1941555
* CAREER: THE IMPACTS OF ANTHROPOGENICALLY-DERIVED SUBSIDIES ON FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEMS
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Krista Capps, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,184,890.00

Rivers and streams provide important services, such as drinking water,
fisheries, and recreational opportunities. Yet, the integrity of rivers and
streams throughout the globe is compromised by pollution from aging and obsolete
wastewater infrastructure. Currently, there is limited understanding of how
human waste affects stream communities and ecosystem processes. The project will
integrate field observations, experiments, and modelling, to advance our
understanding of how rivers and streams are affected by wastewater
infrastructure, and will provide new insights into interactions between civil
and environmental engineering and ecosystem science. This CAREER award will
support the training and development of high school students, graduate students,
and a postdoctoral researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the spatial
and temporal variation in the factors influencing riverine structure and
function is essential to predict how fresh waters will respond to continued
anthropogenic change. This CAREER award will couple field observations with
field- and lab-based experiments and modelling, to examine: 1) spatial and
temporal variation in the quality, quantity, and relative volume of wastewater
entering river systems, 2) the effects of wastewater on seasonal and annual
patterns of metabolic processes flowing waters, 3) the influence of interactions
between wastewater and ambient nutrient concentrations on trophic relationships
and on the tissue and mineralization stoichiometry of consumers, and 4) the
extent to which consumers transport wastewater-derived energy and elements to
resource-limited systems within river networks. The award will integrate
wastewater discharge into a spatial subsides framework to support more accurate
predictions for how wastewater structures aquatic communities and alters
biogeochemical processes in river networks. Moreover, the award will generate
the data needed to compare seasonal and annual patterns in riverine metabolic
processes in large, tropical rivers. The research will also test how flexibility
in the trophic and stoichiometric traits of consumers governs the role they play
in biogeochemical cycling under variable environmental conditions. Educational
modules and service-learning projects in introductory environmental science and
advanced ecology courses will be developed. High school students will be trained
in stream ecology and provided internships with the local government and
freshwater conservation organizations. Additionally, this research will have
important management implications, as governments throughout the globe are
challenged to fix wastewater effects on water quality, human health, and
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.