* 1941244
* PFI-RP: Materials and System Design for Thermal management in Asphalt Pavements Using Solar-Geothermal Energy
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Huiming Yin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 05/31/2024
* USD 566,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to advance a new cost-effective, safe,
and sustainable technology to reduce the surface temperature variation for
enhancing the safety, lifespan, and service quality of pavements. Asphalt
pavements are damaged or degraded by strong summer sunlight or winter snow plows
and salts/sands. The proposed architecture is such that in summer, heat is
harvested and stored in geothermal wells to prevent road softening and rutting;
in winter, the heat is pumped to the surface for ice/snow removal and low-
temperature crack mitigation. This technology can be used in driveways, parking
lots, highway ramps, and other surfaces, and in the longer term can be extended
to other infrastructure surfaces, including building envelopes, airports, and
bridges. This convergent approach to critical needs in civil infrastructure will
also be extended into coursework for hybrid teaching, and the student
recruitment and outreach program will promote STEM participation and
entrepreneurial leadership from women and under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project uses a heat exchange system to
connect a pavement with a geothermal heat well to regulate the pavement surface
temperature by the vast thermal mass of the earth. It integrates experimental
mechanics, materials engineering, civil engineering, and fluid system design to
evaluate: 1) seasonal heat storage and utilization through thermal management
with bi-directional geothermal energy utilization; 2) the lifespan extension of
pavement overlays because of the favorable temperature ranges; 3) material
design and optimization for life-cycle performance improvement. The energy and
mass transfer through the system with time will be simulated by the Greenâ€™s
function technique and validated by experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.