* 1941593
* Interpretable neural network models of morphological realization
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Colin Wilson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 273,415.00

Human languages have complex systems for expressing meaning and grammatical
information with morphology, the elements which make up words (e.g., rules of
prefixing, suffixing, and copying). The project will develop a novel
computational model that is both highly interpretable and capable of learning a
broad range of morphological rules from examples. The model will be evaluated on
its ability to induce morphological systems from large naturalistic data sets
containing many rules and exceptions and to match human performance in
generalizing morphological rules from small amounts of evidence in controlled
experiments. By incorporating insights from linguistics and other areas of
cognitive science, the model will provide a bridge between the studies of human
and artificial intelligence. In virtue of its modular and transparent design,
the model will shed light on the uniquely human capacity to learn and extend
linguistic patterns. The project will provide interdisciplinary training
opportunities in linguistics, cognitive psychology, artificial intelligence, and
data science for students at many levels and from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large body of research in linguistics has
identified the general properties of morphological systems and the restricted
ways in which they vary across languages, while recent advances in artificial
intelligence have given rise to computational models that can learn morphology
with minimal supervision. These two approaches, however, have been developed
largely in isolation from one another. The project will develop a novel kind of
deep neural network that is understandable and interpretable, in the sense that
its representations and operations are continuous versions of the discrete
symbolic components of linguistic theory, and that can induce a broad range of
morphological realization rules from positive evidence with domain-general
learning algorithms (e.g., stochastic gradient descent). The model will be
evaluated on large naturalistic data sets that are common in natural language
processing and on results from new miniature artificial grammar experiments on
infixation, intercalation, and reduplication. The project aims to demonstrate
that deep neural networks can make transformative contributions to the study of
language structure and acquisition when they have a modular design that mirrors
the fundamental representations and operations of symbolic linguistic
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.