* 1941828
* Enriching knowledge of linguistic typology and language classification through linguistic and cultural documentation and analysis of an unknown language complex.
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jeffrey Heath, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 03/31/2024
* USD 186,615.00

Languages spoken by small populations are threatened by globalization and
socioeconomic change, yet they contain undocumented linguistic and cultural
knowledge that leads to a deeper understanding of language use and language
structure. This project focuses on linguistic and anthropological analysis of
closely related languages that have not yet received systematic attention. The
research will advance scientific knowledge of linguistic properties of these
under-described languages, and provide new insight into what appear to be highly
unusual tone systems and word order properties. The project will further shed
light on the understanding of how many languages there are in this language
complex and their relationships to each other based on linguistic criteria such
as mutual intelligibility and structural intelligibility, and of contact
dynamics with neighboring languages. The research will produce a theoretically
informed grammar as well as a dictionary, texts, and videos with a focus on
practical activities, flora and fauna vocabulary and related ethnobiological
information, and reminiscences about now locally extinct megafauna, representing
scientific knowledge that that is disappearing with the societal changes that
are rapidly occurring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The linguistic component of this
project will lead to a theoretically informed corpus-based analysis of these
related languages. Products will include audio/video recordings of various
genres, reference grammars drawing from the collected corpora as well as
elicitation, and dictionaries. The theoretical analyses that will inform
important questions in typological theory, in particular in the domains of tone
and word order. The collected data will illuminate both the present-day ethno-
linguistic landscape of the region and address unsolved issues in language
classification. The products of this project will be of value to linguists as
well as other sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.