* 1941260
* PFI-TT: A Robotic Rehabilitation System for Hand Therapy after a Stroke
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Ashish Deshpande, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2024
* USD 282,000.00

The potential broader impact of the Partnerships for Innovation-Technology
Translation (PFI-TT) project is to improve the quality of life of more than five
million stroke patients who may benefit from the proposed innovation, a robotic
system for delivering hand physical therapy. If successful the technology will
address one of the most critical and challenging problems in stroke
rehabilitation, which is the hand rehabilitation. It is expected that this
robotic hand physical therapy system may result in higher functional and motor
skills outcomes and shorter lengths of hospital stays. The major outcomes of
this work hold potential to improve the rehabilitation outcomes of not only
stroke patients but also those with upper extremity neurological and
musculoskeletal impairments. Indirectly, the proposed innovation is expected to
improve vocational skills and prevent the consequential injuries after a stroke.
With mentoring from personnel with business and commercialization experience and
the focus on developing a commercialization plan, this project creates a unique
opportunity for educating the team in the process of translating basic research
into deployed technology. Successful completion of this project will train the
next generation of innovators and business leaders. Execution of activities
toward broadening participation and outreach contributes to national
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles a critical shortcoming of the
current treatment options, which is failure to cause meaningful recovery for
stroke patients resulting in severe disabilities, especially in hand movement.
While robotics is a promising technology for delivering effective therapies,
currently there is no robotic system that can sufficiently recover a patient’s
full hand movement. This PFI team will prototype and translate a novel robotic
system with a unique ability to provide precise assistance to invoke recovery of
hand function. The exoskeleton will also collect high-resolution motion and
effort data during therapy to provide online and summary feedback to the
patients and the therapists. The project will advance the existing ‘lab
prototype’ to a ‘field prototype’ that will translate into clinical testing
using a control architecture: physical attachment to the subject and a graphical
user interface. Successful completion of these activities may lead to
implementation of therapeutic protocols that restore movement capabilities after
stroke. Importantly, the project will also elucidate appropriate metrics, value
proposition, and regulatory/commercialization paths to accelerate translation of
the hand therapy robotic system to the end user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.