* 1941712
* The physiological hypothesis of affective aging
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Kelly Giovanello, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 468,062.00

Emotions impact health, well-being, social relationships and decision-making. It
is crucial to understand how the brain and nervous system create emotions if we
are to intervene in emotion-based problems. Yet most of what we know about the
biology of emotions is from the study of young adults (&lt;30 years old) and
there are important changes in emotions from early to late adulthood. Most
research to date has focused on how older adults’ changing motives or declines
in cognitive ability alter emotions. This research investigates whether
biological aging of the brain and nervous system itself changes adults’ emotions
by reducing the intensity of bodily sensations during emotions. An understanding
of the biological processes that contribute to emotions across the adult
lifespan is essential for our nation and world given a rapidly aging population
and an uptick in mood-based illnesses. The proposed research will additionally
provide important educational impacts for graduate and undergraduate students to
conduct interdisciplinary STEM research uniting psychology, physiology, and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research integrates psychological
theory with technological advances in measuring brain activity, peripheral
physiology (e.g., heart rate, skin conductance), and emotional experience in
both the field and lab to understand whether aging of the brain and peripheral
nerves is associated with changes in emotions. A large-scale cross-sectional
study of 90 adults (aged 18-80) will assesses the link between the brain (i.e.,
structure and functional connectivity), peripheral physiology (i.e., autonomic
nervous system activity), experience (i.e., emotional intensity) and behavior
(i.e., emotion regulation success, emotion-based decision-making) during
emotions in both daily life and the lab. Advanced statistical techniques such as
network analyses and longitudinal time-series analyses will be employed to
understand the linkage between brain, body, and emotion across participants of
different ages. Understanding the linked role of the brain, body, and emotion
may improve our understanding of how both the body and mind change across the
adult age-span. It may also inform applied advancements in the areas of emotion-
related illnesses and statistical modeling of brain
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.