* 1941861
* CAREER: The role of maternal behavior in driving bidirectional interactions between infectious diseases and offspring immune phenotype.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Sarah Durant, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,319,085.00

Children inherit DNA from their parents, and this shapes innumerable traits,
like hair color, height, and their likelihood of developing chronic illnesses.
In addition to these genomic contributions, parents also shape their offspring
through their behavior and physiology, which are referred to as parental
effects. For instance, exposure to infectious diseases can cause mothers to pass
antibodies to their young that protect them from pathogens. Much less understood
is how infectious diseases shape offspring responses to pathogens through
changes in parental behavior, yet parental behavior is a key determinant of
their offspring’s developmental environment. Birds represent an excellent study
organism for understanding the effects of disease on offspring disease outcomes
that are mediated through shifts in parental behavior, because the physiology of
the parent and offspring become separated after egg-laying. Once eggs are laid,
parental incubation behavior shapes a vital element of the avian embryonic
developmental environment: temperature. Birds are also important study organisms
because they harbor pathogens relevant to wildlife, agriculture, and humans. The
investigator will study the effects of disease on avian parental care behaviors
and subsequent offspring responses to disease, including likelihood of disease
transmission. Using these data, the investigator’s lab will develop theoretical
models to explore the contributions of parental effects to epidemic size and
duration, and pathogen virulence. In addition, proposed educational efforts will
help to retain underrepresented groups in STEM academia by providing
professional development and research opportunities in partnership with the
Association for Women in Science and a regional Historically Black
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project crosses scales and disciplines to
explore an important question in disease ecology: how important is non-genomic
inheritance to host-pathogen dynamics? The parental effects examined herein
occur at different stages of early development, which will reveal how parental
effects mediated through shifts in parental behavior vs. parental physiology
(e.g., maternal antibodies) interact to shape offspring immune phenotypes, and
increase our understanding of the plasticity of immune phenotypes to variable
pre- and postnatal environments. The researchers will use an avian model system
to test the overarching hypothesis that the pathogen environment shapes parental
care behaviors and reproductive investment creating variation in the
developmental environment to affect offspring disease outcomes important to
population-level disease dynamics and pathogen evolution. Birds are an excellent
model system to explore these questions because there is a clear link between
avian parental behavior, the developmental environment (e.g., incubation
temperature), and offspring immune phenotype. Empirical data will be used to
develop theoretical models examining complex cross-scale interactions that
result in dynamic feedbacks to shape host reproduction, host phenotype (disease
outcomes and transmission likelihood), pathogen phenotype (growth and
reproduction), and ultimately, epidemic dynamics. This research also will build
our understanding of the importance of the early thermal environment to
offspring disease susceptibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded
by the Integrative Ecological Physiology and the Symbiosis, Defense and Self-
recognition programs in the Physiological and Structural Systems cluster and the
Behavioral Systems cluster within the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.