* 1941716
* CAREER: Transport and collective behavior of microswimmers in porous media
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Sujit Datta, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2025
* USD 401,987.00

This CAREER award will investigate how bacteria move in porous environments such
as tissue, gels, soils, and sediment. Bacteria are examples of microswimmers, a
class of particles that can propel themselves through fluid. The investigators
will use 3D printing to fabricate porous environments with controlled pore
structures, and they will use microscopy to observe how the bacteria move. These
studies will reveal how the motion and self-organization of bacteria depend on
the properties of their environment, the properties of the cells themselves, and
interactions among the cells. The project will provide new research experiences
and educational modules for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students,
with a specific focus on students from under-represented groups. It will also
enable new presentations and demonstrations to inspire and engage K-12 students
at the Princeton Public Library and at local schools. Finally, it will provide
opportunities for discussion forums, workshops, and dissemination of
computational tools to the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new experimental
techniques and mathematical models to generate a fundamental understanding of
microswimmer transport and collective behavior in porous media. The work will
focus on bacteria, an archetype of microswimmers that can move through fluid by
flagellar propulsion. Two fundamental questions will be addressed. First, how is
single-cell motility altered by pore-scale confinement - specifically, how does
motility depend on the properties of the cells and of the porous medium? Second,
how do cell-cell interactions guide collective behavior in porous media? By
connecting cellular properties, porous medium properties, and
motility/collective behavior, this work will generate knowledge to enable
prediction and control over bacterial transport and organization. Results from
this project will help practitioners control bacterial behavior in applications
such as treating infections, microbial drug delivery, using soil bacteria for
agriculture, and bioremediation. More broadly, this work will provide a
foundation for future studies of microswimmers in complex environments and will
guide the design and use of synthetic microswimmers for applications ranging
from drug delivery to chemical sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.