* 1941963
* NSF/GEO-NERC:  Stirring at the Walls - A Dynamical Boundary Model for the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* William Dewar, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 327,906.00

Much of ocean circulation variability occurs over time scales of days to months
and length scales of 10s to 100s of km, a range known as the 'mesoscale'. These
features can feedback on the larger scales of circulation in the ocean (up to
'basin scale' - 6000 km), and are important in determining ocean circulation on
interannual to decadal timescales. Yet mesoscale features require much finer
grids to represent them in models than basin scale features, so their direct
numerical resolution over the entire globe for the long times required in
climate simulations is far beyond current computer resources. This project will
use a 'Dynamical Boundary Model' (DBM) instead of high resolution grids at model
boundaries. This project will first develop a DBM that can be incorporated into
existing realistic global climate models. Then performance will be evaluated by
comparison to models with high resolution near boundaries. Finally, the project
will investigate mixing at boundaries using realistic models with the DBM
implementation. The overall collaboration will support a post-doctoral fellow, a
graduate student, and an undergraduate from an under-represented demographic.
The work has broad social relevance, as success would represent a significant
technical step forward in numerical modeling and prediction of global climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic methodology is to split the ocean into separate
interacting regions: an outer region that encompasses the general ocean
circulation and a narrow boundary layer with different dynamics, referred to as
a DBM. Mathematically, this is accomplished by the introduction of a small
parameter that measures the ratio of the thin boundary layer thickness to the
large horizontal scale of the ocean basin. At smaller scales, the boundary layer
equation becomes a nonlinear wave equation allowing coastal waves to break,
energy to be dissipated and fluid to mix at the boundary, and feeds back into
the interior dynamics. To extend this work to non-idealized geometry, the
equations for the boundary layer will be generalized to include coastal
curvature and cross-shore depth profiles, and Kelvin waves on vertical walls
will be replaced by coastal trapped waves. Once a reliable and rapid method has
been derived for the boundary/interior interaction, the DBM will be inserted
directly into global climate primitive equation (PE) models. Side-by-side
numerical experiments using PE models with dense nested grids to explicitly
resolve the boundary layer will be compared with those run at coarser resolution
using the DBM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
National Science Foundation's Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the
National Environment Research Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the
NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK
proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has
the largest proportion of the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an
award, each Agency funds the proportion of the budget and the investigators
associated with their own country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.