* 1941731
* CAREER: Experimental and Theoretical Studies to Develop Complex Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Martin Conda-Sheridan, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/28/2025
* USD 453,229.00

Dr. Martin Conda-Sheridan and his lab aim to merge material sciences and
medicinal chemistry to create tiny materials (nanostructures) to advance science
and improve human health. Their goal is to create “on-demand” nanotechnologies
tailored to industrial or patient needs. &lt;br/&gt;Their first objective is to
create two types of nanostructures: those sensitive to different conditions, and
those resistant to the environment to meet the needs of the chemical and
pharmaceutical industries.&lt;br/&gt;Their second objective is to develop
computer software that will allow scientists and clinicians to predict the shape
and behavior of nanostructures when placed in different environments.
&lt;br/&gt;Their third objective is to create nanostructures responsive to free
radicals, which are linked to aging, illness, and oxidative stress. This can
evolve into responsive therapies for health conditions associated with
inflammation – including cancer. &lt;br/&gt;In summary, Dr. Conda-Sheridan and
his team propose to prepare biocompatible nanostructures to develop responsive,
on-demand treatments. If successful, a physician may someday consult a computer
program to foresee which nanostructure(s) would best treat a health condition.
&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the team will develop educational activities geared
towards students and the general public, seeking to increase the basic
understanding of nanotechnology. Wikipedia pages and instructional videos will
be translated into several languages in hopes of reaching a wide audience of
science enthusiasts. The goal is to teach and share the findings of this project
with the wider world, inspiring a new generation of material scientists and
engineers working in nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The design of smart, self-assembling nanostructures with easy
to modify properties is a thriving new field that can revolutionize material
science, engineering, and chemistry. The long-term goal of this project is to
create multifunctional nanostructures that possess tunable properties and are
responsive to external stimuli. To achieve this final goal, this project is
divided into three objectives. The First Objective will focus on tuning intra-
and inter-molecular forces to modify properties at the supramolecular level.
This will permit the control of the morphology and physicochemical properties of
the nanomaterials. The Second Objective will focus on developing theoretical
tools (based in statistical mechanics) that can be used to predict
supramolecular shape from the self-assembling molecules. This new software will
be used to design novel nanostructures. The Third Objective seeks to prepare
stimuli responsive nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;This will lead to nanostructures
that can release selected molecules on demand and at various rates by the action
of reactive oxygen species. This research will generate new biomaterials that
are composed of diverse chemical functionalities with distinct pKas, hydrogen
bonding potential, size, spatial orientation, and stereochemistry. It is
expected these new biomaterials can lead to smart nanostructures that can adjust
their behavior based on pH, salt concentration, temperature etc. The ability to
design and tune material properties and molecular release with the aid of
theoretical models and by the simple exchange of building blocks can lead to
breakthroughs in material science, engineering, and medicine. In addition, this
research will support educational activities geared towards high school,
undergraduate and graduate students in a variety of science disciplines as well
as the general public to increase nanotechnology literacy. Key concepts in self-
assembly and nanotechnology will be disseminated by two primary teaching
activities: (1) editing and expanding relevant Wikipedia entries, and (2) the
creation of educational videos. The educational component will be translated to
multiple languages and made available free to the public in order to reach
larger audiences across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.