* 1941106
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of Molecular Mechanism of DNA Synaptic Complex Assembly and Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Anatoly Kolomeisky, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 530,822.00

Genome integrity is a crucial feature defining the successful functioning of
cells, their maintenance, and evolution. The genetic processes in the cell
require distant communications between the regulatory regions controlled by
specific proteins. Mistakes in this interaction process result in termination of
the genetic process followed by cell damage, disease development, or cell death.
A common feature of these genetic processes is a transient formation of a
complex between two DNA segments by specific proteins. However, a molecular
model explaining how the proteins recognize specific DNA segments remains
uncertain. The combined theoretical and experimental studies under this project
are expected to build a novel framework, which will also explain how the search
process of distant DNA segments in a long DNA molecule occurs. Several avenues
that facilitate the integration of scientific and technological advances in
education programs for graduate and undergraduate students are proposed. The
concepts of DNA and single molecule biophysics are incorporated into a
Biophysical Chemistry course for the UNMC program 'Graduate training in
structural biology and biophysics'. These concepts are also included in
Biophysical Chemistry and Chemical Kinetics courses that are taught at Rice
University as well the participation in the project of undergraduate students
from the University of Nebraska-Omaha (UNO) and nation-wide scholars from the
UNMC Summer Undergraduate Research program. The PIs will participate in the
Young Nebraska Scientists (YNS) program to provide STEM enrichment activities
for middle and high school students and activities to attract the
underrepresented minority undergraduate students Summer Research Program at Rice
University. A large societal impact from this proposed project will be the
training of postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduate students
at the university level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical step in numerous
fundamental genetic processes is the protein-mediated assembly of a synaptic
complex between distant DNA regions. The formation of a synaptic complex is a
general phenomenon found in gene regulation (e.g., Lac repressor), site-specific
recombination (e.g., Flp, Cre recombinases), and various genome integration
systems. Still, little is known regarding the molecular mechanisms that underlie
how such proteins search for DNA distant sites during the formation of
synaptosomes. If the specific sites needed for the formation of the synaptosome
are located on the same DNA molecule the search for the two sites leads to the
formation of a loop in the DNA. However, the knowledge on the assembly of
synaptosomes is very limited. A proposed comprehensive research plan fills this
gap by generating a quantitative model describing the phenomena of the search of
specific sites and the synaptosome assembly. This problem is approached by
coordinated experimental and theoretical studies to be conducted by labs that
specialize in experiments and theory. The central hypothesis behind this project
is that sliding and intersegment transfer are the key pathways in the search for
two and more sites; the partition between these two pathways specify the
dynamics of the site search. The project objective is to characterize the role
of DNA loops and other topological features that define the search process.
Successful completion of the innovative work proposed herein will advance
knowledge of fundamental processes involved in the DNA synaptosome assembly,
which will in turn explain mechanisms involved in the genome rearrangements. The
proposed experimental and theoretical approaches will lay a foundation to
elucidate mechanisms of such fundamental genetic processes as site-specific
recombination, integration, excision, and inversion of specific DNA regions
within genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.