* 1941315
* CAREER: RF Co-Designated Fully-Directional Antenna Interfaces for Dynamic and Efficient Spectrum Access
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Dimitra Psychogiou, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 191,931.00

Wireless communication systems are increasingly covering every facet of our
lives, including their use in mobile phones, healthcare delivery, autonomous
driving, and space exploration. While wireless technologies are significantly
changing the way our society is exploiting them for public safety and economic
growth, they have resulted in an extremely congested radio spectrum. To address
this challenge, innovative spectrum sharing solutions targeting new allocations
at millimeter-wave frequencies (30-100 GHz), full-duplex spectrum usage and
operation in under-utilized or unlicensed frequency bands are currently being
considered. While the use of higher frequencies promises wider bandwidths and
higher data-rates, these frequencies are not suitable for long-range
communications and require expensive radio frequency (RF) hardware solutions.
The main goal of this research is to address the nation's needs for spectrum
sustainability, ubiquitous connectivity and increased national security for
frequencies lower than 6 GHz, where the spectrum is more congested. In
particular, this career development project will focus on RF co-designed fully-
directional antenna interfaces that pave the way to efficient spectrum sharing
through: i) full-duplex operation, ii) dynamic access of under-utilized and
unlicensed frequency bands and iii) suppression of interference. The proposed
research promises revolutionary improvements in spectrum sharing and allows for
new capabilities in areas in which high-performance and high-density wireless
technologies are of paramount importance, including next generation cellular
communications, internet of things, and public safety. The program's broader
educational goals include training of undergraduate and graduate students in
areas related to next-generation RF systems, enhancing the Electrical
Engineering (EE) curriculum at the University of Colorado Boulder with new class
modules and a new class on tunable filter design techniques. The outreach
activities will focus on broadening the participation of students in EE and
promote higher education to traditionally under-represented populations
including community-college students, veterans and
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objective of this proposal is to
investigate and establish the theoretical foundations for highly-miniaturized
and highly-reconfigurable RF front-ends through a new RF front-end design and
integration concept based on RF co-designed fully-directional antenna interfaces
that are in-field programmable and enable dynamic and efficient spectrum access.
In particular, the proposed research will set the basic foundations for: i)
fully-directional filter synthesis and design methods, ii) RF components with
collocated signal processing capabilities and iii) multi-level transfer function
tunability of the RF front-end chain. A specific focus of the research will be
to understand the fundamental limits of spatio-temporal modulation and non-
reciprocal filter design and determine trade-offs for various high-impact
applications ranging for cellular to military and space communication systems.
Tuning methods that facilitate multiple levels of transfer function
reconfigurability will be developed, and their effectiveness in terms of
efficient spectrum access will be studied. Furthermore, the trade-offs of size
and performance of RF co-designed antenna interfaces will be systematically
investigated. The proposed techniques will transform the way full-duplex radios
are implemented and operated in spectrally-congested environments and will pave
the way to generalized RF front-ends with multi-functional and multi-standard
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.