* 1941633
* CAREER: Coding Subspaces: Error Correction, Compression and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Hessam Mahdavifar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 516,468.00

In today’s technological world, an enormous amount of data is being constantly
generated, transmitted, received, processed, and stored at an unprecedented
scale. The classical approach of representing data as blocks of information bits
falls short of addressing diverse requirements, including scalability,
efficiency, and reliability, of the next generation storage, computation, and
communication systems. This project develops an alternative paradigm for
transmission of data across massively connected wireless networks by proposing
methods to embed the information into mathematical constructs called subspaces
(i.e., linear-algebraic objects in a vector space), via a technique called
subspace coding. While these structures capture the essence of gathered data in
a wide range of signal processing applications, fundamental limits of
compression as well as practical and universal techniques to attain these limits
are not understood. This project characterizes a natural duality between error
correction and compression in the subspace domain and proposes to leverage this
connection in order to develop explicit and efficient compression mechanisms for
massive data sets that exhibit certain properties. This interdisciplinary
project is tied with an education plan and provides a stimulating and innovative
research environment for students at all levels. Furthermore, workshops are
developed as part of an active outreach program in order to introduce high
school students to concepts in fields related to data science and
communications, exposing them to careers essential to tomorrow’s
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless networks are rapidly growing in size,
are becoming more hierarchical, and are becoming increasingly distributed.
Conventional methods including channel estimation of point-to-point links and
block coding do not properly scale with the size of such massive networks. This
project proposes that subspace coding in the analog domain becomes relevant for
conveying information across networks in such a scenario. Furthermore, the dual
problem in the compression domain is central to a wide range of applications
involving large-scale raw data, often exhibiting low-dimensional structures,
which require techniques for low-dimensional subspace recovery and
dimensionality reduction. The specific objectives of this project are summarized
as follows: (1) Provide a comprehensive framework, including a certain metric
space and an analog operator channel, to study coding for wireless networks in a
non-coherent fashion; (2) Construct subspace codes for analog operator channels
and characterize their performance; (3) Develop techniques for low-rank subspace
recovery given constrained observations; (4) Characterize fundamental limits on
compression of low-rank matrices and leverage the duality with subspace codes to
design explicit compression mechanisms; (5) Develop schemes for subspace-coded
distributed computation to efficiently compute the outcome of algorithms
operating over matrices and subspaces while minimizing the
delay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.