* 1941561
* CAREER: Integrated Local Sustainability Strategies, Capacities and Performance Management
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Aaron Deslatte, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 05/31/2025
* USD 485,385.00

Local governments of all sizes are facing increasing threats to their fiscal and
economic health, community well-being, and environmental resources. Addressing
these challenges requires a litany of economic, ecological and societal
governance adjustments. However, it also assumes local communities can either
develop new organizational capacities or divert resources away from more
traditional services and activities. This project aims to develop a better
understanding of the processes through which local governments identify
sustainability goals, find the resources needed to achieve them, and assess
their performance. This requires a flexible research design to observe
communities in both urban and rural contexts which fall along the entire
spectrum of sustainability: those attempting to formulate long-term
sustainability strategies; those attempting to develop the capacities needed for
implementation; and those attempting to track their progress and
adapt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will assess the integration of
sustainability planning, capacity-building, and performance management in
Indiana municipalities. Each of these elements alone represent a complex system
in which external and internal factors interact to influence organizational
processes, routines and decisions. However, these systems also interact,
reinforcing or destabilizing broader patterns of organizational behavior through
feedback. The empirical context and timing of the project is critical as these
systems are still infantile and evolving. Three phases of mixed-methods and
longitudinal research designs will be used over five years: first, strategic
planning will be analyzed through automated text-analysis; second, surveys and
interviews will be used to assess capacity-building and implementation; and
third, case studies and experiments will examine performance management and
adjustment. The project will build infrastructure for future research by
developing a comprehensive database of variables generated across the three
phases. Additionally, outreach will be conducted to involve rural communities
through the Indiana University Center for Rural Engagement (CRE) and to
participate in community workshops and webinars through the Indiana University
Environmental Resilience Institute (ERI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.