* 1941186
* Workshop: Building an Inclusive Foundation of Engineering Education Research Scholarship for Future Growth
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Aditya Johri, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2022
* USD 99,933.00

Over the past couple of decades, the engineering education research community
has seen significant growth in terms of participation from ever increasing
number of scholars, practitioners, and institutions. Akin to any maturing
academic entity, the community is morphing from a relatively close-knit
community of practice into what can be seen as a network of practice. The
increase in number of participants and areas of study has brought with it the
challenge of consolidating and synthesizing the knowledge and different voices
in the field so that future work can be innovative and impactful. This project
creates foundational knowledge in the form of a handbook that will help achieve
this goal. Through a series of workshops, this project will bring together a
broad range of participants engaged with engineering education who will
contribute to the handbook. This confluence of scholars will also bring to light
work that is published in journals, conferences, or books that are not
necessarily the go-to sources although they are very relevant. This workshop
brings together scholars who have not necessarily collaborated before thereby
strengthening the field. The workshop catalyzes mentorship among senior and
junior scholars and sharing of ideas among the community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to the intellectual mission by
addressing three objectives. First, a representative body of knowledge is co-
produced through review of scholarship in the different areas of engineering
education research. Second, to develop an inclusive and comprehensive handbook,
this project maps the boundaries of engineering education research and the major
areas of scholarship within the field. This is achieved through input from a
broad range of participants and analysis of publications and working papers
across journals and conferences. Finally, through its engagement of scholars
that have traditionally not been represented in engineering education research,
this effort will catalyze new scholarly collaborations and strengthen the
network of practice by bringing together participants from different academic
sub-communities, institutions, and nations in small teams to produce the
chapters that will constitute the body of knowledge. The handbook produced as a
result of this project will be released under the Creative Commons License and
will be freely available to readers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.