* 1941355
* EAGER: Enhanced Pain Recognition Through Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Wei Chao, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 04/30/2022
* USD 129,300.00

Pain is a distressing feeling often caused by intense or damaging stimuli and
commonly defined as an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated
with actual or potential tissue damage. In clinical medicine, pain is often
regarded as a symptom of an underlying condition. Since pain is a complex and
subjective phenomenon, objectively defining pain has been difficult. This
project is designed to develop machine learning and computer algorithms for
enhanced and objective pain recognition based on unique behavioral and neuronal
activity patterns recorded in a novel animal pain model. The investigators will
then apply and test the algorithmic tool to two local and systemic inflammatory
conditions that are often associated with severe pain. Successful completion of
this project will potentially lead to development of innovative pain assessment
tools for both mechanistic exploration and future management of
pain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the project has two specific aims. The
first one is to establish machine learning-based pain recognition algorithms
built on unique behavioral and central neuronal activity patterns induced by
pain. The investigative team has established a novel animal model of neuropathic
pain (trigeminal neuralgia) that produces unique behavioral (e.g., orbital
tightening and face grimace) and central neuronal activity patterns as
documented by video recording and in vivo two-photon imaging, respectively. This
model has generated wealth of high-quality data sets directly related to
spontaneous pain and offers a rich source as training materials for machine
learning using convolutional neural network, which will enable the team to
develop computer algorithms for enhanced pain recognition. The second aim is to
examine the pain recognition algorithms developed in Aim 1 by investigating its
performance in animal models with clinical relevance. Specifically, the team
will employ ankle joint arthritis and bacterial sepsis as models for local and
systemic inflammatory conditions, respectively. Using conventional methods,
spontaneous pain behaviors have not been reliably captured in these models. The
team plans to prove that pain recognition algorithms based on convolutional
neural network established in Aim 1 are powerful and versatile to reveal novel
patterns indicative of spontaneous pain, despite vastly different underlying
mechanisms of pain. The results will be highly valuable to inform future studies
aiming at optimizing treatment regimens and improving long term outcomes of the
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.