* 1941216
* Contributions of Hippocampal Subsystems to Different Aspects of Episodic Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Gary Lynch, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 840,194.00

People routinely organize the flow of experience in complex everyday
environments into episodes that minimally contain information about what
happened, where different items or events were located, and the order in which
they occurred. The hippocampus plays a critical role in the brain’s formation of
these episodic memories. Studies by the investigator and others found that
rodents acquire simplified versions of ‘what’, ‘where’, and ‘when’ memory;
subsequent neurobehavioral investigations identified hippocampal networks
associated with each of these. The proposed experiments will determine if the
animals also express two other critical features of human episodic memory –
using context to retrieve a specific episode and one item to prompt recall of
the next -- and then localize the underlying networks. Preliminary results
suggest that rodents utilize both of these operations. A description of the
network level operations underlying these functions would enable work on
episodic memory’s contributions to higher order cognitive operations, including
inferential thinking, that are vital to the human experience. It could also
point the way to computerized learning systems that obviate known limitations on
present versions of artificial intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will use modified forms of rodent learning paradigms developed in the
applicant’s laboratory. These involve sequences of odors, cues that are of
innate interest to the animals. The protocols do not require repetition or overt
rewards and thus align with cardinal aspects of human episodic memory. The
network-tracing portion of the work will employ chemogenetic techniques for
transiently silencing specific pathways within the hippocampus and allied
structures. Results will be evaluated with regard to a general hypothesis and
associated computer models. In addition to the scientific advances, the project
will provide an environment of training, mentoring and research activities for
high school, undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.