* 1941719
* RAPID proposal: Rapid seismic response to the July 2019 Mw 7.1 and 6.4 doublet near Ridgecrest, Southern California
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Abhijit Ghosh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2021
* USD 74,865.00

This RAPID project is a seismic response to the two July 2019 Ridgecrest
earthquakes in southern California. The earthquakes occurred close to the
southern San Andreas fault and the Garlock fault. This is a heavily populated
area that could sustain significant damage if earthquakes happened on those
faults. While Ridgecrest is less populated, understanding these earthquakes can
help us to better understand the seismic hazard more broadly in southern
California, it can also help us to understand how large earthquake evolve and
what physics governs these events. This experiment will rapidly deploy 20
seismic instruments around the earthquake ruptures. These additional stations
will improve our ability to record aftershocks from the two mainshocks. The
broader impacts of the project include support for students to be trained in
scientific response to earthquakes and an improved understanding of seismic
hazard in southern California. The data from this experiment will be made
publicly available through the seismic data facility at
IRIS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This deployment of 20 seismic stations around the
epicenter of the Mw 7.1 and Mw6.4 Ridgecrest earthquakes will be used to
determine the detailed fault structure, possible earthquake triggering,
aftershock occurrence. The project will deploy a combination of short period and
strong ground motion stations in collaboration with the USGS. Results may also
inform high resolution seismic velocity structure, postseismic deformation and
the evolution of stress in the region. Ultimately this may improve understanding
of seismic potential on the Garlock and San Andreas faults which are in close
proximity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.