* 1941617
* CAREER: Tools and Techniques for Preserving Integrity on the Web
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Nick Nikiforakis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 440,220.00

The web, the Internet's most successful and recognizable application, has become
part of peoples' daily lives and is relied upon by billions of users for news,
entertainment, communications, and work. This reliance is constantly taken
advantage of by attackers who appear to have an inexhaustible collection of
diverse attacks targeting popular web services and end users. This project views
a large number of seemingly unrelated attacks as mere instances of the problem
of integrity violation. Due to the absence of integrity checks and guarantees,
web applications have no way of gauging whether the content that their users
will receive today when clicking on a remote link or loading a remote resource,
is the same content that they linked to in the past. This project focuses on
better understanding this issue of content integrity on the web, gathering data
about how attackers abuse it, and developing defenses against integrity
violations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to design, implement, and
evaluate tools and techniques for preserving integrity on the web by enabling
web developers to discover the remote resources on which their web applications
rely and make explicit statements about these resources through new policy
systems. Next to developer-authored policies, this project will use anomaly
detection to automatically discover when remote resources behave in an
uncharacteristic fashion by extracting attributes and combining them in
integrity signatures. To quantify how popular web applications depend on remote
resources and to evaluate how different types of websites would react to
different policies, the project includes the longitudinal collection of linking
data and the use of this data to simulate the effects of the proposed systems.
Finally, the project proposes collaborative, client-server resource-integrity
schemes to further protect web users and strengthen the security of existing
services. The outcomes of this research effort are expected to improve the
research community's understanding of content integrity on the web and to
achieve substantial practical impact in protecting websites and users against
integrity-violating attacks on the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.