* 1941713
* CAREER: Tuning fish: mechanics of biomaterials change with changing demands of locomotion
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Marianne Porter, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 558,315.00

How do animals tune, or dynamically adjust, their movements using their skin and
skeletons? This research investigates the contributions of the shark
cartilaginous vertebral column, skin, and animal movements that tune the body
during swimming. Shark vertebrae work as springs, which store and return energy
based on the species-specific arrangement of mineral in the cartilage. Shark
skin contains mineralized teeth, which make the skin feel like sandpaper and are
hypothesized to resist stretching. During swimming, the movements of both the
body and the tail can vary among different species. By studying these three
levels of organization individually, the influence of hard and soft tissues on
overall body performance can be modeled and understood in sharks swimming at
different speeds. The results of this research will provide information about
swimming, and inspiration for both stiff and stretchy synthetic materials. The
research will be conducted at Florida Atlantic University, a Hispanic Serving
Institution that is considered to have one of the most diverse student
populations in the United States. The project will support advancement of a
female assistant professor, whose laboratory draws diverse graduate,
undergraduate, and dual-enrolled high-school researchers from a student
population in which 26% of STEM majors are Hispanic. The principal investigator
will teach an Animal Locomotion course in which students develop active-
learning-focused content that is shared in open-access education journals and
then disseminated locally at nature centers and museums. This work facilitates
collaboration with researchers studying machine learning and ocean and
mechanical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stiffness imparted from the
vertebral column and skin, which tune an animalâ€™s body, can impact swimming
speed and style. This research links the contributions of both mineralized
(cartilaginous vertebrae) and soft (skin) biological materials to animal
movement. The mineral amount and arrangement impact mechanical properties like
stiffness in cartilage and skin, but there are complex interspecific
morphological variations that are not understood. The vertebral column contains
repeating centra that yield, or permanently deform at high stresses, creating a
mechanical space wherein the cartilage can operate without permanent damage, and
the impacts of body tuning can be explored. Similarly, this research will
examine the tiny mineral inclusions (dermal denticles) that have been shown to
impact stiffness of the skin and potentially the whole body. Mechanical
properties and mineralization patterns of cartilage and skin from several shark
species will be quantified using material testing and CT scanning. Preliminary
video data show that some species of shark can swim using a double oscillating
system, where frequency of movement varies in the anterior to posterior
direction, and these mechanics may be facilitated by passive stiffness from the
vertebrae and skin. The work facilitates collaboration with researchers through
university programs and partnerships including the university lab school. The PI
will impact the larger scientific community in South Florida by organizing a
seminar series on campus, in which graduate students interact and network with
marine scientist speakers from educational, industry, and non-profit
organizations. Research findings will be shared with the general public,
including K-12 students, at local nature centers and science
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.