* 1941870
* CAREER: Stochastic Analyses to Optimize Designs for Single-Cell Optical Microscopy Experiments
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Brian Munsky, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2025
* USD 809,736.00

Computational analyses can provide powerful keys to unravel basic biological
mysteries, to discover new mechanisms, and to drive national advances in
medical, agricultural, and environmental sciences. The exceptionally complicated
nature of biological processes requires that new computational tools be created
to address specific challenges and opportunities that frequently arise in modern
biological investigations. This project discovers, improves, and validates
several sets of integrated computational and experimental methods to explore and
more fully understand one of the most fundamental processes in molecular biology
– the translation of individual mRNA molecules to form functional proteins. The
project creates and distributes new computational software packages to design,
interpret, and predict cutting-edge single-cell and single-molecule experiments
for use in future biological and biomedical investigations. This project also
incorporates a new three-week annual summer school program to train
undergraduate students from the physical, engineering, and computer sciences, to
use modern statistical methods to measure, analyze, predict, and control complex
biological processes. In addition, the project involves developing and
disseminating an online quantitative biology course curriculum for senior
undergraduate and graduate students to complement the recent community-written
textbook Quantitative Biology: Theory, Computational Methods, and Models (MIT
Press, 2018).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates, tests, and validates
new technologies to integrate super-resolution fluorescence microscopy
experiments with high-performance computing to measure, interpret and predict
the complex dynamics of single-mRNA translation within variable genomic and
environmental contexts. Project goals comprise three integrated research
objectives: (1) Develop rigorous computational tools to quantify and take
advantage of intrinsic and extrinsic fluctuations (often called ‘process noise’)
that affect the dynamics of single-mRNA translation, while minimizing impacts of
experimental measurement noise; (2) Demonstrate new methodologies to rigorously
estimate model uncertainties and choose the best possible experiments to resolve
subtle differences in competing hypotheses in the most efficient and cost-
effective manner; and (3) Combine intrinsic, temporal mRNA translation
fluctuations with statistical analyses to enable simultaneous measurement of
multiple translating mRNA species in real time and in single, living cells. The
project incorporates tools from all three objectives to produce and distribute
an open-source, user-friendly Python software package called RNA Sequence to
NAscent Protein Simulator (rSNAPSim), which enables experimental biologists to
analyze, predict, and redesign single-mRNA translation
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.