* 1941953
* CAREER: Measuring the tectonic and volcanic stresses* preserved in crystals
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Kenneth Befus, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2025
* USD 376,862.00

Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions are produced by the imbalance of geologic
forces. Direct measurements of the responsible stresses are impossible because
the processes are dangerous to approach or occur deep underground. Minerals are
passive passengers within these dynamic environments, who then become valuable
recorders of stress as they are deformed. Emergent synchrotron X-ray
microdiffraction and Raman spectroscopy technologies now make it possible to
quantify geologic stresses by carefully measuring changes in the atomic
structure of minerals. For this CAREER award, the investigator and his team will
perform fundamental research to fully explore and validate mineral and crystal
deformation studies. The research program will dovetail with a 3-tiered
education program that relies upon the intrinsic beauty of gemstones to capture
the minds and imagination of its audience. The PI will introduce an interactive
mineral display to the local museum, implement a Gems course for non-major
undergraduates, and develop of a geovisualization lab for diverse graduate
student research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minerals provide an in-situ record of
dynamic geologic processes because their growth and deformation respond to the
surrounding environment. Synchrotron X-ray microdiffraction and Raman
spectroscopy are new tools for quantifying how minerals are deformed.
Synchrotron microdiffraction works by using X-ray diffraction patterns to
structurally characterize minerals with micron spatial resolution. Raman
spectroscopy is similarly high resolution, but instead measures strain by
exploiting a mineral’s elastic response to changes in temperature or pressure.
Together, these tools have the potential transform the chemistry-based high
temperature geosciences into a discipline also rooted in physics and material
science. The first proposed project will combine synchrotron microdiffraction
with Raman spectroscopy to directly correlate crystal structure with Raman band
position. Such efforts will define how crystal structure and deformation
mechanisms change with changing pressure-temperature conditions. Second, pink
deformation bands in rare, financially valuable diamonds will be measured using
synchrotron microdiffraction. Results will identify the origin of pink color in
diamonds, and importantly, constrain strain rates and stresses in the Earth’s
deep lithospheric mantle. Finally, Raman thermobarometry will be performed on
samples collected across a full transect of a crustal section at the Famatinian
Arc, Argentina. The reliability of Raman estimates will thus be tested against
critical stratigraphic constraints and independent thermobarometers. Each
project provides new constraints on mineral deformation mechanisms and
mechanical processes active in the subsurface. Students working on this project
will be prepared for careers in academia or industry as leaders in spectroscopy,
diffraction, crystallography, and geovisualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.