* 1941316
* A thorough Investigation of Negative Capacitance Model for Ferroelectric-Gated MOSFETs
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Tso-Ping Ma, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 02/28/2022
* USD 250,000.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Negative Capacitance: Scientific Facts or Fiction -
A Thorough Examination of Ferroelectric-Gated Field-Effect Transistor
Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The concept of
“negative capacitance” (NC), recently brought to light, is one of the most novel
and exciting ideas that emerged in the last decade or so in the semiconductor
community, as it promises to enable field-effect transistor (FET) integrated
circuits (ICs) to perform at speeds exceeding the limit predicted by the
conventional theory, even with reduced power consumption. Consequently, many
researchers and engineers throughout the world have been actively working on
various aspects of NC transistors since its introduction, resulting in numerous
publications with varying degrees of quality and sensibility. The research
reports have caused wide spread confusion and conflicting conclusions. The
objective of this research is to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the NC
model of ferroelectric-gated FETs by conducting a thorough investigation of all
aspects of this topic, and to disseminate widely the findings with a goal to
foster its healthy development in the semiconductor
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this
objective, an exhaustive study of the published literature will be made to
thoroughly investigate both theoretical and experimental aspects of negative
capacitance models of ferroelectric-gated field-effect transistors (FeFETs) in
order to identify and to articulate valid as well as false claims. Many cleverly
constructed experiments are proposed to confirm or debunk the prevailing NC
models of FeFETs, and to convincingly expose the false claims as supported by
the revelation of their underlying causes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
significance of this project stems from the fact that it addresses an issue of
both intense scientific interest and significant technological importance. On
the scientific side, the NC model is one of the most striking ideas in the last
decade or so, which have generated intense interests in the semiconductor
community worldwide. On the technological side, the NC associated with FeFETs
promises to provide a very low subthreshold-swing solution just when the
conventional scaling based on the Moore’s Law is nearing its end. The findings
of this study are intended to provide an important and unbiased reference, if
not the key reference, for the study of the negative capacitance in the context
of FeFETs for next-generation integrated circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.