* 1941737
* CAREER: Decoding seascape-scale vegetation patterns on coral reefs to understand ecosystem health: Integrating research and education from organismal to planetary scales
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Elizabeth Madin, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2025
* USD 878,665.00

Coral reefs worldwide are under increasing threat from a range of human-induced
stressors. Climate change is understood to be a key global stressor threatening
reefs, but the only proven levers for ecosystem managers to increase reef
resilience is to mitigate local and regional stressors such as fishing pressure.
A vexing question persists, however, which is how to measure the effects of
fishing on ecosystems, particularly over the large spatial (e.g., &gt;10s of
meters) and temporal (multi-year) scales over which fishing occurs. One
promising approach to doing so is using the large-scale vegetation patterns
found on coral reefs globally, called “halos”, to remotely observe when, where,
and to what extent fishing pressure is affecting community structure and
function. This program combines lab- and field-based experiments with cutting-
edge satellite imaging technology and computer science approaches to provide a
leap forward in our understanding of how species-level interactions can scale up
in space and time to shape coral reef seascapes around the world. By drawing on
these approaches, the synergistic education program: 1) integrates science and
art (i.e., murals and satellite imagery) to educate and inspire Hawai‘i’s
students and general public about coral reef ecology; 2) builds technological
capacity in Hawai‘i’s underrepresented minority high school to graduate
students, and 3) empowers these students with science communication skills to
communicate with diverse audiences. By leveraging this research program and the
cutting-edge technologies it will involve, the investigator establishes a strong
foundation for long-term teaching and mentoring activities focused on increasing
capacity within STEM-underrepresented minorities with Hawaiian and other Pacific
Islander backgrounds. Decoding what coral reef halos can tell us about the
effects of fishing on reef ecosystem health provides valuable knowledge to reef
ecosystem managers and conservation practitioners as reefs continue to rapidly
change due to human stressors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines lab-
and field-based experiments with cutting-edge satellite imaging technology and
computer science approaches to address the goals of: 1) determining the
mechanisms that create the “halos” that form around coral patch reefs, and 2)
testing the predictions arising from these mechanisms in a global arena. This
project uses a transdisciplinary approach – spanning ecology, oceanography,
geospatial science, and computer science – to address these goals. This program
has three scientific objectives: to determine 1) which species interaction
mechanisms and environmental factors cause reef halos and what their relative
importance is; 2) whether these mechanisms are globally consistent or vary
geographically; and 3) whether halos can therefore be used as an indicator of
aspects of coral reef ecosystem health. In the process, this research advances
our understanding of how remote observation tools (satellite and drone imagery;
camera traps) can be integrated with computer science (machine learning) and
ecological approaches (mechanistic experiments) to generate emergent insights
that would not otherwise be possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Biological Oceanography Program, the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and Ocean Education
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.