* 1941642
* CAREER: Spreading Computational Literacy Equitably via Integration of Computing in Preservice Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Lauren Margulieux, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 06/30/2025
* USD 388,584.00

Understanding and creating computer-powered solutions to professional and
personal problems enables people to be safe, resourceful, and inventive in the
technology-infused world. To empower society, K-12 education is rapidly changing
to spread computational literacy. To spread literacy equitably, schools must
give all students opportunities to understand and design computing solutions.
However, school schedules are already packed with required coursework, and most
teachers graduated from programs that did not offer computer science courses. To
spread computational literacy within the K-12 system, this project will
integrate computing into all preservice teacher programs at Georgia State
University. This approach enables all teachers, regardless of primary discipline
or grade band, to introduce their students to authentic computing solutions
within their discipline and use these solutions as powerful tools for teaching
disciplinary content and practices. In addition, this approach ensures equity
because all preservice teachers will learn to use computing tools through their
regular coursework, rather than a self-selected group that chooses to engage in
elective courses or professional development on the topic. The project will also
require preservice teachers to use computing-integrated activities in their
student teaching experiences. This requirement helps teachers gain the
confidence to use the activities in their future classrooms and immediately
benefits students in the Atlanta area, who are primarily from groups that are
underrepresented in computing, including women, people of color and those who
are from low-income families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the
effect of computing integration in preservice teacher programs on computational
literacy. Preservice teacher programs, like K-12 school schedules, are loaded
with subject area, pedagogy, and licensure requirements. Therefore, research
needs to examine the most sustainable methods for integrating computing into
these programs. The proposed project will use design-based research to explore
1) how to connect computing concepts and integration activities to teachers'
subject area knowledge and teaching practice, and 2) which computing concepts
are most valuable for general computational literacy. Because computational
literacy is a relatively new literacy, the computing education community still
debates which concepts are foundational for all citizens. By studying computing
integration in a range of grade bands and subject areas, this project will
explore which computing concepts are applicable in a wide range of subjects.
These research activities will feed directly into the teaching objective of this
project — to provide computing education and computational literacy to all
preservice teachers. This project will prepare about 1500 preservice teachers
(more than half of them will be women) across all grades and subject areas who
can teach computing integrated activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER
program is a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards
in support of junior faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through
outstanding research, excellent education, and the integration of education and
research within the context of the mission of their organizations. This project
is supported by NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. DRK-12 seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.