* 1941655
* Mechanobiology of Hemoglobin-Based Artificial Oxygen Carriers
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* E Du, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 09/30/2024
* USD 415,107.00

Artificial oxygen carriers (AOCs) were initially developed as red blood cell
substitutes for transfusion and recently as oxygen therapeutics. They can reduce
the harmful side effects of transfusion, such as immunoreaction and inflammation
from the donated blood, or to enable life-saving surgeries in patients when
donated blood becomes a sparse source. However, development of safe and
effective AOCs to replace physiological human red blood cells is challenging.
This award supports the research on AOCs to better understand their behavior and
performance after entering blood circulation. The results from this project will
provide useful knowledge that can be used to develop of safer AOCs products. The
research methods can be used to predict the post-transfusion performance of
blood substitutes or evaluate the effects of drug treatment on blood
circulation. This research is highly interdisciplinary, involving knowledge and
training in microfabrication, biochemistry, microfluidics, bioengineering and
materials science. It will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in research. Research findings from this project will be integrated into
undergraduate and graduate bioengineering courses, as well as the outreach
activities with K-12 students and science teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prolongation of AOCs survival and prevention of
transfusion-associated complications are grand challenges in transfusion
medicine. Mechanobiology of AOCs, linking biochemistry and systematic response
post transfusion, has not been well-studied. The goal of this project is to
address several important questions regarding the post-transfusion behavior of
AOCs and the potential impacts on the blood vessels, using a multi-scale
experimental approach. First, the fatigue of AOCs will be characterized by
subjecting them to cyclic hypoxia and shear stresses at single-cell level using
a unique and general biomechanical testing platform. Then, the dynamic
interactions between AOCs and physiological cells will be studied under
oxidative damage and nitric oxide treatments, using in vitro models of blood
circulation replicating cellular, hemodynamic and gaseous microenvironment of
capillaries and arterioles. Finally, he blood flow behavior, onset and
progression of vessel injury will be measured while AOCs circulate in concert
with physiological blood cells in a microfluidics-based pulmonary
microvasculature model. This study will provide a fundamental understanding of
the biomechanical mechanisms underlying the failure of AOCs, inflammatory
response, and relevant therapeutic interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.