* 1941900
* RAPID: Examining the relation between trace gas emissions and seismic activity of the 2019 Searles Valley Earthquake
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ira Leifer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,939.00

This project is focused on making measurements of trace gas emissions related to
seismic activity from open gas migration pathways and the presence of deep
subsurface sources within the Earth. Seismic activity can create extensive
hydrocarbon seepage along faults, as the resultant motion creates or re-opens
migration pathways. Measurements of carbon dioxide (CO2) and sulfur dioxide
(SO2) will be made, along with measurements of other trace gases and related
atmospheric data, in Death Valley, Panamint Valley, Searles Valley, and Rose
Valley where aftershocks from the Searles Valley earthquake that occurred on
July 5, 2019 are leading to elevated emissions of these
gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trace gas measurements will be made using the AMOG
(AutoMObile trace Gas) Surveyor, a mobile atmospheric chemistry, solar
spectroscopy, and meteorology lab in a vehicle that collects data at up to
highway speed and uses real-time data integration and visualization to enable
adaptive surveying, slowing where gradients are strong, and collecting targeted
atmospheric samples. The hypotheses that will be addressed through this research
are: (1) The recent M7.1 Searles Valley earthquake opened gas migration pathways
that led to increased trace geo-gas emissions along activated faults. These
emissions will remain elevated during the period of intense and frequent
aftershocks, decreasing with time afterwards (2) After a period of time
(months), emissions will return to quasi-baseline. (3) Emission source locations
correspond to surface expressions of fault damage (that may be displaced from
seismic sources). (4) There are thermal signature at areas of fault damage where
there is geofluid flows (gas emission) that are detectable in thermal infrared
remote sensing data. (5) The source is volcanic in origin. The emission data
collected in this research may have air quality implications for nearby parks
and urban lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported through the
Grants for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) program because of the urgent need to
measure trace gas emissions as soon as possible after the earthquake (that
occurred on July 5, 2019) and during the aftershock period before sources
deplete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.