* 1941543
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Advanced Technologies for Preservation of Biological Systems (ATP-Bio)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* John Bischof, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2025
* USD 13,999,546.00

The ERC for Advanced Technologies for the Preservation of Biological Systems
(ATP-Bio) aims to “stop biological time” and radically extend the ability to
bank and transport cells, aquatic embryos, tissue, skin, whole organs,
microphysiological systems (“organs-on-a-chip”), and even whole organisms
through a team approach to build advanced biopreservation technologies. In order
to build a more robust and diverse STEM workforce, especially in the growing
number of fields needing biopreservation technologies, ATP-Bio also aims for
equitable STEM education across all components of the Center. As such, ATP-Bio’s
workforce development plan is purposefully designed to promote interest and
engagement in STEM for all students. ATP-Bio will engage middle schoolers and
high schoolers with biopreservation science and technology, fund numerous
research internships in ATP-Bio labs for undergraduates, sponsor dozens of
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in ATP-Bio labs, and facilitate
dozens of internships in the biopreservation industry. ATP-Bio will also include
a focused effort on Ethics and Public Policy so that the Center’s technology
will be legally and ethically translated to public benefit. Together with a
large and active group of industrial partners, ATP-Bio aims to produce massive
social benefit through “off-the-shelf” biopreservation technologies for cell
therapies, tissue and organ transplantation, pharmacological research,
aquaculture, biodiversity efforts, and many other
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ATP-Bio will accomplish its goals by engineering
technologies for biological systems before cooling, during cooling and stasis at
subzero temperatures, and during rewarming to normal biological temperatures. At
each stage, ATP-Bio convergent science teams will aim to eliminate or control
ice formation, mitigate the toxicity of cryopreservation agents, and eliminate
thermal and mechanical stress. The integration of Engineering and Workforce
Development and Diversity and Culture of Inclusion across all components of ATP-
Bio is aimed at creating a more diverse STEM workforce that understands team
science, especially for the growing number of fields needing biopreservation
technologies. ATP-Bio will leverage the long-term nature of an ERC to conduct
research on developing positive STEM identity for all students and improving
STEM pathways for K-12 and undergraduate STEM education, especially for women
and minorities under-represented in academic and industrial STEM fields. ATP-Bio
will also include focused research on Ethics and Public Policy so that the
Center’s technology will be legally and ethically translated to public
benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.