* 1941816
* CAREER: Inferring and Securing Software Configurations through Automated Reasoning
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Paul Gazzillo, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 330,725.00

Highly-configurable software forms the basis of much modern computing
infrastructure, because configurability enables extensive reuse. However,
software configurability opens the door to misconfiguration vulnerabilities,
which are invalid settings that expose software weaknesses. Misconfiguration is
one of the most critical and common security risks. Real-world software,
however, can have an enormous number of possible configurations and often lacks
explicit information about what configurations are secure, leaving users to find
and validate configuration settings manually. Compounding the problem, a
complete computing system may combine hundreds or thousands of software packages
whose configuration settings interact unexpectedly. The goal of this project is
to automate the creation of valid configurations that are reliable and secure.
As the world increasingly depends on smart infrastructure and Internet-of-Things
devices to enhance lives, this research will benefit society by improving the
reliability and security of the configurable software used in these computing
devices. The research topics, results, and materials from this award will be
used in education and training as well as outreach aimed at broadening
participation in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of four
tasks that take the foundational first steps towards making software
configuration reliable and secure. The first task is the development of a
unified configuration language for configuration specifications that are
explicit, well-defined, and amenable to formal modeling. To bootstrap support
for existing software, this task will develop new algorithms to automatically
extract specifications from known configuration mechanisms. The second task is
an optimizing compiler for the unified configuration language that produces
formal logic, so that checking secure configurations is equivalent to Boolean
satisfiability. Algorithms for sampling and searching for valid configurations
will also be developed to provide the basis for testing and security
applications. The third task is a set of new techniques for testing highly-
configurable software. This project will develop static analyses to localize
defects to precise configurations and search-based algorithms to explore the
space of valid configurations for software bugs. The fourth task is the
development of new algorithms that automatically discover secure configurations,
because a valid configuration may be bug-free but still violate a user's
security policy. This project will develop algorithms to automatically find
hardened configurations and minimize attack surface. These research tasks will
be evaluated on critical, widely-used, highly-configurable software for the
ability to infer, test, and secure configurations on a large scale
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.