* 1941846
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Systematic Investigation of the Spanish Subjunctive
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Elena Herburger, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2022
* USD 13,990.00

The Romance language family is known to have a productive contrast between two
verbal 'moods', the subjunctive and the indicative. Subjunctive-selecting
clauses are those in which a speaker expresses a desire, demand, doubt, emotion,
possibility, purpose, or cause. According to traditional grammar, Spanish, being
a Romance language, also adheres to these restrictions. However, contrary to
what is expected, Spanish-speakers select the indicative in many 'subjunctive-
requiring' environments. Many frameworks used to describe the choice of mood
focus exclusively on prescriptively correct patterns of selection. As a result,
the unexpected use of indicative in subjunctive clauses is left untouched by
traditional semantic theory. This dissertation research project, thus, aims to
develop a semanto-pragmatic account of mood that can explain mood variation that
is non-prescriptive. However, prior to developing such an account, the current
project seeks to confirm the extent to which this variability exists, as well as
the dialects in which it is present. In this way, a more comprehensive
description of the Spanish mood system that accounts for both dialect-specific
and non-prescriptive variability will become available. This will lead to a
better understanding of Spanish, the second most common language spoken in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A corpus study will be carried out in order to obtain
naturally-occurring examples of mood use in the eight traditionally subjunctive-
requiring contexts. The items obtained will be adapted for inclusion in an
Acceptability Judgment Task (AJT). The objective is to test how specific
contexts affect participant views on the acceptability of either mood. Results
from the AJTs and follow-up interviews will provide greater insight into the
semanto-pragmatic factors conditioning mood variation in environments in which
it is not supposed to occur. The participants forming part of the experiment
will come from various Spanish dialects. Since no systematic, widespread study
of Spanish has been carried out, data from this project will expand on the body
of knowledge that currently exists. Additionally, in terms of a theoretical
standpoint, such an investigation will help to fill the research gaps related to
non-prescriptive uses of mood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.