* 1941591
* Collaborative Research: An emotion-motivation-obstruction approach to waiting and worry
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Howell, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 214,567.00

People often face situations in which they must wait to learn important news. It
may be the results of a medical test, the outcome of a job interview, or the
performance of financial investments. These periods can be unpleasant and
stressful for many people, and a variety of (often ineffective) coping
strategies may be adopted in an effort to minimize the discomfort during these
uncertain waiting periods. Past research on uncertain waiting periods has
primarily focused on describing the phenomenon – identifying the emotions people
feel and the coping strategies they use during these periods. What is still
unknown are the reasons people choose specific coping strategies and which
strategies are effective under various conditions. Although earlier work has
established that high levels of worry are the primary reason people feel
distress while awaiting uncertain news, little research has tackled the
questions of where this worry comes from or why people experience it so
intensely during waiting periods. This project aims to answer these unanswered
questions. The central premise of the research is that people experience worry
during some periods of uncertainty because worry serves a purpose: It motivates
people to prevent bad things from happening. However, worry can only serve this
useful function when people have some control over their outcome. During
uncertain waiting periods – such as that following a medical test but before
learning the results – worry cannot do its job because people have no control
over the outcome at that point. Eight laboratory-based experiments and one field
study investigate how people cope with worry when they find themselves trapped
in such stressful waiting periods. By better understanding how people cope with
the uncertainty of such situations, interventions may be developed to help
reduce the discomfort and redirect energy in more productive and healthy
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a broad theoretical
framework for understanding emotions and coping. The emotion-motivation-
obstruction (EMO) model brings together two related but largely disconnected
areas of study: the action readiness theory of emotions and research on
situation-specific coping processes. It is proposed that when circumstances
prevent people from engaging in the action tendency associated with an emotion
(preventing a bad outcome in the case of worry), they will select coping
strategies that aim to down-regulate the emotion or to redirect the action
tendency. By testing the EMO model in the context of worry and waiting, this
research provides an instructive initial test of the framework in a domain with
strong theoretical background. The project investigates how threatening
uncertainty prompts worry, and in turn, its action tendency of prevention
motivation and ultimately preventive behavior. The project also focuses on
situations in which preventive behavior is not feasible (due to a lack of
control) and tests whether coping efforts directed toward down-regulating worry
or redirecting prevention motivation reduce people’s experience of worry and the
urge to carry out its action tendency. A longer-term aim is to understand the
consequences of these dynamics for health and well-being. A multi-method
experimental approach addresses these goals, using self-report, behavioral
observation, and assessments of related physiological responses. The findings of
this research can serve as the basis for interventions to reduce worry and other
negative emotional experiences, and to steer people toward coping strategies
that are likely to be most effective for mitigating the health and well-being
consequences of these experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.