* 1941577
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sensing the World: The Development of Tactile Information Systems
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Graham Jones, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 02/28/2023
* USD 18,825.00

Understanding data is key to scientific literacy in the twenty-first century.
This doctoral dissertation project investigates how Science and Technology
Studies can contribute to developing new approaches to making technical data
intelligible by collaborating with computer scientists. Working with specialists
in Human-Computer Interaction, the principal investigators ethnographically
investigate how computer scientists seek to translate data visualizations into
other sensory modes for visually impaired users. Through historical research,
this project documents how the science and technology studies can inform the
development of communication technologies for people with disabilities, which
will also be the foundation for developing a set of best practices for
integrating social analysis into the technical research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project follows a tradition of technically-
engaged Science and Technology Studies projects that takes scientific
collaboration as a working method and a site of investigation. Using insights
from critical disability studies, the history of computing, and sensory studies,
the principle investigators explore how discourses of “accessibility” as a
design ideal in Human-Computer Interaction always involve implicit ideas about
physical, perceptual, and cognitive ability. By using historical and
ethnographic methods to make those ideas explicit, this project seeks to improve
approaches to conceptualizing and designing communication technologies for
people with disabilities. The historical case study of tactile reading systems
like braille and haptic computer interfaces serves as an empirical basis for
understanding how ideas about ability become embedded in the design of computer
interfaces. This project thus draws on the long history of these systems to
investigate, inform, and critique the current practice of making multisensory
data visualizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.