* 1941850
* Roundtable on Global Science Diplomacy
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Nina Ward, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2021
* USD 49,999.00

This award supports the National Academy of Science to implement a Roundtable on
Global Science Diplomacy to advance knowledge at the intersection of science and
policy with the goal of sustained U.S. leadership in science diplomacy. Science
diplomacy has emerged as a critical concept for discussions within the
scientific and foreign policy communities. The United States has been a leader
both at the governmental and non-governmental levels. In recent years,
unfortunately, some efforts within the United States have decreased, especially
with the decrease in activity and focus within the AAAS Center for Science
Diplomacy. At a time when many national challenges are intrinsically linked to
global developments, and global challenges require U.S. leadership science
diplomacy, including accessing knowledge networks, is critical to achieving
goals and in turn, preserving the welfare of the U.S. The Roundtable seeks to
reinforce U.S. expertise and leadership in this space, promote young scientists
and future generations to continue this important work, and ensure beneficial
U.S. interaction with the growing number of science diplomacy networks.The
Roundtable also provides an opportunity to investigate the role of funding
agencies in science diplomacy especially as it relates to multilateral and
global networks and how best to leverage and strengthen networks. It is also an
opportunity for agencies to further their international reach, highlight their
own innovative programs, and learn from other innovative initiatives around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roundtable discussions will be structured to
catalyze activities such as topical workshops within NASEM as well as
activities, projects, and programs to be pursued by others. Workshop topics
include a focus on next generation talent, involving NASEM's early-career STEM
leader initiative, New Voices; regional opportunities within key countries as
identified through discussions with the U.S. government;&lt;br/&gt;and assessing
progress since the 1999 National Academies report on science in foreign policy
to map future opportunities in this space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.