* 1941826
* CAREER: Quantum Acoustic Information Processing with Phononic Crystal Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Amir Safavi-Naeini, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 03/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

We understand the quantum laws of nature well enough to write equations that
describe the behavior of real-world systems such as complex molecules, exotic
materials, and electronic devices. However, in the majority of cases, computing
the solutions of these equations on a computer to make concrete predictions
remains outside the realm of possibilities. Recently, physicists have developed
a different approach to computation that could harness the enormous complexity
inherent in the laws of quantum physics to make predictions about nature. Such
quantum computers, if they can be built, would also execute powerful quantum
algorithms that break cryptographic codes, solve optimization problems, and
simulate currently intractable systems in quantum chemistry. Realizing a useful
quantum machine remains an elusive dream. In the last decade, an approach
involving microwave frequency circuits and systems made from superconducting
materials has emerged as a leading candidate for realizing a quantum machine.
These systems use the interactions between microwave frequency light, or
photons, to encode, process, and store quantum information. We propose an
enhancement of this approach that uses microwave-frequency sound, or phonons. If
successful, our approach will significantly reduce the complexity of a quantum
machine and enable rapid scaling to larger quantum computers. Improving the
processing power of these quantum computers is expected to significantly impact
science and technology in many application spaces ranging from basic science to
drug discovery. For further impact, our proposed program includes a professional
education outreach component that will develop and deliver a curriculum to
engineers who hope to move into quantum science and engineering. The proposed
program will deliver a targeted set of four courses tailored to practicing
engineers that will build the theoretical and practical skills needed to become
quantum scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging quantum machines use the
interactions between photons, single quanta of electromagnetic excitation, to
encode, process, and store quantum information. We propose an enhancement of
this approach that in addition to photons, uses phonons, the quanta of
vibrations, to realize quantum functionality. The proposed phonon devices are
many thousands of times smaller than the circuit elements used in current
approaches to quantum computing because the speed of sound is considerably lower
than the speed of light. Additionally, phonon devices can be remarkably
coherent, with the coherence times many thousands of times longer than competing
photonic systems. These properties enable new architectures that greatly
facilitate scaling to larger system sizes. To investigate the feasibility of
this approach, we will fabricate chips that contain superconducting transmon
qubits and mechanical resonators, and we will perform quantum gates between
these elements. We will also develop ways of using quantum acoustic devices as a
means of efficiently multiplexing and routing quantum signals. Successful
demonstration of the proposed architecture bringing together mechanical devices
and superconducting qubits significantly accelerates the development of quantum
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.