* 1941100
* PFI-TT: Nanoscale Chemical Imaging Spectroscopy using Novel Fiber Probes
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Zhenrong Zhang, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2023
* USD 331,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enable the nanoscale chemical
imaging technology from strictly research labs to industrial in-line processes.
Nanoscience and nanotechnology have revolutionized a variety of markets since
their inception. Nonetheless, large-scale manufacturing of nanomaterials has
lagged, partly because of the inability to efficiently qualify and control
nanoscale production methods. The proposed project will develop a user-friendly,
practical, and potentially portable chemical imaging system. This technology
will revolutionize nanotechnology by improving quality control of future
production methods and enabling new applications, ranging from data storage and
optical communication to cancer detection. The probe microscope market accounts
for approximately 4% of the $5.3 billion microscopy market and has been limited
by measurement complexity and lack of chemical sensitivity. The proposed
technology would remove these limitations, creating an opportunity for growth
within the microscopy market space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is
to prototype the transformative nanoscale chemical imaging microscopy by
integrating the invented plasmonic fiber probes with commercial probe
microscopes. Nanoscale chemical imaging had demonstrated potential for use in an
array of applications including material science, bio-sensing, optoelectronics,
and catalysis. However, due to the complex operating challenges including
optical alignment times, low tip reliability, low Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR),
and highly skilled technician requirements, there has been limited commercial
application. This PFI-TT project will undertake prototyping activities of a
fiber tip-enhanced Raman spectroscope (F-TERS), an optical fiber probe-based
nanoscale chemical imaging microscopy designed to overcome these challenges
while still providing the chemical composition and nanoscale morphology imaging
of a sample surface. In addition, F-TERS also provides the potential for
significantly improved SNR, enabling additional applications. This will be
accomplished by 1) overcoming the identified hurdles of demonstrating F-TERS
functionality with atomic force microscope (AFM), and 2) quantifying F-TERS
performance in real-world environments with independent
operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.