* 1941973
* CAREER: Harnessing Decision-focused Explanations as a Bridge between Humans and Artificial Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Chenhao Tan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 197,948.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) plays an increasingly prominent role in decision
making in domains critical to society such as criminal justice, healthcare, and
misinformation identification. It is crucial that AI systems be able to explain
the basis for the decisions they recommend in ways that humans can easily
comprehend, thus serving as a bridge between humans and AI. While most current
computational research in generating explanations focuses on the AI side, little
attention has been paid to how humans provide and interpret explanations. This
project advances our understanding of natural language explanations formulated
by humans, and then moves on to develop improved algorithms for human generation
of explanations and human-machine collaborations on explanations.

First, the project will develop computational approaches to understanding human
explanations by leveraging a unique large-scale corpus of naturally-occurring
explanations with human annotations highlighting the persuasive elements of an
argument. Additional datasets with annotations of explanations that draw on
psychological theory of effective explanations will be created. Second, the
project will build algorithms that learn from these natural language
explanations so that AI systems can generate explanations that follow human
style and so are more easily interpreted and compelling. Third, the project will
develop best practices for soliciting human explanations where an AI system
collaborates with the human to generate more effective explanations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.