* 1941314
* EAGER: Integrating efficient and dependable wave power generation into ocean sensing buoys: at-sea pilot tests.
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Umesh Korde, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 10/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Small oceanographic buoys enable a range of long-term in-situ measurements of
ocean properties that are closely related to the earth's climate-related and
other natural phenomena. Currently, such buoys rely on solar panels, wind
turbines, and batteries for the energy they need for instrument operation. These
researchers plan to conduct pilot tests to evaluate a new technique dependably
to utilize ambient ocean waves to provide dramatically greater power amounts
than existing sources. Dependable availability of larger power amounts to
operate high-power instruments for long periods should be of interest the Ocean
Science and Engineering communities. Additionally, the methods and data from
this project are also expected to be transferable to small platforms designed
for mid-ocean recharging of autonomous vehicles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research plans to test a new technique to control the wave energy conversion
process such that the maximum practical power amounts can be converted in
changing, irregular wave conditions. The team has learned through detailed
hydrodynamic simulations and wave-tank testing that force and motion-constrained
impedance matching control in realistic sea states can enable a 4-5 fold
increase in the time-averaged power amounts that small oceanographic buoys might
otherwise convert. With modest hardware additions, this improvement could allow
standard oceanographic buoys to use wave energy as a power source. However, the
proposed control requires real-time up-wave surface elevation measurements for
deterministic wave-profile prediction 20-30 seconds into the future, and a bi-
directional power take-off capable of providing large forces. To that end, the
pilot study will use a fully-instrumented, currently operational wave-energy
converter buoy with a bi-directional electro-hydraulic power take-off, to
quantify the performance improvements possible (over baseline resistive control)
with constrained optimal acausal real-time wave-by-wave control of the buoy
oscillations. The team will use a high-resolution, short-range radar on-board
the device to infer (up-wave) incoming wave fields for deterministic wave-
profile prediction at the device. Results will enable an evaluation of the
immediate merit of wave energy relative to other power sources available for
ocean sensing buoys, such as solar, wind, fuel cells, batteries, and diesel
generators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.