* 1941242
* PFI-RP: Zero-power Wireless Flame Detector for Ubiquitous Fire Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Joseph Mantese, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 05/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to advance the development of a
disruptive fire monitoring sensor technology that could save thousands of lives
and prevent billions of assets loss annually. Currently large-scale wireless
fire sensor networks suffer from prohibitive cost associated with ownership,
installation and maintenance. Commercially available sensors rely on active
electronics to detect and discriminate signal of interest. Therefore, they
consume power continuously to monitor the environment even when there is no
relevant data to be detected, which results in a short battery lifetime limited
to very few months. The proposed wireless flame detectors can be deployed
virtually anywhere by dramatically reducing the cost associated with sensor
hardware, installation, and maintenance. The completely passive sensing
mechanism and wireless connectivity of the proposed technology offer fire
protection in environmental conditions considered harsh for conventional
electronics (e.g., extreme temperature and limited access to power sources). The
project will advance the technology to address the constricted spaces of an
aircraft (i.e., the engine or the cargo compartments) where the propagation of
fire is significantly hampered, hence restricting the use of the conventional
fire detectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop a
novel micromechanical flame detector consuming near-zero power in standby until
awakened by the specific infrared signature emitted by a flame. The fundamental
technical challenge lies in the continuous power consumption of state-of-the-art
sensor technologies. The proposed device advances recently developed zero-power
digitizing infrared sensors that can selectively harvest the energy from the
specific infrared signature emitted from a warm object to operate without using
any electrical power. The rigorous fire detector standards require a high level
of system robustness and stability against environmental variabilities such as
temperature extremes, vibration, and extraneous transients. The proposed project
will demonstrate a prototype meeting the national flame detector
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.