* 1941494
* Conference Proposal: Looking Back and Looking Forward: Increasing the Impact of Educational Research on Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* James Hiebert, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,971.00

The focus of the proposed conference is to carefully examine past and current
research with an eye toward improving its impact on practice. This conference is
designed to create concrete steps that could shape the nature and impact of
mathematics education research for years to come. A diverse group of 50
participants will be invited to participate. Participants include 10 experienced
K-12 educators whose perspectives will be used to anchor the conference in
problems of practice. Other participants represent senior through more junior
scholars who have demonstrated a commitment to addressing the disconnect between
research and practice, along with technology experts to advise participants on
capabilities and innovative uses of modern technologies for instruction,
assessment and data management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal for
the conference is to help the field of mathematics education think deeply about
the most productive ways to answer the following questions: [1] Why hasn't past
research had a more direct impact on practice? What can be learned from this
historical analysis for future research? [2] What is a possible vision for
research that would have a more direct impact on practice? What questions should
be asked? What methods should be used? What concrete steps can be taken to
launch the new research programs? [3] What are the implications of adopting new
kinds of research programs? If they gain traction, how will such changes affect
the broader education community and infrastructure, including preservice teacher
education, teacher professional development, and the training of future
researchers? How should the roles of researchers and teachers change? What
incentive structures might motivate these changes? How will new programs of
research interact with existing programs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.