* 1941135
* Electrophoretic Deposition of Ternary Metal Sulfide Electrochemical Electrodes with Tunable Pore Structure
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Richard Robinson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2024
* USD 549,863.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge to the manufacturing
of ternary metal sulfide electrochemical electrodes for energy storage
applications. Complex metal sulfides are materials made from sulfur combined
with more than one metal. These complex metal sulfides have emerged as a new and
increasingly researched system for energy applications due to their high
application performance, low cost, and portfolio of earth-abundant, non-toxic
alternatives to standard materials. Compared to the currently used metal oxides,
metal sulfides have demonstrated better electrical conductivity, greater
mechanical and thermal stability, and higher performance. However, the
widespread industrial integration of electrodes, which is the basis for most
energy applications, made from metal sulfide nanostructures is impeded by the
lack of large-scale production methods that are low cost, efficient, and simple.
Additionally, one of the important but often overlooked design parameters for
electrodes is the pore structure, which plays an important role in increasing
performance. This grant addresses both issues by investigating methods for
scalable nanomanufacturing of complex metal sulfide nanocrystals and assembling
them into optimum porous electrode structures. The outcome of this grant
benefits the U.S. economy and society because electrochemical electrodes are key
components of batteries and supercapacitors, which power and store energy for
many devices and applications in modern society. This work advances the next
generation of electrochemical energy materials, leading to improvements in
energy conversion, storage, and lowering of cost. It broadens the participation
of underrepresented groups and promotes teaching and learning by developing
lending library modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current injection methods for
synthesis of ternary sulfide nanocrystals suffers from low conversion yield and
poor reproducibility This project overcomes these technical barriers by
manufacturing ternary sulfide nanocrystals through a solvent-less synthesis
method, employing highly reactive anion precursors, such as ammonium sulfide,
and metal carboxylates in the organic phase. This research uses electrophoretic
deposition to assemble the complex metal sulfide nanocrystals into
electrochemical electrodes with controlled porosity. The nanocrystal building-
blocks are uniform in size and no additives are used, which permits tailoring
and quantification of the packing and pore structure of the electrode. The
research team seeks to achieve high-fidelity printing of thin three-dimensional
electrode films with tunable pore size by directed assembly of colloidal
particles in electric fields. The research investigates non-linear applied
potentials and characterizes the films with methods including electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy, Voronoi tessellations to quantify the pore structure,
and radial distribution function analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.