* 1941350
* Eliciting support in times of distress: Examining when and for whom expressing positivity is an effective strategy
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Amanda Forest, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 379,762.00

People experience distressing events throughout their daily lives. These range
from minor setbacks to life-changing tragedies. In such times of distress,
receiving appropriate support from close relationship partners is important for
personal and social well-being. Yet people in distress often do not receive the
support they need. Decades of research has documented the benefits of social
support, but the research has not typically focused on actions that people can
take to increase their chances of getting support that meets their needs. This
project focuses on one particular type of support-seeking behavior that has not
been emphasized in distress-related situations: expressing positive thoughts and
feelings. Examples of such positive behavior include the expression of optimism
about the distressing event or gratitude toward the support-providing partner.
The research examines when and for whom expressing such positivity is useful in
obtaining support for negative events. The findings are expected to inform the
development of interventions to help people more effectively seek the support
they need in times of distress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on theory and
research on emotional expressivity, social support, and close relationships,
this project tests a contextual model of support-eliciting behavior that
involves the expression of positive thoughts and feelings. In one study,
romantic partners are videotaped during the course of support conversations. Two
other laboratory experiments control the extent of positive expressivity in
support-seeking messages. The studies will inform our understanding of when and
for whom positive expressivity promotes responsive support. The first study will
also include a longitudinal follow-up, which will permit an examination of
downstream personal and relational consequences of support-seeking and support-
giving processes. It is expected that support-seekers' positive expressivity
will enhance providers' responsive support. This result should be especially
strong when features of support seekers, support providers, their relationships,
or the stressors lead support providers to be low in feelings of warmth and
connectedness toward support seekers. It should also be especially strong when
contextual features lead support providers to doubt the effectiveness of their
support efforts. Focusing on the joint influences of positive expressivity and
contextual features will advance basic knowledge about how people can
successfully elicit social support in coping with distressing events. The
research will help to identify targets for future interventions aimed at
enhancing the personal and social well-being of people as they experience
distressing events in their daily lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.