* 1941529
* NSF Engineering Research Center for the Internet of Things for Precision Agriculture (IoT4Ag)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Sue Bidstrup-Allen, University of Pennsylvania
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2025
* USD 14,008,100.00

Ensuring food, energy, and water security is a societal grand challenge. By
2050, the US population is estimated to grow from 330 million to 400 million,
and the world population from 7.8 billion to 9.7 billion, requiring a 70%
increase in global food production. Current agricultural practices account for
70% of global water use, and energy use accounts for the largest cost on a farm.
Furthermore, the current inefficient use of agrochemicals is altering Earthâ€™s
ecosystems. With finite arable land, water, and energy resources, there is a
critical need for new technologies and innovations to improve the efficiency of
food production. These challenges provide a unique opportunity for scientists,
engineers, practitioners, and other stakeholders to come together and develop
new technologies and solutions that would not be realized without a convergent
approach. The NSF Engineering Research Center for the Internet of Things for
Precision Agriculture (IoT4Ag) unites faculty and students from the University
of Pennsylvania, Purdue University, the University of California at Merced, and
the University of Florida with government and industry partners, establishing a
convergence of expertise in agronomy, agricultural engineering, socio-economics,
environmental science, and the science and engineering of physical and cyber-
physical systems needed to transform agriculture. The goal of this center is to
ensure food, energy, and water security by advancing technology to increase crop
production while minimizing the use of energy and water resources and the impact
of agricultural practices on the environment. To realize this mission, IoT4Ag
will create and translate to practice Internet of Things (IoT) technologies for
precision agriculture and train an educated and diverse workforce that will
address the societal grand challenge of food, energy, and water security for
decades to come. IoT4Ag institutions are located in regions of the United States
of intense agricultural production and represent the diversity of both crops and
agricultural environments across the country. The coverage of these diverse
geographical locations will ensure that a broad range of crop types will benefit
from the research, education, and training of IoT4Ag, leading to the successful
transformation of agricultural practices for a sustainable and secure future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IoT4Ag team will investigate how the complex systems
of plant and environmental variables affect crop yield and resilience. To
accomplish this task, center researchers will focus on the development of low-
cost sensor technologies to measure these variables at relevant spatial and
temporal scales. To utilize these sensors and the data collected, IoT4Ag will
develop agriculture-specific communication technologies that relay data from
sensors to both relevant farming equipment and to the cloud by autonomous aerial
and ground-based robots equipped to be deployed at field scale. Data-driven
models will capture plant physiology, soil properties and dynamics, historical
weather trends and future forecasts, management practice variations, and socio-
economic trends to provide farmers the situational awareness necessary for smart
agricultural intervention and improved outcomes. Through the research and
development of these proposed technologies and solutions, IoT4Ag will educate a
diverse workforce of pre-college students, community college students,
university students, and agriculture professionals through audience-specific
lessons and hands-on classroom, laboratory, and field activities. These
activities will arm this new workforce with the strong science and engineering
knowledge to enable precision agriculture solutions. IoT4Ag will recruit,
retain, and educate diverse participants and create a culture of inclusion
through engagement, participation, and cohesion of a broad community of
students, faculty, and professionals. This vibrant innovation ecosystem will
bring together academic, government, and industry partners with the end-user
farming community to ensure the rapid translation of IoT4Ag practices and
technologies into commercial products and economic impact. Through all of these
described activities, IoT4Ag will enable the transformation of agriculture,
producing more crops for every drop of water or Joule of energy to realize a
food, energy, and water-secure future for the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.