* 1941447
* Workshop on Future Directions in Network Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Tijana Milenkovic, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 56,821.00

Network biology, a field in the intersection of computer science and biology, is
critical for deepening understanding of cellular functioning and disease. While
the field is relatively young, there have already been rapid changes to it and
new computational/algorithmic challenges have arisen, owing to many factors,
including increasing data complexity. So, research directions in the field need
to evolve accordingly. This project is about a workshop on identifying pressing
challenges in this field and proposing solutions to the challenges. Thus, the
workshop will help shape the short- and long-term vision for algorithmic
research in network biology. As such, it is expected to benefit global
scientific competitiveness of the US. The workshop results (e.g., video
recordings and a paper about the workshop discussions) will be disseminated
broadly via public repositories. The workshop aims to balance well the
representation of women and other minorities among its participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is to be held in 2020 as a targeted meeting
of approximately 35 researchers who are doing active and state-of-the-art
research in various aspects of network biology. The workshop participants are to
present and discuss their views of important current and future research
directions in the field of network biology. A goal is to understand how the
field of computer science and algorithms in particular is benefiting the field
of network biology, and vice versa, and how to strengthen this synergy even
further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop award is cofunded by the
Computational Biology Program in the Division of Computing and Communication
Foundations and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.