* 1941673
* CAREER: Non-Equilibrium Quantum Physics in Solid-State Spin Chains
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* John Nichol, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 01/31/2025
* USD 468,480.00

Non-technical abstract: Statistical mechanics and thermodynamics underlie nearly
all fields of science, including biology, chemistry, and physics. This project
studies phenomena in objects that do not reach thermal equilibrium with their
surroundings, such as an imaginary coffee cup that stays hot forever. The study
of these systems is important and may have diverse applications in fields like
high-temperature superconductivity and quantum computing. A significant
component of this project involves education and outreach efforts to address the
“leaky pipeline,” which prevents women and minorities from full involvement in
scientific research. The PI is developing interactive, week-long courses in
experimental physics for middle- and high-school students during the summer and
workshops during the school year designed to ignite a passion for experimental
research in the next generation of scientists. The PI is also developing a
quantum technology course for undergraduates and is mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students in state-of-the-art quantum
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: The research objective
of this project is to investigate non-equilibrium quantum physics in quantum-dot
spin chains. The fundamental postulate of statistical mechanics is that a
physical system will sample every possible configuration available to it with
equal probability, leading to thermodynamic equilibrium. In a bizarre phenomenon
called many-body localization, this assumption breaks down, and disorder in the
system prevents thermalization, even in the presence of inter-particle
interactions. Another unusual hallmark of localized states is the appearance of
time-crystal phases. Just as conventional crystals spontaneously break spatial
translation symmetry, time crystals can break time-translation symmetry. In time
crystals, a subharmonic response of the system to a periodic drive persists
indefinitely. Many-body localization and time-crystals challenge our
understanding of statistical mechanics and thermodynamics and will prove
valuable resources for quantum information processing. Evidence of localization
and time-crystals in solid-state materials remains elusive. The specific
objectives of this project involve using spin chains in gate-defined quantum-dot
arrays to explore many-body localization and time-crystals in condensed matter
systems and uncover their phase diagrams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.