* 1941221
* PFI-TT: Remote Respiratory Diagnostics through Visualization of Exhale Flow
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Min-Hyung Choi, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2022
* USD 290,430.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enable the accurate detection of
abnormal respiratory behaviors and breathing disorders through visualized exhale
flow behaviors. Early and accurate detection of declines in pulmonary function
through respiratory monitoring plays a vital role in the mitigation of serious
health consequences caused by pulmonary diseases. For millions of Americans,
these complications include decreased cognitive function, increased
cardiovascular risk, as well as permanent disabilities including irreversible
lung damage. These health conditions can be caused by a wide variety of
pulmonological complications resulting from: Sleep-Disordered Breathing (SDB),
Ear-Nose-Throat (ENT)-related conditions, and early-stage lung damage due to
Chronic Obstructed Pulmonary Disease (COPD). The objective of this innovation is
to broaden our understanding of natural, unconstrained breathing behaviors that
can be used to identify abnormalities due to numerous pulmonary conditions and
diseases. This project proposes to develop the first optical-based breathing
diagnostic tool for pulmonologists that enables new diagnostic pulmonary
evaluations. Through analysis of visualized flow behaviors, this technology
enables a new form of non-contact analysis that can be used to: increase patient
populations including children and infants, improve diagnostic outcomes, and
promote preventative care solutions for pulmonologists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project incorporates the development, design,
implementation, and validation of an integrated hardware-software diagnostic
prototype facilitating visual, quantitative, and qualitative analysis of
expiratory breathing behaviors. The underlying technology provides a unique
approach to extracting physical measurements from visual data through the use of
filtered thermal and depth imaging combined with data-driven fluid flow models.
This approach includes a multifaceted design that integrates analytical,
numerical, and machine learning methods to provide an inverse modeling approach
for measuring respiratory behaviors. Key contributions of this research include:
(1) accurate evaluation of pulmonary function based on visualized exhale
behaviors providing quantitative measurements for flow, volume, exhale strength,
and natural nose-mouth breathing distributions and (2) the development of a
functional prototype that provides real-time visualization of expiratory
breathing behaviors, continuous monitoring, and diagnostics. The realization of
this innovation allows pulmonologists to break away from the current set of
tube-based and wearable devices that require effort-based tests that are
inconsistent, tedious, and uncomfortable for use in any extended duration. By
introducing this new direction in how we monitor, measure, and evaluate
pulmonary function, the proposed work strives to create a pivotal shift in the
technological evaluation of natural breathing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.