* 1941651
* SBP: Consequences of Attributing Discrimination to Implicit Bias
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Jennifer Richeson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 405,602.00

Implicit bias training is being used by companies, police departments, and
educational institutions to decrease discrimination based on race, gender, and
other social categories and thereby to potentially help increase the diversity
of their employees. By some estimates, diversity training costs nearly $8
billion a year, but there is little evidence that diversity training is
effective at reducing discrimination. It is important to examine how people make
sense of and respond to the many acts of discrimination that are attributed to
implicit bias. Implicit biases are often thought to be beyond conscious
awareness and recent research has found that people tend to hold those who
discriminate less accountable if their discriminatory acts are assumed to stem
from their implicit biases rather than explicit biases. Across fourteen studies,
this project will discover for whom, when, and how this reduced accountability
for discrimination attributed to implicit bias is most likely to occur. The
project examines whether attributing discrimination to implicit bias affects the
extent to which people think it is possible to overcome these forms of
prejudice. The research also measures the emotions and behavioral consequences
arising from these processes. The research will shed light on how increased
awareness of implicit biases may actually produce reduced accountability for
some acts of discrimination. The long-term aim of the project is to help produce
more effective interventions to reduce societal discrimination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many researchers and laypeople presume that educating the
public about implicit bias will galvanize support to combat its discriminatory
consequences. Yet there is reason to expect that greater awareness of implicit
bias may actually reduce the extent to which people hold others accountable for
acts of discrimination that are attributed to it. This project integrates
research from moral cognition and social psychology to examine how people reason
about and respond to reports of discriminatory behavior attributed to implicit
attitudes. Specifically, this research investigates the hypothesis that because
implicit processes are assumed to be beyond conscious awareness, people often
hold those who discriminate less accountable for even clearly intentional
behaviors when they are attributed to implicit attitudes and beliefs. The
research will inform current models of moral responsibility and offer a
reconsideration of the question of who is or should be responsible for implicit
bias. This research will also consider additional outcomes of implicit bias
attributions, including their effects on emotions, perceptions of
discrimination, and willingness to work to combat discrimination and inequity.
Because a great deal of discrimination is rooted in implicit forms of bias, a
small but reliable reduced accountability for implicit bias effect could be
highly consequential. The tendency to attribute discriminatory acts to implicit
bias may paradoxically reduce the willingness to sanction those who
discriminate, with the result of increasing rather than decreasing societal
tolerance for discrimination and its
effects.&lt;br/&gt;â€ƒ&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.