* 1941722
* CAREER: Safe and Influencing Interactions for Human-Robot Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Dorsa Sadigh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 01/31/2025
* USD 431,689.00

One of the key challenges when studying robotics systems that interact with
people is the lack of access to a general model of how humans behave. Humans
usually do not follow a fixed stationary model. They change and adapt to each
other and to the robots over time. Humans gain experience - people's driving
behavior when interacting with an autonomous car will be significantly different
after many interactions. In assistive robotics, human responses will change as
robots adapt. Routing decisions of autonomous cars influence other human
drivers' routing choices and can result in undesirable global properties such as
congestion. This introduces a new set of challenges including how robots should
plan for safe and reliable strategies that are aware of their effects on people
and the society as a whole. This project lays the foundations of analyzing and
planning for repeated interactions between humans and robots. Our work will
directly impact humans' comfort, safety, and public life by increasing robot
understanding in interactions with humans in environments such as homes,
hospitals, warehouses, and smart cities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to focus on one of the key components of safe and interactive
robotics -- formalizing influencing interactions, i.e., robot actions that
influence human responses. This requires developing computational models of
human behaviors, and leads to better understanding and formalisms for safe and
reliable interactions with robots. This project investigates three main
challenges: 1) human modeling: the investigator will develop data efficient
methods to learn computational models of human behaviors while interacting with
autonomous systems. One of the challenges in human-robot interaction is the lack
of data from humans. This work develops active learning techniques that
intelligently query and integrate different types of data collected from human
feedback. 2) influencing interactions: it is clear that humans can be influenced
by simple interactions with each other, e.g., people plan to arrive late if they
are meeting a friend who is always late. Similarly, people's behavior changes
when interacting with robots. If they observe an autonomous car being stuck at
an intersection multiple times, they decide to navigate around it. This project
plans to design robotics algorithms that are mindful of their effects on humans,
how they can change the human behavior, and how that can help the overall
system. 3) safe interactions: when planning for interactions that influence
people, the robot will rely on learned human models. However, having access to a
truly correct and reliable human model can be challenging due to lack of data or
insufficient model parameters. This project designs verified robot policies that
will be robust to inaccuracies present in human models, and takes the overall
system to desirable states over long-term
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.