* 1941691
* Collaborative Research: How Accent Distance Impacts Word Recognition Across the Lifespan
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tessa Bent, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 306,435.00

An increasingly globalized society brings together speakers with many different
regional or nonnative accents. These pronunciation differences can pose
challenges for successful communication, particularly in children, whose
language and cognition are still developing. Indeed, mature perception of speech
produced by talkers with unfamiliar dialects and accents does not develop until
late adolescence. Understanding how and when these pronunciation differences
lead to breakdowns in communication is essential for facilitating communication
across people from different cultures, languages, and age groups. This project
will result in a better understanding of how specific accent properties and
listening situations contribute to children's and adults' ability to communicate
across dialects and nonnative accents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
expected to markedly increase the understanding of how regional dialect and
nonnative accent variation impact children's and adult's word identification by
characterizing accent distance within the segmental, suprasegmental, and
perceptual domains. Establishing reliable and predictive measures of
pronunciation distance is a key to bridging work focusing on adults' and
children's perception of specific phoneme contrasts and perception of naturally
produced sentences of different dialects and accents. This project will
establish a quantitative pronunciation distance metric of accent variation.
Segmental, suprasegmental, and perceptual distance from the home dialect
(Midland American English) for a wide variety of regional dialects and nonnative
accents will be measured. The predictive value of the metrics will be assessed
for children's and adults' word recognition accuracy in quiet and in noise. The
research provides foundational knowledge for a testable word recognition model
of unfamiliar accents at key points across the lifespan. Societal benefits
resulting from the research include the recruitment and retention of women and
individuals from underrepresented groups into research careers, provision of
science education to the general public through community engagement and
outreach activities, and the sharing of research products including audio
recordings, datasets, and experimental code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.