* 1941085
* EAGER: The Next Generation of Smart Cyberinfrastructure: Efficiency and Productivity Through Artificial Intelligence
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Valerio Pascucci, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,712.00

Efficient cyberinfrastructure (advanced computing, data, software and networking
infrastructure) is a critical component of the support that NSF provides for new
discoveries in science and engineering. Cyberinfrastructure is complex and
traditionally requires years of human hand-tuning to fully achieve maximal
performance for scientific users. We propose to introduce Artificial
Intelligence (AI) as a way to automatically and quickly optimize the performance
and broadest use of recent NSF-supported advanced computing resources. Through
this pilot effort our ultimate aim is to enable and accelerate scientific
advances in widely diverse fields such as biology, chemistry, oceanography,
materials science, climate modeling, and cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the
research cyberinfrastructure grows rapidly in scale and complexity, it is
essential to integrate new technologies based on Machine Learning (ML) and AI to
ensure that the investments in new hardware and software components result in
proportional improvements in performance and capability. This project will
undertake a transformative research activity targeting: (1) scaling ML
algorithms to make them easily available to the scientific community; and (2)
improving cyberinfrastructure efficiency through AI-based predictive models.
This technical work will be complemented and informed by a community engagement
effort to jointly catalog the state of the art and identify future challenges
and opportunities in enabling a new smart
cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.