* 1941407
* A workshop to discuss attrition of women in the academic ocean sciences leadership pipeline: Washington, D.C., 2020
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Kristen Yarincik, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2022
* USD 66,885.00

The Consortium on Ocean Leadership (COL) will host a workshop to focus on the
issues surrounding the representation of women in tenure-track and tenured
faculty positions in the ocean sciences. Given the percentage of women receiving
doctorates in ocean sciences for the last two decades, the number of women in
these faculty positions in the ocean sciences is lower than expected. The
workshop will invite representatives of academic institutions to review and
discuss the available data on the representation of women at various levels in
the ocean science doctorate-to-tenured-faculty pipeline, to consider the factors
that influence women's experiences and decisions related to academic careers,
and to determine if further investigation into these factors is needed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held at COL headquarters in
Washington, DC with about twenty-two participants in late 2019. As a deliverable
for this workshop, COL will provide an analysis of available data on the
representation of women in the ocean sciences workforce, and results of the data
analysis and recommendations from the workshop will be published in a major
oceanographic journal. This workshop will support NSF goals of ensuring a
diverse scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.