* 1941323
* CAREER: Superelastic Organic Semiconductors (SOSs): A New Class of Molecular Crystals of Responsive Shape Memory
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Kejie Zhao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2025
* USD 511,312.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will promote fundamental
understanding of the responsive shape memory effect in a new class of
superelastic organic semiconductors (SOSs). The shape memory effect can be
illustrated by the ability of a material to remember and recover a programmed
shape via thermal and mechanical input. Superelasticity refers to the ability of
a material to recover a large amount of mechanical deformation at a given
temperature. Superelasticity in organic crystals - through interconvertible
phase changes - is a recently discovered materials phenomenon. This discovery
will likely breed a new research field on polymorphic engineering of molecular
crystals, providing a way of overcoming the intrinsic fragility (brittleness) of
organic crystals in deformable electronics. Polymorphism is the ability of a
material to exist in more than one crystal structure (ordered molecular
arrangement). This award explores the fundamental relationship between those
structural states and the functionalities of superelasticity, ferroelasticity,
and shape memory. Electronic devices with SOSs as active layers can respond to
environmental stimuli without additional circuits and find a variety of
applications such as remote sensing, memory devices, and programmable
electronics. SOSs are also intriguing when it comes to their mechanically and
thermally tunable electrical and optical properties. With the potential to
create new forms of electronic and optical devices, it is vital to understand
and rationalize the mechanics of superelastic organic semiconductors. This
research project will both theoretically and experimentally analyze the
deformability and shape memory in organic semiconductors under mechanical and
thermal load and further understand the fundamental relationship between the
mechanical, thermal, and optoelectronic properties of SOSs. The research will
leverage the educational and outreach activities based on new curriculum
development integrating data sciences, engineering education for K-12 students
through an existing collaboration with Women in Engineering Program at Purdue,
and engagement of underrepresented groups in engineering
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to
understand the mechanics and molecular mechanism of superelasticity,
ferroelasticity, and shape memory effect in a new class of organic
semiconductors using multi-scale theoretical modeling and experimentation
approaches. The research will (i) understand the cooperative molecular mechanism
underlying the deformability and shape memory effect in the solid-state
molecular crystal, (ii) understand the thermodynamics, kinetics, and stress
profiles along the trajectory of the martensitic transition under the thermal
and mechanical load, (iii) understand the molecular kinetics and deformation
twinning/detwinning in organic crystals responsible for the superelasticity,
ferroelasticity, and shape memory effect, and (iv) establish the structure-
property relationship by understanding the mechanical, electronic, optical, and
thermal properties of SOSs for the use in optoelectronics. Overall, the research
project is to address a grand challenge in the fundamental understanding of
molecular structures of macroscopic and reversible deformation in response to
external stimuli. The fundamental understanding of
superelasticity/ferroelasticity in organic crystals will create new knowledge
about the martensitic phase transition in solid-state molecules. Such knowledge
can open new avenues for rapid, reversible modulation of electronic and optical
properties by means of molecular design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.