* 1941871
* DIMACS Special Focus on Mechanisms and Algorithms to Augment Human Decision Making
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 10/31/2023
* USD 99,635.00

The convergence of humans and machines-through machine learning and increasingly
intelligent (and autonomous) devices-promises a transformational impact on daily
life. Already machines may outperform humans at certain tasks. Nevertheless,
complete autonomy remains elusive, and the ability predict future outcomes will
continue to benefit from human wisdom for many more years. Beyond accurate
predictions, decisions require insight into the preferences or utility functions
of the people that they impact. Decision-support tools must go beyond
observational data to actively elicit both information and preferences from
stakeholders, to reward contributors appropriately, and to combine the inputs in
a way that is optimal modulo fairness constraints and practical limits on
computational power. A "special focus" (SF) will study tools to augment decision
making in individuals and organizations, aiming to vastly improve decision-
support systems by leveraging both human and machine intelligence. Tools to be
explored as part of this project include (1) mechanisms to elicit complex
probabilities and preferences from people, rewarding them appropriately (2)
algorithms to combine human judgments and data-driven predictions, and (3)
algorithms to aggregate potentially conflicting preferences. The SF will feature
workshops exploring ongoing research; a visitor program allowing individuals to
dig deeper into issues that arise; and implementation challenges that test out
new algorithmic approaches. The project will involve a large number of people in
various scientific communities and expose them to new ideas, new problems, and
new opportunities for collaboration. These activities encourage diversity of
opinions, experiences, ideas, and expertise, while also advancing the goal of
involving more women and under-represented minorities in computing.
Undergraduates will be exposed to topics of the SF through research experiences
each summer. The workshops will explore the nature of work and how it will
change in the age of intelligent machines. Presentations will also address
current research that has global societal importance in areas such as voting
rules, restrictions on autonomous vehicles, and fairness of algorithms used to
make decisions in the medical, economic, and other
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SF will build on recent advances in
computational social choice, crowd-sourced democracy, and crowd-sourced
forecasting, including prediction markets and scoring rules. It will investigate
how organizations can reduce barriers by rewarding people to enhance inputs to
machine intelligence, thus improving predictions and decisions, and it will
study how to elicit accurate representation of individual preferences and
algorithms to turn elicited votes into organization-level decisions that
maximize an objective subject to fundamental axioms and efficient computation.
It will emphasize important themes in computer science theory such as complexity
and machine learning, as well as issues of social responsibility, fairness of
algorithms, aids to decision making, and human-computer interactions that arise
in a world with increasingly intelligent machines and ubiquitous data. The SF
will explore new ideas for eliciting complex information, including new ideas in
privacy-preserving elicitation, market-based elicitation, wagering mechanisms
and scoring rules. It will address new directions in algorithmic social choice
involving strategy-proof auctions, incentive compatible machine learning,
randomized social choice, and iterative voting. There will be discussion of
mechanisms and markets to elicit information beyond labels (e.g., features) to
improve machine learning models. The SF will address questions of preference
aggregation, including trustworthy preference aggregation, aggregation of
conditional preferences, and complex rating procedures. Finally, the SF will
explore issues of learning from real data and will consider elicitation when one
has limited time, bounding parameter values from qualitative and quantitative
information about probabilities, and leveraging existing knowledge to inform the
elicitation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.