* 1941401
* CAREER: Spatiotemporally addressable hydrogel biomaterials as tools for investigating fibroblast mechanobiology
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Chelsea Magin, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2025
* USD 410,836.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Using principles of materials science,
materials that closely match the properties of living tissue will be developed.
The materials will enable studies of fibrosis, a condition resulting in scarring
of the lung, heart, and other tissues, accounting for over one third of global
deaths per year. Despite great efforts to study the cellular processes that
cause fibrosis, the conditions which lead to fibrosis are still poorly
understood. While most studies are typically performed in a Petri dish, recent
discoveries show that these flat, stiff dishes cause unintended reactions that
produce misleading results. To overcome this limitation, the project aims to
create three-dimensional (3D) models of both healthy and scarred lung tissue,
using new materials with mechanical properties that can be dynamically changed
to match real pulmonary tissues. The materials will combine a synthetic soft
plastic with proteins derived from lung tissue. The materials developed will be
sensitive to light, changing their stiffness upon illumination, allowing spatial
patterning of material stiffness. These improved 3D models will be used to study
cell responses in a more natural environment. These models will be used to test
how cells respond to changes in their environment, like stiffening from scarring
in fibrotic lung disease, to better understand the cellular origins of these
conditions. An educational curriculum to engage a range of students from middle
to graduate school in the translational aspects of biotechnology and biomedical
engineering is proposed to further complement these fundamental biomaterial-
based studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this proposal is to design and synthesize hydrolytically
stable, dynamically tunable hybrid hydrogel biomaterials. Using fundamental
principles of materials science and engineering, photo-addressable hybrid
biomaterial platforms that will mimic critical aspects of fibrotic disease
progression in vitro will be developed. A new class of photo-addressable
poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-based hybrid hydrogels will be synthesized. These
innovative biomaterials will combine a phototunable PEG backbone with
decellularized ECM (dECM) from healthy or diseased lung tissue, to decouple
fibrotic tissue composition from subsequent changes in mechanical properties.
The chemistries and multi-stage reaction schemes introduced will provide
unprecedented reversible spatiotemporal control over microenvironmental
mechanical properties with submicron resolution independent of composition. The
materials developed will allow studying the influence of cell-matrix
interactions on fibroblast mechanobiology in vitro. These materials will improve
our understanding of the fundamental cellular and molecular processes underlying
chronic diseases such as pulmonary fibrosis. Improved in vitro models that
reproduce key aspects of human physiology, including the dimensionality, dynamic
heterogeneity, and mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix (ECM)
composition, will facilitate studies of critical cell-matrix interactions
underlying fibrotic disease. These biomaterial systems will allow answers to
fundamental questions related to fibroblast mechanobiology to be answered: 1)
How do pathological changes in matrix composition and modulus influence the
phenotype of encapsulated fibroblasts? 2) Which of these inputs is the more
potent driver of fibrosis, i.e., the best target for therapeutics? and 3) Are
these phenotypic changes reversible? An educational curriculum to engage a range
of students from middle to graduate school in the translational aspects of
biotechnology and biomedical engineering is proposed to further complement these
fundamental biomaterial-based studies. These research and educational objectives
will advance knowledge and train the next generation of engineers and
scientists. Sharing the results of this project across multiple platforms within
local public schools and bioengineering courses will inspire teachers and
students to use STEM-principles to solve problems in life sciences and
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.