* 1941404
* CAREER: Stabilizing Accessibility of Prior Knowledge Across the Lifespan
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Sharda Umanath, Claremont McKenna College
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 05/31/2026
* USD 551,752.00

People use accumulated knowledge from prior learning to interact with the world.
However, acquired knowledge is not useful if retrieval failures hinder the
ability to bring it to mind when needed. The goal of this project is to advance
an understanding of cognitive aging, and to improve the accessibility and
stability of prior knowledge gained across the lifespan. Practically, it will
lead to strategies to make better utilization of our preexisting knowledge,
which will benefit both younger and older adults. Given the demographic
transitions predicted for the next decades, with an increasing number of elderly
adults in the population, theoretically and empirically informed means of
maintaining cognitive health throughout the life-span are highly
desirable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Retrieval failures can be useful in terms of the
metacognitive feedback they offer a person as he/she remembers, and the
knowledge can thereby shape future behavior. These failures come with a range of
mental experiences (phenomenology), but little research has been done to
characterize them beyond that of imminent recall (i.e., tip of the tongue
states). The present project will examine memory performance of cognitively
healthy younger and older adults, drawing on theoretical, methodological, and
analytical approaches of work on: phenomenology, metamemory (introspective
judgments about one’s learning and memory), memory principles and application to
learning, cognitive aging, and very long-term knowledge. The research focuses on
knowledge that is close to successful retrieval but requires intervention (in
the zone of proximal retrieval), and will test the effectiveness of strategies
to recover and maintain accessibility of content in that zone. Central to this
effort is the investigation of whether theoretical and empirical principles
supporting retrieval practice in new learning can be extended to recovery and
maintenance of knowledge, and how accessibility of prior knowledge can be
stabilized. In addition to scientific broader impacts, the research activities
are concurrent with plans to: 1) disseminate content on understanding how memory
works and evidence-based retrieval strategies to local academic and retirement
communities; and 2) mentor undergraduates to emphasize civic engagement and to
broaden their access to research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.