* 1941701
* TeachEngineering: Democratizing Access to Engineering Education for K-12 Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Malinda Zarske, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,819,365.00

The TeachEngineering (TE) digital library at the University of Colorado at
Boulder has a reputation in the K-12 engineering education community as a high-
quality teacher resource of classroom-tested, standards-based, hands-on
curricula. As the disseminator of original K-12 engineering curricula from ~70
engineering grantees, the free collection is accessed by 3.2M mostly-teacher
users annually, realizing 20%+ annual growth. The 1,700+ TeachEngineering
lessons, activities and maker challenges support teachers in meeting the NGSS
engineering components (as well as other science and math standards) in their
classrooms and are designed to be taught by non-engineers with easy-to-follow,
how-to videos being added monthly. The project serves fundamental national
interests: strengthening widespread STEM literacy, increasing the general
population's awareness of what engineers do, attracting more and more diverse
students to the engineering field, cultivating youth ambitions, and building an
academic foundation to fuel the nation's economic future. The proposed strategic
TE system enhancements, expansion of lower elementary design-based curricula
(new K-2 focus), further user-centered research, a broadened emphasis on
providing blended teacher professional development that puts the "E" in STEM,
and enhanced marketing ensure TeachEngineering's ongoing relevance and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
TeachEngineering (TE) digital library is to democratize engineering education by
launching experiential lifelong STEM opportunities for all youth through
pervasive usage of its curricular collection-a free K-12 educator resource that
emphasizes design thinking and engineering habits of mind with all learners. The
standards-aligned, design-focused, hands-on engineering activities rely upon
readily available, inexpensive, and simple materials. Project activities include
new tools, practices and marketing strategies to cultivate a community of
practice to engage teachers. The TE team will forge partnerships with major
engineering-education entities to become the go-to resource for K-12 engineering
design curricula and to create blended engineering design professional
development training for K-12 teachers so that any engineering college or school
district can offer the hands-on design education. Creating new methodologies
will enable deeper alignment of TE curricula to the Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS), making the use of TE curricula easier for all K-12 educators'
even novice, non-STEM teachers. Finally, to create equity-focused access
pathways and support the national full-day kindergarten movement,
TeachEngineering will promote a renewed curriculum and marketing focus that
strengthens the "K-2" component of the K-12 engineering
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.