* 1941498
* On the Influence of Oceanic Variability on Air-Sea Heat Fluxes and Boundary Layer Recovery in Hurricanes
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Lynn Shay, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 858,495.00

The controlling factors that impact the rapid intensification of hurricanes
remain a scientific and forecasting uncertainty. In this award, the research
team will use observational data to test a new theory about the interaction
between the air and sea during the key periods in the hurricane life-cycle that
lead to rapid strengthening of these storms. The project has direct societal
relevance due to the importance of accurate forecasts of hurricane intensity
changes. The project will also provide graduate students with the opportunity to
plan, organize, and execute a field experiment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is for the investigation of key thermodynamics processes of coupled air-sea
interaction in tropical cyclones (TCs) relative to vertical shear and oceanic
features. The main conceptual theory is that areas with high oceanic heat
content and minimal sea surface cooling exert localized buoyancy forcing on TCs
during rapid intensification due to enhanced moisture disequilibrium and intense
surface heat fluxes. This process leads to a rapid and sustained recovery of the
atmospheric boundary layer equivalent potential temperature. To test this
hypothesis, the PI team will use data collected during prior TCs and participate
in new data collection in collaboration with NOAA during the period of the
project. The specific research objectives are to: 1) Synthesize in-situ
atmospheric and oceanographic data and satellite SST data, and compute air-sea
temperature and moisture disequilibrium, bulk air-sea heat fluxes, and recovery
of atmospheric boundary layer equivalent potential temperature during selected
Atlantic-basin hurricanes, focusing on previous data acquired over various
levels of OHC and upper-ocean stratification; 2) Observe and understand the air-
sea interaction during TC intensity change over warm oceanic eddy regimes by
simultaneously deploying oceanic and atmospheric profilers during storm passage;
and 3) Develop a framework for characterizing the temporal and spatial scales of
variability of the air-sea interaction and storm intensity for the selected TCs
in terms of oceanic and atmospheric parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.