* 1941104
* Tailored Interphases for High-Strength and Functional Composites - Advances in Experiments, Simulations and AI-Based Designs
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Hendrik Heinz, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 03/31/2021
* USD 5,000.00

The project will support the Symposium CT04: "Tailored Interphases for High
Strength and Functional Composites ? Advances in Experiments, Simulations and
AI-Based Designs", at the 2020 Spring Meeting of the Materials Research Society
(MRS) during April 13-17, 2020, at the Phoenix Convention Center. The symposium
will bring together many of the world?s leading experts in composites research,
which has applications in defense, aerospace, and commercial transportation
technologies. The project also supports the mission of MRS as the world's
foremost international scientific gathering for materials research to showcase
leading interdisciplinary research in both fundamental and applied areas. The
symposium organizers are part of a team of 200 scientists from academia and
industry in many countries around the world that coordinate the MRS meeting and
technical programming. The symposium will bring together leading scientists,
junior scientists, and attendees from an interdisciplinary research community to
foster idea exchange and new collaborations in the topical area of composite
materials and data driven design of complex materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to pay travel costs for invited speakers, students
and early-career researchers participating in the symposium. Funds will be
specifically directed to invited and contributed speakers with disabilities,
underrepresented minorities, and women. The project will also support young,
diverse US-based researchers such as assistant professors and researchers in
equivalent positions in other work sectors, post-doctoral scholars, and
students. Recruitment efforts for minority presenters and broad participation
from various related disciplines will be made. The symposium aims at better
connecting scientists and engineers with expertise in different research fields
related to structural and functional composites, such as physics, materials
science, chemistry, engineering, bioengineering, and data science to advance
cutting-edge research tools and design materials for transportation, aerial
vehicles and aerospace technology. Specifically, research areas to be covered in
the symposium include self-assembly and directed assembly of polymers,
biopolymers, and colloids at ceramic and mineral interfaces, including
graphitic, CNT, and BNNT based composites, nanoscale confinement of polymers
near interfaces, as well as interfacial chemistry and reactions of materials to
generate high strength. In-situ nanoscale mechanics and atomic-scale interfacial
mechanisms, atomistic, coarse-grain, multiscale, and AI models of interphases
and composites, interphase properties in biomimetic and bio-inspired composites,
as well as advances in experiment, simulation, and artificial intelligence
related to processing and property prediction will be
discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.