* 1941086
* CAREER: Mapping Problems in Computational Geometry and Topology
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Amir Nayyeri, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2025
* USD 469,915.00

Measuring similarity between objects is a fundamental problem prevalent in many
applications, including registration in medical image processing, function
detection in protein modeling, reconstructing evolutionary trees in
phylogenomics, and finding recurrent patterns in data analysis. Different
measures of similarity have been studied for a range of problems in engineering
and computer science, ranging from very accurate but hard to compute to less
accurate but efficiently computable. This project studies different similarity
measures from the computability and effectiveness point of view. It views all
similarity measures as maps between objects, and considers different geometric
and topological representations of the objects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research of this award focuses on the
following dichotomy. On one hand, it is often hard to compute or even
approximate mathematically accurate similarity measures, studied abstractly as
geometric shape matching and metric embedding problems in computational geometry
and topology. On the other hand, there are faster heuristics engineered for
specific applications that lack theoretical guarantees, hence are not
generalizable. In dichotomy is opportunity – this project will use parameterized
complexity to create a finer understanding of the complexity of computing
similarity measures between metric spaces using different representations and
properties. If successful, the research of this award will result in new
algorithms with new performance guarantees, in particular, for cases of
practical interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measuring similarity between geometric
objects is a fundamental problem with numerous applications, so this project,
and the students that it trains, will have significant impact on theory and
practice in many areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.