* 1941944
* CAREER: Design, Optimization, and Feedback Control of Noncontact Magnetic Manipulators
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Arash Komaee, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 02/28/2025
* USD 532,000.00

Many medical procedures are invasive in nature when the physicians need to
access internal organs of a patient. Since these procedures are usually
inconvenient, painful, and costly, significant research efforts are being
conducted on development of noninvasive medical tools and techniques. Any effort
in this direction has to answer a fundamental question: how to operate a medical
tool without actually touching it. A viable answer to this question is the use
of magnets: magnetized tools can be safely operated inside a patient's body
using sufficiently strong magnets located outside the body. For example, one can
imagine a painless, anesthesia-free gastrointestinal endoscopy procedure that
utilizes a miniaturized camera carried by a magnetized tiny capsule, and the
capsule is navigated inside the gastrointestinal tract by a set of external
magnets. This set of magnets, together with the machinery controlling them, is
generically called noncontact magnetic manipulator.The purpose of this project
is to establish a technical foundation for design, implementation, and
evaluation of noncontact magnetic manipulators suited for a wide range of
surgical, medical imaging, and diagnostic applications. The results of this
research will support the efforts of many researchers, engineers, physicians,
and private companies currently working on design and development of noninvasive
medical devices, and therefore, will contribute to a broader effort in
development of novel medical techniques which improve the quality of care,
patient safety, and access to affordable health care. Furthermore, this project
will advance the development of miniaturized noncontact magnetic manipulators,
which are essential for actuation and control of micro- and nano-scale systems
widely used in biomedical and nanotechnology
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noncontact magnetic manipulators utilize
arrays of multiple magnets to generate and precisely control magnetic fields,
which interact with magnetic objects or fluids in their region of influence in
order to manipulate them from a distance without direct mechanical contact.
Since magnetic fields propagate unchanged through nonmagnetic barriers,
noncontact magnetic manipulators provide a unique capability to control magnetic
objects in the regions behind such physical barriers, which are otherwise
inaccessible. The focus of this project will be on permanent magnet manipulators
in which magnetic fields are controlled by mechanical movement of permanent
magnets, rather than the conventional approach relying on electromagnets and
easy control of their terminal voltages. This conventional approach has been the
focus of much of the existing literature on magnetic manipulators. However,
permanent magnets produce much stronger magnetic fields than electromagnets of
the same size, weight, and cost. This key advantage advocates a technological
paradigm shift toward permanent magnets as a necessary step in development of
compact, effective, and inexpensive magnetic manipulators for medical
applications which often require larger magnetic forces at further distances.
The existing literature on permanent magnet manipulators is still at an early
stage and inadequate to support the development of cutting-edge technologies for
a broad range of novel applications. The proposed research is aimed at filling
this void by establishing a framework for design, analysis, optimization, and
feedback control of permanent magnet manipulators. This framework consists of
mathematical modeling tools supported by experiment, real-time optimization
methods, and feedback control techniques for several scenarios of practical
importance. These scenarios include path tracking of single or multiple magnetic
particles, multi-degree-of-freedom motion control of magnetic rigid bodies, and
transport of magnetic fluids. This coherent set of analytical and numerical
tools will promote advancements in design and manufacturing of precise,
reliable, compact, and cost-effective magnetic manipulators suitable for
integration into new generations of medical devices, as well as micro- and nano-
scale systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.