* 1941733
* Collaborative Research: Computational Models for Studying Word Class Distinctions in Polysynthetic Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2023
* maria polinsky, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2023
* USD 241,536.00

For centuries, most language scientists have agreed that all languages have some
universal building blocks, and the categories of nouns and verbs are among
those. All languages are expected to have nouns, from the concrete ones such as
'table' to the abstract ones such as 'strife'. All languages are equally
expected to have verbs, words such as 'go', 'eat', or 'love'. However, a
persistent thread of research maintains that there are languages that do not
have these categories. Polysynthetic languages investigated in this project are
at the top of this list. In a polysynthetic language, words are composed of many
parts (morphemes) which have independent meaning but may not be able to stand
alone. If polysynthetic languages indeed do not have noun-verb distinctions,
that would make them highly unusual and would create new challenges to our
understanding of universal principles of cognition and speech.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores noun-verb distinctions in
polysynthetic languages by developing new methods in computational linguistics
that promote and facilitate cross-linguistic comparisons. The specific questions
this research addresses are: (1) are there universal word class distinctions,
particularly between nouns and verbs, and if yes, at what level does such a
distinction exist? (2) can we uncover universal diagnostics for noun-verb
distinctions? To answer these questions, two key issues must be addressed
computationally: morphological segmentation and part-of-speech tagging of
lexical items in context. The researchers propose a novel computational approach
to morphological segmentation based on Adaptor Grammars that is unsupervised and
is able to include linguistic knowledge as inductive bias. They also develop an
unsupervised cross-lingual transfer approach for part-of-speech tagging that
will be applied to a range of polysynthetic languages. As a result, the project
will assemble computational tools and primary linguistic data from a diverse set
of polysynthetic languages. Aside from their computational and linguistic value,
the projectâ€™s results will also have significant societal impact as many
polysynthetic languages are spoken in areas that are key for international
security, language revitalization, and health concerns. In-depth work on grammar
and corpora of polysynthetic languages will serve as the basis of new
pedagogical materials to be used for the teaching and revitalization of low-
resource languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.