* 1941739
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Production and perception of native and non-native speech enhancement
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Melissa Baese-Berk, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2022
* USD 10,303.00

In order for speech communication to be successful speakers must be able to
deliver their messages clearly to their listeners. For example, when a listener
does not understand what was said by a speaker the first time, the speaker may
repeat what they said in a clearer manner so that the listener can understand
it. This seemingly simple act of enhancing intelligibility of speech for a
listener is often carried out naturally by fluent speakers of the language, yet
it can be difficult for people who produce less fluent and less intelligible
speech, such as non-native speakers of the language. Not being understood by
listeners has very real consequences for non-native speakers as it can
significantly decrease their opportunities to obtain jobs and education, and
more broadly, to participate in society as an equal member. The significance of
this issue is highlighted by the growing population of non-native English
speakers in the U.S. This project seeks to better understand why it can be
difficult to enhance speech intelligibility in a non-native language by
examining how speakers of different linguistic backgrounds use speech
enhancement strategies in different communication contexts. The results of this
project could inform the development of methodologies for second language
learning as well as interventions for clinical populations who may experience
difficulty enhancing their speech intelligibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to understand two aspects of what contributes to
enhancing speech intelligibility: what kinds of strategies speakers use to
enhance their speech and how these strategies are perceived by listeners.
Specifically, the proposed experiments examine how a speaker’s ability to speak
clearly is affected by different sources, such as the speaker's language
background, characteristics of the speech materials (e.g., familiarity of the
words or phrases), and characteristics of the communication context. Further,
the project examines how speakers' attempts to enhance speech intelligibility
translate to listeners' perception of this speech, including perceived degree of
comprehensibility (how easy it is to understand the speech) and perceived degree
of speaker effort (how hard the speaker is trying to speak clearly). This
project will help us better understand the contributions from both speakers and
listeners to enhancing speech intelligibility for a variety of native and non-
native speaking populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.