* 1941524
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Advancing Sustainability through Powered Infrastructure for Roadway Electrification (ASPIRE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Soheil Nazarian, Utah State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2025
* USD 16,779,301.00

Vehicles drive our national economy. In the U.S. alone, they transport more than
11 billion tons of freight and travel over 3 trillion miles per year. However,
vehicle emissions impact our environment and cost lives, and fluctuations in oil
prices create economic volatility. Electric vehicles (EVs) offer tremendous
opportunity to both reduce emissions and stabilize and reduce cost. However,
many questions persist on the viability of electric vehicles and the charging
demands at scale. The NSF Engineering Research Center for Advancing
Sustainability through Powered Infrastructure for Roadway Electrification
(ASPIRE) will take a holistic approach to eliminating range and charging as
barriers for electrifying all vehicle classes, from passenger cars to heavy duty
trucks. ASPIRE's approach is to pursue innovative wireless and plug-in charging
and infrastructure technology solutions that bring the power to the
vehicles—where they drive and park. The result will be smaller and longer
lasting batteries on vehicles, effectively unlimited EV range, and a ubiquitous
charging experience. EV users will no longer be concerned with when, where, or
how they will charge, and EVs will be less expensive to purchase and operate
than their gasoline and diesel counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of
the NSF ASPIRE ERC is to achieve sustainable and equitable change in the
transportation and electric utility industries, while improving overall quality
of life and health. The ASPIRE team and its influence will be central to
infusing new technology and preparing for a future of autonomous and electric
fleets as we invest as a nation to rebuild our aging roads and electric utility
infrastructure. At the heart of ASPIRE, is a fundamental focus on students and
community. ASPIRE will champion inclusive pathways from varied aspects of life
into its programs and develop a diverse engineering workforce specially trained
to support the ensuing cross-industry transformations. The ASPIRE programs will
result in broad public dissemination of technology advances, methods, and tools,
and a vast library of vetted precollege, undergraduate, graduate, professional,
and community educational content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ASPIRE ERC is
founded on a comprehensive research program to achieve convergence and deep
integration across disciplines, fueling innovation and value creation. The
research thrusts, Transportation, Adoption, Power, and Data (TAPD), are tightly
coupled with immersive Engineering Workforce Development, Diversity and Culture
of Inclusion and Innovation Ecosystem components. With seamless integration of
wireless and wired charging, ASPIRE targets an integrated systems-of-systems
approach to co-optimize transportation and electric utility systems and end-user
experience and productivity, allowing significant departure from conventional
thinking. This approach occurs at the nexus of electrical-mechanical-thermal
design of vehicles, charging systems, pavements, and power systems, data fusion
and dynamic optimization of networked and co-dependent systems, and
econometrics, policy, user acceptance, and environmental and societal impacts.
New fundamental insights will be gained in methods and materials to integrate
charging infrastructure into long-life pavements. New data science innovations
in solving large-scale, nonlinear, nonconvex, and NP-hard problems in offline
and real-time settings (integrated across the electric grid and transportation
systems) will have significant impact on systems design and optimization. New
economic, behavioral, and social science models and frameworks will be developed
to allow the team to breakout of conventional thinking when considering the
societal, policy, consumer, and market perspectives of and integration with
technology elements. The ASPIRE ERC’s unique holistic and convergent research
approach is critical to advancing and sustaining the envisioned equitable
transformations across the industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.