* 1941189
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disentangling neural indices of implicit vs. explicit second language processing
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Kara Short, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2023
* USD 8,446.00

Given the increasing relevance of second language (L2) proficiency in a
globalizing world as well as the benefits that multilingualism might confer for
individuals' socioeconomic, cognitive, and academic outcomes, improving L2
learning is an area of growing importance. A critical part of this endeavor
involves advancing our understanding of the relative contributions of learning
that is explicit (i.e., involves conscious awareness) vs. implicit (i.e., does
not involve conscious awareness). To investigate the relative contributions of
and relationship between explicit and implicit L2 processing, this project
combines an artificial language learning experiment with recently-developed
machine learning analysis techniques for electroencephalography (EEG), a
neurolinguistic method that can detect brain activity related to language
processing in a non-invasive way. This will inform theoretical debates between
models of language learning that posit that implicit/explicit processing are
separated by a strong interface, a weak interface, or no interface. Such an
improved understanding of implicit/explicit grammar processing might inform
second language pedagogy by suggesting how implicit methods (e.g., naturalistic
exposure) and explicit methods (e.g., grammar-oriented drills) should be
balanced to maximize learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiment participants will
perform a language learning task involving four new words with a hidden
grammatical rule (two words usually co-occur with living things and two with
non-living things). Afterwards, participants will answer debriefing questions to
determine if/when they became aware of the rule. Prior research indicates that
even rule-unaware participants show signs of learning, in that rule-violating
trials feature distinct neural activity and slower responses when compared to
rule-following trials. This project extends such research with machine learning-
based analysis techniques which can assess the degree to which different
neurocognitive events are similar in the timing and location of brain activity.
The first analysis tests whether neural markers of implicit (rule-unaware)
grammar processing occur during periods of explicit (rule-aware) processing. The
second analysis tests whether implicit and explicit processing differ in the
occurrence of linguistic prediction (defined here as the occurrence of neural
patterns related to the processing of living words as opposed to non-living
words, when participants read the living/non-living-encoding artificial language
word in isolation). The third analysis tests whether language task reaction
times show a consistent relationship with the timing of neural markers of
implicit and explicit processing, to determine whether participantsâ€™ external
responses are driven by conscious vs. unconscious
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.