* 1941538
* CAREER:Optimal Design of Disability Programs
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Manasi Deshpande, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Very little is known about the effectiveness of disability programs that reaches
13 million recipients in the US. This research project will use economic theory
and experimental methods to study the best ways to design effective disability
programs. The research consists of three projects. The first project uses
experimental methods to investigate how expectations about the availability of
disability benefits in adulthood affects investment in human capital in
childhood. The second project will use administrative and survey data to
investigate whether disability programs insure against health related and non-
health related consumption shocks. The researcher will analyze survey and
administrative data to study how disability applicants, recipients, and non-
applicants compare in terms of health shocks, broader shocks in permanent income
and other resources to tide consumers over in periods of economic crises. The
third project will study the spillover effects of disability programs. Previous
studies of disability programs only focus on recipients; however these benefits
are likely to affect non-recipients through labor markets as well as market for
goods. The researcher has unique access to the SSI data archives that allows her
to get the necessary data to conduct this research project. The project also has
an innovative education plan that includes teaching, outreach to disability
recipients, policy outreach to state authorities, and interaction with
congressional committees that design disability programs. This research project
will help improve the design and implementation of disability programs and
establish the US as the global leader in disability programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research project consists of a
series of empirical studies on the optimal design of disability programs. The
first study addresses whether expectations about the availability of disability
benefits in the future affect current human capital investment. It will
implement a randomized controlled trial of providing families with information
about the likelihood that children receiving disability benefits will continue
receiving these benefits in adulthood. It will then evaluate the effects of the
intervention on human capital investment. The second study addresses the extent
to which disability programs insure non-health risk. It will use a positive
analysis of the characteristics of disability recipients and non-recipients, as
well as a normative analysis of the value of providing disability groups to
different groups. The third study addresses the general equilibrium effects of
disability insurance. It will use variation across geographic areas in the ease
of applying for disability benefits to estimate the effects of these programs on
non-recipient family members, local labor markets, and community outcomes. This
research project will help improve the design and implementation of disability
programs and establish the US as the global leader in disability
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.