* 1941571
* EAGER: Solar Thermal Soil Improvement over Different Depths
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2022
* John McCartney, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 290,307.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project addresses the
geotechnical engineering research needed to assess the feasibility of using
solar thermal energy to improve the mechanical properties of soft soil deposits
over different depth ranges. Specifically, heated fluid collected from solar
thermal panels circulated through closed-loop geothermal heat exchangers in the
subsurface is used to induce thermal volumetric contraction and a corresponding
increase in shear strength of a targeted zone of soil. Arrays of geothermal heat
exchangers in vertical and horizontal configurations will be investigated to
improve soil over different depth ranges and areal distributions. Advantages of
this approach are that soil improvement can be gained in a targeted manner using
renewable energy, after which the geothermal heat exchangers can be used for
long-term underground thermal energy storage, yielding cost savings when
compared to available soft soil improvement technologies. The research plan
seeks to better understand fundamental processes governing the thermal volume
change of soft soils over different depth ranges and to improve constitutive
models for soft soils needed in advanced computer simulations, addressing the
NSF mission "to promote the progress of science." If feasible, solar thermal
energy and geothermal heat exchangers will be important tools for the cost-
effective improvement of challenging soft soil deposits encountered in civil
infrastructure projects, offshore or river sediments, mine tailings dams, and
coal ash impoundments. This project will introduce undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds to research through established summer programs at UCSD like
STARS and ENLACE. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A fundamental issue investigated in
this study that will impact the feasibility of solar thermal soil improvement is
the possible impact of the initial mean effective stress (or initial void ratio)
on the magnitude of drained thermal volume change of normally consolidated soils
for a given temperature increment. Although existing thermo-elasto-plastic
models indicate that all normally consolidated soils should have the same
thermal volume change due to thermal hardening, limited data available for
heating of normally consolidated soils indicate that soils lower in initial mean
effective stress and higherin initial void ratio may experience greater thermal
volume changes and greater increases in undrained shear strength after
improvement. If these limited data are valid, this would indicate that shallower
soils may experience greater improvement for a given temperature increment. The
objective of this project is to better understand the thermal volume change of
normally consolidated clay through a comprehensive experimental testing program
in a thermal triaxial cell and to use the experimental results to enhance
existing drained thermo-elasto-plastic models and undrained thermal
pressurization models. Along these lines, this project seeks to investigate
potential impacts of temperature and mean effective stress on key material
properties including the thermal hardening parameter, the coefficient of thermal
expansion of the soil skeleton and the coefficient of compressibility of the
soil. Using the knowledge gained from this investigation, this project seeks to
unify predictions from the transient coupled heat transfer and water flow
process associated with solar thermal soil improvement with the observed trends
in drained thermal volume change. The unified model will be used to simulate
solar thermal soil improvement process to understand the roles of heat exchanger
geometry and solar thermal boundary conditions in reaching different degrees of
soil improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.