* 1941055
* Workshop: Industry Listening Workshop Series on Systems Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Richard Malak, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 02/28/2022
* USD 98,886.00

Systems Engineering is primarily an industry-driven activity, and industry
recognizes the value of improving the methods for designing and managing large,
complex systems development activities. This project supports a series of three
workshops devoted to identifying fundamental research challenges in systems
engineering. While there have been numerous recent workshops supported by NSF
related to fundamental research in systems engineering, the academic community
has struggled to identify research directions that will fundamentally improve
systems engineering processes. What makes this workshop different and valuable
is that it is focused on obtaining input directly from industry participants. It
is important to note that systems engineering is not a natural phenomenon that
academics can observe in a laboratory setting. Therefore, mechanisms such as
these workshops, through which academia can learn about the needs and
opportunities in the area, are crucially important to hypothesis generation and
the advancement of knowledge. Intellectual merit lies in the potential to
collect practitioner community perspective regarding the challenges in designing
and managing complex systems that require fundamental research to
overcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop series is designed to identify and
articulate fundamental challenges faced by the practitioner community. Two
"practitioner listening workshops" will be held in early 2020 to elicit input
from industry stakeholders. The workshops will feature a mix of inquiry based on
predetermined questions and open discussions led by industry participants.
Workshop organizers will aggregate and synthesize observations from the initial
workshops to produce a recommendation for a prioritized fundamental research
agenda. A final "feedback" workshop will be held in the second half of 2020
during which organizers will present and solicit feedback about the research
agenda. Participants of the original workshops will be invited to participate in
the feedback workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.