* 1941426
* CAREER: Quantum Spintronic Device Building Blocks with Magnetically Ordered Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Wei Zhang, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project will, at the fundamental level, explore how materials’ quantum
properties, either natural or artificially engineered, can be utilized
effectively to enhance future electronic device performance through a new class
of spin-based device building blocks for potential applications in
nanoelectronics. The project will help answer fundamental questions such as how
novel hybrid magnetic&lt;br/&gt;heterostructures can be made into and used as
device building blocks and how materials’ quantum mechanical features can be
adopted as new mechanisms for future robust, efficient communication and
computation. These efforts will potentially revolutionize technologies in Big
Data, Advanced Electronics,and the Internet of Things. This project is expected
to benefit researchers from spintronics, magnetism, and quantum materials, and
effectively links undergraduate and graduate education to the research frontier.
The research and education content developed therein will be used in outreach
programs tailored for students from underrepresented groups to promote their
interest in physics and encourage them to consider careers in science. The
project will also involve education and outreach activities, developing cutting-
edge research and education infrastructures and toolkits for nanoscience and
quantum technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how solid-
state orders (structural, electronic, and magnetic), as well as quantum-
mechanical couplings in condensed matter systems, can affect spintronic
properties, and study how these can be effectively controlled for future
nanoelectronics device applications. It focuses on realizing novel and optimized
device building blocks by using state-of-the-art hybrid antiferromagnet/heavy-
metal/ferromagnet heterostructures. Specific thrusts include: (1) establishing a
solid understanding of spin-orbit effects and their impact on spin dynamics in
magnetic heterostructures; (2) realizing nanoscale, ultrafast readout spin state
variables for coherent, reliable signal readout and propagation; and (3)
developing nanoscale electrical and optical measurement toolkits for research
and education in quantum science. The project is transformative in that it is
expected to produce a platform that comprehensively incorporates magnetic
heterostructures into nanoscale spintronic devices combining pronounced spin-
orbit effects that enable both high energy-efficiency and ultrafast operating
frequencies up to THz levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.