* 1941917
* CAREER: A Quantitative Analysis of Spatial Inequality and Place-based Policies
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Cecile Gaubert, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 376,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal sheds light on some of the causes,
consequences and policy implications of geographic inequality. The first project
formalizes the theoretical argument in favor of a redistribution system based on
place of residence, in addition to income. The project then assesses the gains
of such place-based redistribution in the United States. The second project
studies within-city geographic inequality and the impact of corresponding
neighborhood-level place-based policies. In particular, it analyzes jointly
three trends of the past few decades in the United States: increased income
inequality, high incomes moving to the downtowns of large cities, and
neighborhood change in these cities. The third project develops and
characterizes a new theoretical model that incorporates preferences for location
that depend on income, and examines the impact of population growth on changes
in location choice by skill, and on geographic inequality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of Economic Geography has witnessed a
quantitative revolution in the recent years due to the frameworks that combine
theoretical tractability, close connection to data, and the ability to undertake
quantitative model-based general equilibrium counterfactuals that are useful for
policy assessment. These tools have been primarily focused so far on studying
efficiency in models with homogeneous agents. This proposal extends the
framework and its applications to analyze spatial equilibria with heterogeneous
agents, where households are unequal in skill and income, leading to different
location choices. These theoretical extensions are a necessary starting point
for the analysis to focus on spatial inequality and the distributional
consequences of spatial policies, in addition to their impact on
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.