* 1941247
* I-Corps: Nanostructured wear and corrosion resistant surfaces for titanium and titanium alloy applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Gary Doll, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project affects all
industries that employ mechanical components fabricated from titanium or
titanium alloys. The ability to solve the problems of poor wear resistance of
titanium and titanium alloys facilitates and accelerates the utilization of
titanium alloys for mechanical components in many markets. This is especially
beneficial for those markets that require materials with high corrosion
resistance, the capacity to handle high temperatures, and materials that possess
a high tensile strength to density ratio. This technology will potential
significantly benefit first markets in the automotive and aerospace industries
where titanium utilization is expected to grow significantly. The potential of
this project can also extend to biomedical devices and components such as
medical implants. Additive manufacturing technologies have accelerated the
growth of titanium-containing materials in these and other markets, and this
project should contribute synergistically with advanced manufacturing
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will further develop a
new surface treatment for titanium and titanium alloys. The surface treatment
consists of a modified oxide layer produced through thermochemical processes.
After initially generating an oxide layer, a post nitriding process produces a
unique structure containing nanocrystalline titanium nitride in a titanium
dioxide matrix. The wear and corrosion resistance of specimens with this surface
treatment have been benchmarked against untreated specimens and specimens
treated with other commercially available engineered surfaces. The nanocomposite
converted surfaces were shown to provide a 300x improvement in the wear
resistance in dry and tribocorrosive environments, and a 10x improvement over
thermal oxidation and nitriding. This technology is an improvement over previous
attempts used to attain this unique surface morphology that used toxic chemicals
that leave hazardous contaminants in the coating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.