* 1941475
* Collaborative Research: Triple oxygen isotopes as a new method to study water inputs and metabolism in wild animals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Alexander Gerson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 218,531.00

All animals require water and energy to stay alive. Water is obtained from a
variety of external sources (e.g., rivers, lakes, food), and internally as a
byproduct of the chemical reactions that occur during the breakdown of food.
Energy is obtained from food and is processed at a rate that limits everything
an animal does: foraging and hunting, dispersing, competing with other
individuals, reproducing, and other activities. Thus, assessing the
contributions of different water sources to animal intake, and assessing animal
rates of energy use, are critically important for understanding all aspects of
animal function. However, measuring water inputs and energy use of wild animals
is prohibitively difficult. Methods to date require capturing and handling
animals at least two different times, or sampling every potential water source
in a given habitat. These tasks are frequently impossible in the field, severely
limiting the study of these important variables. To overcome this challenge,
this project will develop the use of Δ17O measurements from a single sample of
animal body water (Δ17OBW) to quantify the fractional contributions from
external and internal sources to the body water pool of an animal. In addition,
the fractional contribution of internal water will provide an index of the rate
of energy use, because this internal water is created at a rate that directly
reflects the rate of energy processing. The understanding of Δ17OBW from this
project will create new opportunities to incorporate animal function into a
broad variety of studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The value of Δ17O reflects
deviations in the relationship between δ17O and δ18O. For most animals, two
sources provide 80–99% of the input into their body water: 1) drinking/food
water that is ultimately sourced from precipitation and 2) metabolic water.
These two inputs have relatively constant and strikingly different Δ17O values:
drinking/food water Δ17O ≈ 0.030‰ and metabolic water Δ17O ≈ -0.450‰.
Importantly, the Δ17O values of these sources exhibit little variation because
they are determined by mass-independent fractionation processes that are not
affected by changes in δ17O and δ18O values. This project will study animals in
captivity to evaluate the influence of changes in exogenous water intake and
metabolic rate on Δ17OBW. In addition, longitudinal changes in the Δ17OBW values
of wild animals will be tracked during natural fluctuations in temperature and
precipitation that will influence their water balance and metabolism. These
Δ17OBW results will be compared to traditional approaches involving δ18O
modeling and the doubly-labeled water technique. Finally, the analytical methods
of Δ17O measurements will be optimized for biological samples, including organic
tissues, which will reduce the costs and required expertise of this approach and
promote its adoption by the ecophysiological and ecological research
communities. The new understanding of Δ17OBW can be used to study animal
responses to the shift towards a hotter, drier climate that is occurring in many
regions of the planet, and to assess qualitative variation in field metabolic
rate, a critical but notoriously difficult-to-measure
variable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.