* 1941684
* SBP: Language tools to improve intercultural interactions.
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Monica Biernat, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 385,410.00

The presence of ethnic minorities, immigrants, and international visitors
increases the diversity and prosperity of countries, but cultural differences
may make it difficult to have comfortable and productive interactions at school,
in workplaces, and in other everyday settings. This research tests the
effectiveness of a simple intervention to improve interactions between members
of different cultural groups: Teaching proper pronunciation of unfamiliar
“ethnic” names. Names are important to people’s sense of who they are. When
others cannot pronounce or remember another person’s name, that can create
awkwardness and distance, and it may signal to the other that they do not
belong. Learning to correctly pronounce another person’s name may also make the
speaker feel closer to the other individual and reduce their prejudice levels.
In an increasingly globalized world, enhancing feelings of respect and inclusion
through the simple gesture of properly pronouncing names may improve
interactions and attitudes between members of different cultural groups, and may
boost people’s engagement and productivity in schools and workplaces.
&lt;br/&gt;Ten experimental studies will test the effects of learning to
pronounce ethnic names on both the “speakers” and those whose names are properly
learned and used in interactions. Learning to pronounce ethnic names may reduce
cognitive disfluency, anxiety, and feelings of “difference” between people from
different cultural groups, and as a result, may improve the quality of
interactions and attitudes toward the cultural group. For those with unfamiliar
ethnic names for the majority of White Americans, the efforts of others to
correctly pronounce their names may be a pleasant surprise; it may convey a
welcoming environment, thus lowering anxiety, smoothing interaction and
increasing positive attitudes. The studies involve placing people in real one-
on-one interactions (e.g., between White American and Chinese international
students or Latinx students) or in simulated interactions to test the proposed
model and to compare the name learning intervention to other approaches, such as
multicultural training. The research tests the model from the speaker’s
perspective and from the recipient’s perspective. The research builds on and is
inspired by findings that international students and other ethnic minorities
face negative treatment based on their names, but that the practice of using
less “foreign” sounding names is associated with lower self-esteem and well-
being. The value of the name pronunciation intervention may lie in its ease and
simplicity: It does not require education about cultural differences or bias, it
removes the burden of denying one’s name and identity to “fit in,” and it
requires only a small gesture and time investment. This training should
theoretically influence the attitudes of the speaker and of the recipient.
Superficial learning of a language for the purpose of pronouncing ethnic names
may have a profound impact on social life, smoothing interactions with and
attitudes toward people from different cultural and ethnic groups, and
increasing involvement and engagement in work, school, and social
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.