* 1941434
* Precursors to perspective taking: Examining monolingual and bilingual infants' attention to social cues
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Rachel Barr, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Almost 25% of children in the US grow up in bilingual homes, many of whom speak
Spanish. Bilingual toddlers attend to social cues and perceive emotions and
faces differently than toddlers growing up in monolingual homes. Bilingual
exposure also alters how flexibly they learn, how they communicate, and when
they begin to take the perspectives of others. These differences are likely due
to the fact that language, memory, and perception systems are less specialized
early in development, and early modifications in one system affect the later
development of other systems. The proposed studies will identify how social
communication develops in bilingual and monolingual children. These findings
could be used to develop more effective teaching strategies for early education.
Early educators will be then able to use these findings to capitalize on
protective factors rewarding children for strong communication skills and
flexibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior studies have not considered how systems
develop across time. The proposed studies will bridge that gap in the research.
The researchers will use eye tracking tasks to examine emotion and language
processing in 9-month-olds. Because face processing involves flexible switching
to appropriate cues, they will also examine the infants’ memory flexibility. The
infants will be tracked and retested at 15 months on a gaze switching task, a
perspective-taking task, and a social communication inventory. It is predicted
that early bilingual differences in face processing and flexible learning will
be related to later social communication skills. Practices that maximize the
strengths of bilingual children could enhance communication and broader learning
within the entire student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.