* 1941514
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of code-switching on emotional processing
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Edith Kaan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2022
* USD 14,006.00

This dissertation research project examines the effect of switching languages,
or code-switching, on the emotional reactivity to emotional words. Emotional
reactivity is defined as the differences in how we react to emotionally charged
words such as ‘sweetheart’, ‘disgust’, and neutral words, such as ‘door’, ‘cup’,
as observed using various experimental techniques. Researchers have a good
understanding of the language acquisition factors shaping bilinguals’ emotional
reactivity to words in their first and second language. Nevertheless, it is yet
unknown how switching between languages, a common bilingual conversational act,
affects emotional reactivity. Spurred by the work of sociolinguists and
psychologists, this project aims to ascertain whether code-switching reduces
emotionality and its findings will advance knowledge about the relationship
between code-switching and emotionality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sociolinguists
have found that code-switches frequently occur before emotional words. This
pattern suggests that code-switches provide some type of benefits to bilingual
comprehension. Psycholinguists have found that code-switched paragraphs increase
objectivity by potentially reducing emotionality, more than passages entirely in
the first or second language. Moreover, emotion regulation or reduction and
code-switch comprehension result in similar neurocognitive responses. It is thus
likely that code-switches help reduce bilinguals’ emotional reactivity to
emotional words. Two experiments will be conducted to ascertain the effect of
code-switching on emotional reactivity. In the first experiment, Spanish-English
bilinguals' eye-movements associated with emotional vs. neutral words embedded
in Spanish, English, and code-switched sentences will be compared. The second
experiment will use electroencephalography time-locked to events (Event-Related
Potentials) to compare the electrophysiological signatures of emotional vs.
neutral word processing in the three language conditions. The hypothesis is that
the differences between emotional and neutral words would be the smallest in the
code-switched sentences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.