* 1941181
* PFI-TT: Enhanced Electronic Cooling via 3D Printing from Additive Laser Fabrication of Heat Removal Devices
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Changhong Ke, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 09/30/2023
* USD 315,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enable better cooling for more
efficient and powerful computing. This technology development and
commercialization project will investigate the potential benefit of 3D printing
metal fins directly onto silicon to enable a 10X improvement in cooling compared
to standard existing technologies. This technology may enable faster and higher
power computing, especially for supercomputers conducting high demand processes,
such as training artificial intelligence systems. The research objective is to
demonstrate a performance benefit resulting from the optimization of the
printing process, mechanical bonding/reliability, and the heat sink design. The
education objective is to train a postdoctoral and student team in the
essentials of entrepreneurship and leadership through industry mentorship and
participation in Binghamton University’s XCEED and regional I-Corps program.
Participation will be broadened by inclusion of an LSAMP summer student in the
research, and having the student and postdoc team lead a seminar explaining
their innovation and entrepreneurial quest at our campus LSAMP’s seminar series.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on translating research on
laser printing a molten metal alloy, called Sn3Ag4Ti, on a silicon substrate
into a minimum viable product for demonstration to potential development and
strategic partners. The process includes depositing a thin powder layer of
Sn3Ag4Ti onto silicon and exposing the areas where cooling fins are desired to
laser heating. Subsequent layers of copper are then deposited onto this layer to
form high-aspect ratio cooling fins using selective laser melting. The rapid
laser heating forms thin silicide and intermetallic films at the interface. The
manufacture of the entire fin assembly using selective laser melting will be
researched, specifically how to deposit high thermal conductivity copper metal
onto the Sn3Ag4Ti layer. We will also measure the interfacial mechanical
properties and thermal cyclability of the device, which are critical to
electronic packaging reliability. The design of the heat sink at high heat
fluxes, expected in the next generation of packages, will be optimized using
neural network techniques. Our research will solve key translational challenges
by refining the processing method, demonstrating long-term mechanical
reliability, and optimizing the printed heat sink for minimal thermal resistance
at high heat fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.