* 1941714
* CAREER:Exploring the Unknowns: Responses of Soil Microbial Communities to Increased Plant Functional Trait Diversity in Managed Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Rongzhong Ye, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2025
* USD 476,196.00

Soil microorganisms are integral components of natural and agricultural
ecosystems. Our ability to manipulate and manage soil microbial abundance and
diversity can improve the capacities of ecosystems to provide goods and services
to human society, such as water purification, nutrient regeneration, food,
fiber, and energy production. However, such ability is constrained by our
limited understanding of the complexity of microbial communities below ground
and their connections to plants, and overall ecosystem function. Research in
this NSF CAREER grant will investigate the interaction between plant diversity
and soil microbial communities and the processes that they carry out. These
include plant matter decomposition, nutrient regeneration, carbon retention and
contributions to atmospheric gases. The synergistic nature of research and
educational components of this project will produce well-trained personnel who
will work effectively to address the Nation's agricultural and environmental
challenges and opportunities. Communication of research-based information will
increase public awareness of soil biological health, environmental literacy and
agricultural advancement via research and education. The project will broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in science, including first-generation
college graduates, and inspire their interests to participate in scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses two fundamental
questions: (1) how increased above ground biodiversity (using cover crops as a
model study system) affects soil microbial community composition and functional
traits related to soil biogeochemical processes that underpin soil health and
agroecosystem productivity and sustainability; and (2) whether the linkages
between soil microbial biodiversity and agroecosystem function can be
understood. A whole ecosystem approach, ranging from the molecular to the
ecosystem level, will be performed with the application of cutting-edge
experimental techniques, including stable isotope probing and metagenomics, to
investigate the response of microbiota. This project will improve our
understanding of the interactions among plants, soil, microbes, and the
environment, the four major components of ecosystems. The project will untangle
the mystery of how plants modify soil microbial communities through their
organic inputs and how microbial biomass, in turn, influences plant performance
by regulating soil carbon and nutrient cycling. The completion of this project
will advance our knowledge of the relationships between microbial communities
and specific soil functions (e.g. nutrient retention, biogeochemical cycling and
plant residue decomposition), as well as how microbial communities can be
controlled to direct biogeochemical processes that are important to the
productivity and sustainability of managed ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.