* 1941213
* EAGER: Exploring silicon nitride for high speed electro-optic modulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Jaime Cardenas, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2022
* USD 177,907.00

This project will explore whether we can develop a electro-optic silicon nitride
that is compatible with&lt;br/&gt;complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS)
fabrication. The ideal material for integrated&lt;br/&gt;photonics is compatible
with CMOS electronics, has a high refractive index, is deposited,
electrooptically&lt;br/&gt;active, and low loss; however, current photonic
platforms fall short of meeting these&lt;br/&gt;characteristics. While silicon
has revolutionized photonics over the last two decades because of its
high&lt;br/&gt;refractive index and relative compatibility with CMOS
electronics, the silicon photonic platform, which&lt;br/&gt;uses the plasma
dispersion effect for refractive index modulation, is fundamentally limited by
carrier loss.&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental loss limits the impact of silicon
photonics in quantum information science, ultra-low&lt;br/&gt;power
communications, and chip-based LIDAR. Silicon nitride is a CMOS compatible
material with high&lt;br/&gt;refractive index and low loss; however, it is
passive. Electro-optic silicon nitride (EO-SiN) has the&lt;br/&gt;potential to
completely change the field of integrated photonics. If successful, one can
envision an EOSiN&lt;br/&gt;platform for modulation, low loss guiding,
switching, and nonlinear functionalities all integrated on a&lt;br/&gt;single
chip.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will create a unique experience for one
high school student from the Kearns Center&lt;br/&gt;Upward Bound Program. The
experience consists of a six-week internship during the summer.
The&lt;br/&gt;student will be immersed in the research group working on a
project alongside other undergraduate,&lt;br/&gt;master's and PhD students. The
goal of this effort is to expose one first-generation, low-income
high&lt;br/&gt;school student to STEM fields to motivate them to follow a career
in math, science, and engineering. The&lt;br/&gt;students will receive an
integrated mentorship from McNair fellows (undergraduate students),
master's&lt;br/&gt;students, PhD students, and the PI as they reinforce and
discover the excitement of working in cutting&lt;br/&gt;edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to explore
whether we can engineer an electro-optic effect in silicon nitride
using&lt;br/&gt;electrical poling. As a proof-of-concept of the potential of
electro-optic silicon nitride, we will&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate a silicon nitride,
on-chip, high-speed modulator. Understanding how to engineer an
electrooptic&lt;br/&gt;effect in silicon nitride will bring forward a high
refractive index, low loss, deposited material with&lt;br/&gt;CMOS compatibility
and the ability to modulate the refractive index without inducing loss. It will
clarify&lt;br/&gt;the origin of previously observed second harmonic generation
in silicon nitride, which is hypothesized to&lt;br/&gt;come from either surface
effects or the bulk properties of silicon nitride.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.