* 1941497
* Inclusive Fieldwork Toolkit - Community resource of technology to enable accessible fieldwork
* GEO,RISE
* 02/15/2020,09/30/2022
* Anita Marshall, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2022
* USD 49,715.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Field courses are a critical element of teaching and learning
in the field-focused science disciplines. However, key sites are often
inaccessible to students with disabilities. Students who cannot access a field
location with their peers and instructors are given alternate assignments that
do not provide the same level of inquiry-based, collaborative learning that
students receive in the field. Technology-mediated approaches to collaborative
fieldwork have been shown to be an effective means of enabling participation for
students who would otherwise be excluded. However, the cost of appropriate
communication technology to facilitate remote access is a barrier for many field
course instructors. Establishing a set of loan equipment will enable broader
accessibility and active participation in field-based teaching, learning and
research for students and faculty with disabilities. A major outcome will be
increasing the social inclusion within the field-based disciplines which will
help attract other under-represented groups to study the geosciences and provide
further opportunities to promote diversity and inclusion within higher education
and the associated disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;This grant
will establish an inclusive fieldwork toolkit to enable field-focused science
instructors to integrate tried-and-tested assistive technology into their
teaching and provide a basis for sharing inclusive fieldwork practices across
institutions, promoting diversity and inclusion in the broader geoscience
community. The established toolkit will support the following goals:&lt;br/&gt;-
Provide access to equipment for inclusive field experiences.&lt;br/&gt;-
Establish a community of student and faculty researchers engaged in
accessibility-related projects who could then generate use-case reports and
become system trainers for deployment at other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;- Create
new opportunities for collaboration and innovation by reproducing instructional
practices utilizing an established and evaluated set of
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.