* 1941985
* CAREER: A Versatile Quantum Simulator for Fermionic Ordering
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Colin Parker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 05/31/2025
* USD 602,071.00

This CAREER award supports the development of a novel and versatile “quantum
simulator” aimed at better understanding the properties of solid materials. In
addition to attributes like density and elasticity, materials have properties
such as electrical conductivity and magnetism that result from the fundamentally
quantum mechanical behavior of the dense gas of electrons holding the atoms
together. Some of the wide variety of complex and technologically important
properties of materials, such as superconductivity and magnetism, can only be
understood using quantum theory. Unfortunately, the centrality of quantum
mechanics to these properties means that simulating them with classical
computation devices is either ineffective or inefficient. This award supports an
alternative approach, wherein the awardee and his students are developing a
simulator capable of modeling the underlying physics of materials using the
quantum properties of atoms. In order to bring out the quantum effects in
lithium atoms, they need to simultaneously cool the atoms to within one
millionth of a degree above absolute zero and cause them to act like a solid
material. Students will use one set of lasers to slow the atoms down to achieve
the cooling, and another set of lasers to pin them in place. Critical to this
award, scientists, including the awardee, have developed a technique to shake
the pinned atoms, which coerces them into emulating a much larger range of
materials than previously possible. This award will further scientific insight
into materials of technological relevance, as well as support a new generation
of students in understanding quantum interactions. In addition to supporting the
training of graduate students, the award supports high school students and
teachers from the Atlanta area to work in the lab over the summer on mechanical
and electronic (“mechatronic”) automation tools to increase lab productivity.
The skills and knowledge of state-of-the-art laboratory set up acquired will be
used to develop similar tools for the high school physics
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a novel approach to quantum
simulation of materials using laser cooled, ultra-cold lithium. Many of the
details of debated importance in materials relate to the Fermi surface, where
the conduction electrons live. The project will employ shaken optical lattices,
which allow a great degree of control over the shape of the Fermi surface.
Thereby, the Fermi surface will be tuned to favor or disfavor certain types of
order. Important questions about how these different forms of order can compete
or co-exist can be answered, and create complex phase diagrams generated from a
well understood microscope model that can be directly compared with theory. The
project team will use resonant optical lattice shaking in a gas of ultracold
lithium atoms to tune the Fermi surface shape. The project goals include
facilitating interactions with significant momentum dependence, demonstrating
two merging Fermi surfaces at a neck closing (Lifshitz) transition, and creating
models of nesting-driven density wave formation in a “clean” scenario where no
lattice phonon modes exist to provide an alternate
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.