* 1941537
* RAPID: Assessing the impact of Harassment and other Negative Events on Inclusion of Undergraduate Students in STEM
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Jennifer Mankoff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2020
* USD 210,071.00

There is need to understand the prevalence, impact, and source of sexual and
gender harassment on the careers of women in STEM. Such events which can have an
additive, cumulative effect on careers. How does this cumulative adversity
affect women and when does it cause them to leave STEM altogether? While this
topic has been studied in great detail, there is a lack of understanding of the
relationship between harassment, short-term behavior, and long-term outcomes, as
well as the structural issues that impact the university response. The proposed
study will address this by following students through their entire four-year
undergraduate university experience, and combining detailed measures of short-
term behavior, mental health, and physical activity with qualitative data. The
analysis will be of use to policy makers, will help clinicians develop new
therapeutic approaches, and will ultimately support intervention design.

In 2018, a team at the University of Washington launched UWEXP, which aims to
study undergraduate engineering students during their entire four-year college
experience, and which is unique in that it uses passive sensing (from phones and
Fitbits), combined with self-reported answers to bi-weekly questionnaires and
periodic longer surveys, to better understand the student experience. Analysis
of the 2018 pilot data has unfortunately uncovered an unexpectedly high level of
violence, sexual assault, ridicule and gender harassment. The data contains
uniquely-detailed passively-sensed information around such negative experiences.
To best understand the impact of these events, it is critical to collect more
information from study participants as soon as possible, especially while the
students are still enrolled at the university. Important information can be
obtained from follow up interviews and new analysis, and it would be especially
illustrative to collect and study four consecutive years of data. For these
reasons, RAPID funds are requested to continue the UWEXP project during the
2019-2020 academic year, while the team continues longer-term fund-raising for
the planned four-year data collection. The team will interview participants who
experienced harassment about the timeline of their experience; collect another
year of data from the participants in the 2018 and 2019 cohorts to make
longitudinal analyses of impact possible; study the impact of harassment on
participants' behavior immediately following the event and over time, as well as
the impact of protective factors such as social support and resilience; and
develop algorithms that can detect changes in behavior induced by harassment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.