* 1941405
* SBIR Phase I:  Rotary Electroadhesive Clutch for Lightweight and Energy-Efficient Actuators in Next-Generation Robots
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Stuart Diller, ESTAT ACTUATION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research project will be to enable new robotics systems with actuator hardware
that is substantially lighter and less expensive than the current state-of-the-
art. The high cost and limited performance of actuators are the greatest
problems for engineers developing products for mobile applications, such as
package delivery, security, disaster recovery, and wearable assistive devices,
causing the market to bifurcate into low-cost robots with extremely limited
functionality or versatile robots costing tens or hundreds of thousands of
dollars. Clutches are an important way to reduce actuator requirements and
costs, but conventional clutches are large, heavy, and power-hungry, ultimately
negating potential improvements. In this project, we will develop an electro-
adhesive clutch that is 10x lighter and uses 1000x less power than conventional
clutches. This hardware innovation allows robotics engineers to use clutches
with almost no mass or power consumption penalties. Removing this constraint
will have a substantial impact on the commercial viability of robots that are
both capable and affordable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will consist of the design and characterization
of a compact rotary electro-adhesive clutch. This work will build on recent
accomplishments in creating and characterizing the linear electro-adhesive
clutch design to move toward a rotary design integrating with existing robotic
joints with minimal required hardware changes. The objectives of this work are
to experimentally optimize the effect of materials and design choices on the
performance of the rotary electro-adhesive clutch, and to establish performance
metrics to evaluate the feasibility of commercial use. Design work will include
simulation, mass optimization, and exploration of fabrication techniques. The
experimental work will characterize the system in terms of maximum torque,
power, and speed testing, response time and dissipation testing, and preliminary
fatigue and wear experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.