* 1941695
* CAREER: UrbanEMOS: An Urban Energy Management Operating System for understanding and co-optimizing building, energy and human systems at multiple scales
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Rishee Jain, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2025
* USD 555,000.00

Building, energy, and human systems are deeply intertwined in cities. Design
decisions regarding buildings impact energy usage and human comfort and
productivity. Conversely, human dynamics and associated municipal policy
decisions impact the use types of buildings (e.g., residential, commercial,
industrial) and drive associated energy consumption patterns. Failing to
understand these complex multi- scale interactions between human, building and
energy systems leads to sub-optimal design and operating conditions for all
three systems and result in significant energy, economic and environmental
costs. The overarching goal of this research is to develop an Urban Energy
Management Operating System (UrbanEMOS) that integrates methods from
engineering, data science, and urban design/policy to understand and optimize
building, energy, and human system interactions at and across multiple scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By understanding and optimizing the complex interactions
between building, energy, and human systems at multiple scales (i.e., building,
community, urban) this research aims to provide policy, design, and operational
pathways for more sustainable, energy efficient, and productive cities. To
accomplish this goal and advance sustainability of the urban built environment,
this research will undertake the following integrated research (R) and
educational/outreach (E) objectives: R1) Model the dynamics of building and
energy systems at multiple scales through integration of machine learning and
engineering simulation; R2) Characterize dynamics between building, energy and
human systems by developing a graph-based inference model; R3) Model and explore
policy, design and operational intervention impacts (energy, economic,
environmental); E1) Create a new project-based laboratory course - Data-driven
Urban Engineering Lab; E2) Develop K-12/undergraduate internship programs; E3)
Launch an online professional training mini-course. Overall, this research is
targeted to yield fundamental knowledge on the complex dynamics between
building, energy, and human systems and serve as a foundation for life- long
integration of scholarly research and education in urban systems engineering to
support the design of sustainable, energy efficient, and productive
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.