* 1941782
* Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and the Future of STEM and Societies
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Conrad Tucker, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by exploring the potential of
artificial intelligence (AI) techniques transform how knowledge is gained,
applied, and transferred. It will examine this issue across different sectors,
including education, industry, and government. The project focuses specifically
on the need to harness today's AI technology to augment human performance and
productivity. To this end, a two-day workshop will bring together a broad range
of stakeholders to share insights and ideas. The workshop will include keynote
presentations, panel and participant discussions, and AI technology
demonstrations. Through these activities, participants will explore how to
harness machine intelligence in ways that collaborate effectively with humans,
thus augmenting human understanding, productivity, health, and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will generate: (i) a white paper on AI
systems to enrich human lives in an inclusive manner; (ii) a roadmap for
priority action in AI-enhanced STEM knowledge acquisition and application; (iii)
a sustainable network of researchers and advisors for future submission of
proposals to federal and other funding agencies. On Day 1, following a keynote
presentation by the governor of Pennsylvania, there will be a networking session
for participants, followed by AI technology demonstrations. After lunch, a panel
discussion will explore AI Knowledge Acquisition and Application, followed by a
presentation on governmental funding opportunities to support work in this area
of AI. On Day 2, following a keynote presentation by the president of the Fund
II Foundation and a networking session for participants, researchers will
present their work on overcoming biases in AI. Participants will develop a draft
of the white paper during the working lunch and extending into the afternoon.
Following additional networking breaks and presentations about funding
opportunities, the afternoon will conclude with discussions about pathways
forward. The workshop will benefit society by paving the way toward deeper
discussion and greater collaboration among stakeholders regarding the use of AI
to augment human performance and productivity. Additionally, the topics
addressed involve human interaction with cyber-physical systems in ways that re-
define the human-computer interface, a topic at the confluence of three NSF Big
Ideas: Human-Technology Frontier, Growing Convergence Research and Harnessing
the Data Revolution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is cofunded by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources
Program, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students and the NSF Engineering
Education and Centers Division, which invests in creation of 21st century
engineers and discovery of technologies through transformational center-based
research, research in education and inclusion, and research opportunities for
students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.