* 1941053
* EAGER: Cyberlearning with Co-Robotic Teachable Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Kenneth Perlin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,851.00

Cyberlearning technologies that incorporate robust personalized support and
motivational engagement with co-robotic teachable agents present compelling high
risk-high payoff opportunities for advancement and broad dissemination of
collaborative-robotics STEM education. The project will create robotic teachable
agent technologies that provide personalized social, affective, and cognitive
support to improve students' STEM learning and motivation. The project will
engage at least 10 teachers and 250 middle school students including many
underrepresented minority middle school students in the study of collaborative
robotics and STEM cyberlearning. The researchers will involve students and
teachers in the design and integration of ChalkTalk (a Mixed Reality gesture-
based storytelling and simulation tool-kit) with Robotic-Teachable Agents for
middle school Geometry (R-TAG) to create an open-source tool-kit for formal and
informal STEM learning. The researchers will conduct empirical studies to
develop rich models of student cognitive and social interactions, and improve
understanding of how to design personalized cognitive, social, and affective
support using physical and virtual teachable robotic agents. The project will
create a low-cost opportunity for students and teachers to engage in
collaborative robotics and STEM cyberlearning. The project will contribute to
development and testing of education strategies for broadening participation of
students from groups underrepresented in education pathways to careers in
robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the state-of-the-art
of co-robotic cyberlearning, engaging hundreds of underrepresented minority
middle school students in personalized Ubiquitous Cyberlearning with
Collaborative Robotic Experiences (UCCRE). The project will (1) investigate how
UCCRE can develop perceptual and cognitive support through collaborative
embodied personalized interaction that generates exploratory insight, adaptive
feedback, and self-explanation - going beyond typical tutoring support (offering
hints, instructional explanations); (2) investigate how UCCRE can develop social
support, through embodied personalized interaction with robotic teachable agents
that engage and motivate students and (3) evaluate UCCRE through a series of
pilot studies using design-based research methods, affective and physiological
measures, and Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools. The researchers will use
these methods, measures, and tools to sense and adapt to learners' affective
states in ways that promote learning and creativity. Students and teachers will
iteratively advance the capacity of UCCRE to provide personalized adaptive
cognitive and social support, and facilitate collaborative embodied interactions
between robotic teachable agents, students and teachers, within formal classroom
and informal after-school settings. The findings on participatory design of
ubiquitous co-robotics will likely generalize across domains and improve
students' interest and motivation in learning
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.