* 1941700
* Patterned-MOF-Functionalized Nanofiltration Membranes for Selective Removal of Selenium and Arsenic from Fracking Wastewater
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Steven Weinman, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 04/30/2024
* USD 397,563.00

Hydraulic fracturing or "fracking" of rock layers to release the oil and gas
trapped within produces a substantial amount of wastewater that is typically
disposed of by pumping it back underground. This process has the unfortunate
side-effect of increasing seismic activity in disposal areas. The ability to
remove any hazardous components returned in the wastewater, so that it can be
reused in the fracking process or for other purposes such as irrigation, would
minimize the detrimental impact of fracking in local communities. Toxic heavy
metals, such as selenium and arsenic, are among the hazardous materials found in
fracking wastewater. This project will develop a new approach to remove selenium
and arsenic from fracking wastewater using nanofiltration (NF) membranes. NF
membranes are semi-permeable, meaning certain small molecules or ions (i.e.,
sodium chloride) pass through the membrane while other components are trapped
behind the membrane. NF membranes are susceptible to oil-fouling when treating
fracking wastewater, or in other words, oil contaminants remaining in the
wastewater collects at the membrane surface until water and small molecules can
no longer pass through. Therefore, this project will utilize surface patterns
and anti-fouling metal organics frameworks (MOFs) to prevent membrane oil-
fouling. MOFs are a class of highly porous crystalline materials formed from
metal ions and organic linkers. MOFs are an attractive modifier in membrane
synthesis since they can selectively capture dissolved molecules and ions from
large volumes of fluid. The effectiveness of this separation arises from the
affinity of the MOF for the molecule or ion, the extraordinarily high porosity
of the material, and the ability to tune the sorbent properties of the material
to the molecule of interest. Engineering surface patterns on the MOF is expected
to create localized mixing such that foulant materials are less likely to stick
to a membrane surface. The overall research effort aims to enable sustainable
treatment schemes for fracking wastewater by removing toxic heavy metals. The
proposed research will be carried out by graduate and undergraduate students,
who will collaboratively develop research plans, mentor other students, and
perform STEM outreach to local K-12 students from underrepresented groups.
Additionally, water treatment and membrane design concepts will be incorporated
into the research team’s classes to expose undergraduate and graduate students
to current topics and challenges in water treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to mitigate oil-fouling and adsorption capacity reduction using
surface patterns and anti-fouling metal-organic frameworks to maintain MOF
selectivity for selenium and arsenic while incorporated in an NF membrane to
treat fracking wastewater. The investigators hypothesize that surface micro-
patterning and anti-fouling graphene oxide (GO)-decorated MOFs will mitigate
oil-induced membrane fouling, thereby preventing capacity and selectivity loss
of thin-film nanocomposite membranes in produced water service. The approach
will examine three different sized micro-patterns and two types of GO-decorated
MOFs to tailor anti-fouling ability, selectivity, and permeance. The project
will yield fundamental understanding of how pattern size and synthesis procedure
affect the MOF capacity, selectivity, and oil-fouling resistance. This project
will generate new knowledge on whether GO-decorated MOFs, specifically GO-Cu-
and GO-Fe-MOFs, improve anti-fouling performance over non-GO-decorated MOFs.
Ultimately, the proposed research is expected to enable sustainable produced
water treatment schemes through the removal of toxic heavy
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.