* 1941132
* Numerical Understanding Mentored By Expert Researchers (NUMBERs) workshop
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* John Dunlosky, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 10/31/2022
* USD 48,937.00

Gaps in math achievement in the United States are numerous: children in the US
lag behind children in other higher performing countries; children in low income
families lag behind those with higher incomes; and girls lag behind boys even
for the highest achieving students. These national, socio-economic, and gender
gaps can result in negative downstream outcomes for the lower achieving
students, such as limiting the types of careers that they can pursue. Closing
these gaps is essential, especially given that the US seeks to increase its
workforce in areas that require strong mathematical understanding, such as in
science, technology, and engineering. Thus, discovering solutions on how to
close these gaps will have a broad and positive impact on the public welfare.
Towards discovering these solutions, the organizing committees’ goals are (a) to
identify the most promising avenues for developing and evaluating the efficacy
of interventions aimed at improving math achievement and closing the math-
achievement gaps and (b) to foster the development of younger scientists in the
field of math cognition/education – the next generation of math researchers who
will be charged to solve these and other societal problems that arise from
underachievement in math. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Numerical Understanding
Mentored by Expert Researchers (NUMBERS) Workshop will be designed to foster
high-quality research aimed at closing the gaps in math education. To do so, the
organizing committee of this two-day workshop will provide a venue where expert,
senior scientists can share their vision for the most promising avenues for
future research and provide direct mentorship and guidance for younger
scientists (postdoctoral and graduate students) who aspire to conduct math
research that will have an impact. The schedule and agenda for the NUMBERs
workshop will achieve several aims: (a) develop a forum to allow workshop
attendees to engage K-12 educators to identify their most pressing needs for
enhancing math education; (b) provide an overview of prior interventions aimed
at improving math education and the most important questions to guide future
research; (c) provide up-to-date discussion and analyses of cutting-edge theory
of math ability to foster theory-driven research (theoretical and applied) in
the next decade; (d) provide expert mentorship to young scholars who are
developing their research programs around math scholarship; (e) provide a
mind's-on workshop that will guide both senior and junior scientists on how to
effectively translate their research ideas into fundable NSF grants; and (f)
foster collaborations among workshop attendees. Although participation will be
limited to about 50 scientists so as to ensure that everyone can actively engage
in all aspects of the workshop (and so that younger scientists can receive
individual mentorship from senior scientists), the impact of the workshop will
be broader and inclusive. In particular, the organizing committee will summarize
the development and success of the workshop (which will be made available on the
NUMBERS Workshop website), and, most important, all sessions held during the
NUMBERS Workshop will be video-recorded so as to share the talks with the
broader research and education community. This project is co-funded by the
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12), which seeks to enhance preK-12
teaching and learning of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
through the research and development of new innovations and
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.