* 1941596
* CAREER: Uncertainty Quantification and Optimization with Hybrid Models for Molecular-to-Systems Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Alexander Dowling, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 01/31/2025
* USD 401,753.00

Multiscale modeling combines molecular, material, device, system, and
infrastructure scales into holistic approaches to create targeted technologies
that meet national and global needs. However, most multiscale frameworks require
over-simplification to ensure reasonable computation time, even when using a
supercomputer. These over-simplifications introduce uncertainty and can bias
analyses and decisions. The investigator seeks to establish new hybrid modeling
methodologies to explicitly quantify, propagate, and mitigate uncertainty (i.e.,
information loss) across vast length and timescales. The investigator predicts
that hybrid models will improve safety, enhance performance, reduce
environmental impact, and improve efficiency in chemical manufacturing and
energy conversion systems through more accurate and predictive multiscale
models. Multiscale engineering frameworks enabled by hybrid models can
accelerate many domains of science, engineering, and public policy of national
importance, including climate change, water scarcity, and advanced manufacturing
by enabling more effective top-down and bottom-up integration across
interdisciplinary teams of scientists, engineers, and decision-makers. The
project enmeshes education and research by leveraging interactive modules and
cloud-computing to integrate statistics and computing at all grade levels. In
partnership with local educators, the investigator plans to create educational
modules aligned with computer science curricula for grades 6 - 12. Educational
modules to incorporate statistics and computing across the chemical engineering
undergraduate and graduate curricula will also be developed. Whenever possible,
research software and educational materials will be distributed online for free
to maximize impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER program seeks to establish
rigorous mathematical frameworks to quantify the information loss and induced
epistemic uncertainty from multiscale model reduction. Hybrid models can
overcome this challenge by augmenting physics-based equations with data-driven
machine learning constructs (e.g., Gaussian Processes) to quantify effects of
missing, unknown, or simplified physics. The investigator will address three
fundamental research questions to enable scalable hybrid modeling for molecular-
to-systems engineering: (1) How to efficiently embed hybrid models in
optimization problems, thereby extending optimization under uncertainty
paradigms to consider epistemic (i.e., model-form) uncertainty?; (2) How to
leverage approximate variational inference techniques to accelerate hybrid model
training by orders of magnitude?; and (3) How to compute optimal design of
experiments (DOE) for hybrid models? This approach will promote convergence of
statistics, machine learning, computational optimization, and chemical
engineering. Sparse grids and compressed sensing will be examined to enable
tractable optimization under uncertainty including new frameworks for reaction
engineering under epistemic uncertainty. Likewise, 10x to 100x faster hybrid
model training could enable online control. Generalizing model-based DOE and
Bayesian optimization formalism could enable DOE for hybrid models, offering new
capabilities to maximize resource-constrained experiments in collaborative
teams. Cloud-hosted Jupyter notebooks are proposed to integrate computing and
statistics across curricula from graduate to middle school levels, helping to
ensure the future U.S. workforce is well-equipped to leverage hybrid models and
machine learning advances for decades to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.