* 1941262
* PFI-RP: Novel 3D Nanomaterial Printer for Additive Manufacturing of Multiscale Materials
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Brian Paul, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to develop new stainless steel (SS)
alloys. These materials are important for structural components that need to
operate under extreme conditions such as high temperature and/or radiation
damage, but some of these alloys suffer from high processing cost and
difficulties in welding. This project addresses these challenges with a unique
hybrid platform to selectively produce special SS alloys during the additive
manufacturing of stainless steel, expected to be 22% of the metal additive
manufacturing market by 2023. Finally, we will inspire and educate the next
generation of scientists and innovators by training the graduate students
participating in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is
highly innovative and aims to integrate a microreactor-assisted nanomaterial 3D
printhead (MAN3D) into a laser directed energy deposition (DED) printer. The
former will deploy targeted volumes of nanomaterials at the point-of-build, with
lower energy requirements, thus eliminating the need to store and transport
potentially hazardous materials. The proposed novel process is distinctive and
will advance the state of the art and current knowledge because it does not
require an aerosol, it generates reactive chemical fluxes in-situ via an
activation processing step, and it is solvent-free. This project addresses
knowledge gaps such as the design optimization of a MAN3D printhead for
integration with a laser DED printer, the controlling of reaction parameters to
generate controlled reactive fluxes, strategies to prevent channel fouling,
process optimization for nanostructure printing, and the controlled fabrication
of oxide-dispersion-strengthened (ODS) alloys with targeted
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.