* 1941193
* Brain changes related to learning loss in children
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2025
* Jessica Church-Lang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 01/31/2025
* USD 801,438.00

Learning loss from educational interruption, such as the dreaded "summer slide",
is an understudied but influential phenomenon that plays a part in the widening
wealth-related achievement gap seen in U.S. schools. On average, 3rd-8th grade
students lose between 2-5 standard points on math and reading skill tests every
summer, but there is also wide variability across students that may be tied to
cognitive, and environmental protective or risk factors. The investigators focus
on the neurobiological and cognitive impact of summer learning loss as a
contributor to an education achievement gap, and as a barrier to prosperity for
the nation's children. They will test the impact of 4th-5th and 7th-8th grade
summer transitions on children's brain activity and behavioral performance in a
wide range of students, including English language learners and those qualifying
for special education. The primary questions the investigators seek to answer
are: 1) Where in the brain are there relations between brain activity and amount
of summer learning loss? 2) What factors in a child's environment relate to
variability in summer learning loss? 3) How does learning-related loss differ
across age, and relate to brain and behavioral maturational changes? This
project is an ambitious step forward from previous studies of learning-related
change, drawing on techniques from cognitive neuroscience, sociology, and
educational psychology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess student changes over the
summer period, this research will collect multivariate data (e.g., behavioral
test battery, demographic variables, neuropsychological assessments, educational
testing on reading and math, MRI datasets). The sample will include 210
behavioral and 90 imaging (MRI) pre- and post-summer datasets over the 3 years
of the project, with half collected from rising 5th graders, and half rising 8th
graders. To address their primary questions, investigators will 1) Assess summer
learning change behaviorally via change in standardized math and reading scores,
and in the brain via change on functional MRI tasks of reading, math, and
executive function; 2) Assess what factors moderate summer learning change
through measures of family socioeconomic status, academic ability, education
quality, summer enrichment, and executive function abilities; 3) Identify
maturational differences in summer learning loss through comparisons of grade
and pubertal stage. This project is co-funded by the Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12), which seeks to enhance preK-12 teaching and learning of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics through the research and
development of new innovations and approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.