* 1941798
* CAREER: A Longitudinal Study of Communication and Biology in Committed Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Sonya Pritzker, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 511,338.00

A critical measure of human physical and psychological health is relationship
success. Effective communication has been shown to be a critical determinant of
healthy relationships, but that does not translate uniformly across different
sociocultural groups. Researchers acknowledge a number of significant
challenges: sampling bias; an overreliance on the use of standardized measures
developed among demographically homogenous samples; and the limitations of
laboratory settings where couples are studied in brief interactions, and as
isolated dyads. Anthropologists conducting ethnographic investigations of human
relationships across diverse cultural and sub-cultural settings have repeatedly
demonstrated that there is no single healthy way to engage in long-term
partnerships, further showing that couples might better be understood as always
embedded in and affected by complex and heterogeneous social, historical, and
economic processes over time. Ethnographic research has only recently begun to
investigate the linkage between such conditions and moment-to-moment biological
processes, however, though current work suggests that physiological patterns of
coregulation emerging in isolated interactions cannot necessarily be generalized
to either a single relationship or to relationships as a general category. The
current research thus deploys the theories and tools of biolinguistic
anthropology, which has been developed in both pilot and large-scale studies by
the PI and colleagues as well as graduate students at the University of Alabama
and integrates human biology with ethnographic approaches in anthropology, in
order to investigate the ways in which culture, biology, and experience co-
emerge in moment-to-moment interaction among diverse couples over time. By
incorporating a multi-scalar, longitudinal, and community-based approach,
findings will contribute to a generalizable understanding of the range of
everyday relationship ideologies across different sites. The research will
further flesh out the science of emotional and physiological co- and counter-
regulation by attending to and identifying specific sources of intra-individual
and intra-couple variability over time. These findings will undoubtedly impact
the future design of large-scale biolinguistic studies that significantly expand
on the validity of laboratory studies of interaction and physiology among
partners. As a CAREER project, it further provides funding for the training of
both graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in methods
of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis. Knowledge generated by
the research will also be integrated into shareable pedagogy in biolinguistic
anthropology; an ongoing, collaborative UA-wide weekly seminar in biolinguistic
anthropology; and age-appropriate educational workshops for both UA and the
general public, including K-12 educational programs dedicated to helping
children learn about the science of communication in local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of a Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Award, the researcher will conduct a multi-phase,
longitudinal project investigating everyday ideologies of healthy relationships
of more than 100 individuals in long-term partnerships in both the U.S. and East
Asia. The sampling strategy incorporates several common denominators in order to
ensure comparability and generalizability. Specifically, participants must be
between the ages of 30 and 60, must live in medium to large urban environments,
and must include at least one person works full- or part-time in the high-stress
field of civic engagement. The first phase of the project consists of a
community-based participatory approach that includes both anonymous surveys and
remote interviews with up to 100 individuals who meet these criteria and are
currently in a long-term partnership. This portion of the project assesses
participantsâ€™ ideas about healthy relationships and communication as well as it
aims to build upon the knowledge and experience of participants in order to
ensure that the remainder of the project is based in stakeholder interests. The
second phase of the project further includes an in-depth bio-ethnographic
investigation of the ways in moment-to-moment interaction between partners is
associated with time-matched physiological arousal in a year-long intensive
study of 24 couples across multiple locales. This portion of the research
combines ethnographic data collection; video-recording of naturally occurring
interaction; collection of physiological data; multiple interviews; and
participant-driven mobile ethnography over the course of a year. Ethnographic,
video, and physiological data will be analyzed in an integrated digital platform
to yield an empirical understanding of how embodied experience and physiological
processes co-occur with communicative encounters at multiple timescales. In
combination with data collected in the first phase of the project, it will
further provide insight into how this co-occurrence is mediated by both shared
and divergent ideas about healthy relationships among participants. Findings
will not only enrich existing studies on communication, emotion, and health in
anthropology, psychology, and related disciplines, but will also contribute to
the transformation of theory and method in anthropology through the further
development of biolinguistic anthropology as an approach that can be applied to
study multiple phenomenon in which researchers seek to investigate the multi-
directional, diverse, and varying processes through which culture,
communication, and physiological regulation co-emerge in interaction over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.