* 1941822
* CAREER: Understanding the persistent effects of the food environment on taste sensation
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Monica Dus, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,251,137.00

Life experiences like trauma and abuse can have lasting effects on the brain,
altering the behavior of animals for a lifetime. This occurs because a memory of
the event is written and persists beyond the environmental circumstances'
change. These memories limit the range of possible behavioral responses to
future stimuli and may lock animals into maladaptive patterns of behavior. How
these memories are written, how they influence behaviors, and how they become
etched in the brain has been hard to study. Here the investigators will
implement a research and educational platform to understand the enduring effects
of the dietary environment on the brain. Specifically, they will use the
genetically tractable model organism Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) to
study how high dietary sugar, which is prevalent in society, permanently changes
taste sensation and feeding behavior. The broad impact goal is to develop an
outreach platform to disseminate accurate and accessible knowledge on the
lasting effects of environmental influences on the brain. The target audience of
that platform are people of all ages and challenges traditional campus
boundaries. Together, the intellectual and the broader impact this project have
implications for the field of public health by uncovering and communicating the
mechanisms through which the environment, and especially diet, has a lasting
effect on brain and behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diet composition alters the
peripheral processing of sensory information, and this, in turn, influences food
choice and food intake. The principal investigator recently showed that high
dietary sugar decreases the responses of the sensory neurons to sweetness in D.
melanogaster. Furthermore, the investigator established a causal link between
changes in sweet sensation to the action of the Hexosamine Biosynthesis Pathway
(HPB), a metabolic signaling pathway activated by high levels of sugar.
Preliminary experiments show that the HPB requires the gene silencing activity
of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) to decrease sweet taste, which
provides a mechanism to link food environment and behavior. This project
uncovers the molecular mechanisms through which PRC2 leads to persistent changes
in the physiology of the sweet sensing cells by (1) determining the effect of
PRC2 manipulations on the activity of the sweet sensing neurons; (2)
establishing how PRC2 targets affect the physiology of the sensory neurons to
decrease sweet taste function; and (3) identifying how sweet taste deficits
persist beyond exposure to the high sugar environment. These aims are pursued
using a combination of genetic, molecular, and behavioral
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.