* 1941824
* CAREER: Genetic dissection of stress signaling and defense in yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Jeffrey Lewis, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 11/30/2024
* USD 957,741.00

The goal of this project is to understand how individual organisms with similar
genetic makeup can respond differently to environmental stress. The research
will focus on studying brewer’s yeast, which is used for industrial fermentation
of foods and beverages. Whereas brewer’s yeast can be found in many natural
settings, not all yeast cells are well-adapted to tolerate the high-ethanol
environments associated with fermentation or brewing. Identifying the gene
differences that lead to variation in ethanol tolerance in yeast is expected to
have two broad scientific outcomes. The results may permit identification of
yeast with better capabilities for agricultural and biotechnology applications.
Also, the results could help us understand how genes control stress responses in
more complex organisms, such as humans. The project will have educational
impacts by providing scientific training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students in Arkansas, including underrepresented minority groups.
In addition, through a partnership with a local fermentation business, the
project team will develop two undergraduate laboratory courses on the Science of
Brewing, providing hands-on experience in fermentation microbiology and
biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is to
understand how variation in gene expression shapes phenotypic differences
related to stress defense, using the model eukaryote Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
The strategy is to leverage extensive natural variation in the yeast ethanol
response in order to investigate acquired stress resistance, where cells
pretreated with sub-lethal stress gain the ability to survive an otherwise
lethal exposure to stress. To comprehensively identify the suite of genes and
processes necessary for high acquired stress resistance in wild yeast strains, a
large collection of lines with individual genes knocked out using CRISPR
technology will be produced. Then, genotype-to-phenotype relationships will be
established by bulk segregant analysis combined with deep sequencing. The CRISPR
knock-out lines will also be used to identify key differences in the ethanol-
responsive signaling network across diverse yeast strains. The outcomes are
expected to provide new insights into: 1) the genetic determinants of acquired
stress resistance and cross protection; 2) how these factors differ from those
regulating intrinsic stress resistance; 3) whether key regulators responsible
for natural variation in stress defense operate through changes in gene
expression, protein coding potential, or both; and 4) how stress signaling
networks differ across genetically distinct
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.