* 1941595
* CAREER: Soil Pedogenesis, Agroecology, and Their Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Noa Lincoln, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2025
* USD 712,680.00

Humans affect soils through agriculture in several ways: removing nutrients,
altering ground surfaces, changing vegetation, and so on. By changing the soil,
people are also changing the future potential of agriculture on those soils.
This project uses Hawai'i Island as a model system to understand how centuries
of farming has impacted the soils. Hawai'i is an excellent study system because
of the diverse soil types created by the combination of different aged lava
flows and broad rainfall gradients, and because of the diverse agricultural
strategies Hawaiian farmers used on the different soils. Such studies are
extremely important today as the world grapples with agricultural
sustainability. By learning about agricultural adaptation and the long-term
sustainability of indigenous agriculture we can learn how to maintain
agriculturally sustainable soils. This project will also train a significant
number of undergraduate and graduate students, including Native Hawaiians, and
will engage middle and high school students in Hawai'i in learning about the
history of social and agricultural practices of their
home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon a foundation of soil
pedogenesis work in Hawai'i and leverages the relatively short time frame of
human occupation (approximately one millennia) to understand anthropogenic
impacts on soils in their entirety. Project data will advance knowledge of soil
pedogenesis and biogeochemistry while using interdisciplinary methods to
quantify pre-industrial human impact on soils within a framework of niche
construction. The overarching hypothesis is that niche agroecological
construction of pre-industrial agriculture in Hawai'i was highly dependent on
interaction with and feedback to the biogeochemical environment. The research
team will pursue five specific aims: (1) use soil, elemental, and isotopic
analysis to characterize and map natural soil biogeochemistry; (2) map
agricultural strategies using mixed methods of plant micro-remains, historical
documentation, remote sensing, and geospatial modeling; (3) document and
quantify human alteration of soils and biogeochemical cycling through soil
science and biogeochemical modeling; (4) create predictive geospatial models of
agroecological forms based on biogeochemical drivers; and (5) further situate
findings within the biocultural restoration of Native Hawaiian socioecosystems.
This award was co-funded by the Ecosystem Science Cluster (BIO/DEB) and the
Archaeology Program (SBE/BCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.