* 1941992
* CAREER: Promoting Equitable and Inclusive STEM Contexts in High School
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Kelly Lynn Mulvey, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 01/31/2025
* USD 864,846.00

This project focuses on fostering equitable and inclusive STEM contexts with
attention to documenting and reducing adolescentsâ€™ experiences of harassment,
bias, prejudice and stereotyping. An important barrier to persistence in STEM
fields for marginalized groups, including women and ethnic minorities, relates
to a culture in many STEM organizations, such as academic institutions, that
fosters discrimination, harassment and prejudicial treatment of those from
underrepresented groups. This research will contribute to understanding of the
current STEM educational climates in high schools and will help to identify
factors that promote resilience in the STEM contexts, documenting how K-12
educators can structure their classrooms and schools to foster success of all
students in STEM classes. Further, this work will explore how to create schools
where students stand-up for each other and support each other so that any
student who is interested will feel welcome in STEM classes and programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to examine cultures of discrimination
and harassment in STEM contexts with attention to: 1) assessing STEM climates in
high schools in order to identify the character of discrimination and
harassment, 2) understanding how youth think about these instances of bias and
discrimination; 3) identifying pathways to resilience for underrepresented youth
pursuing STEM interests, and 4) testing an intervention to promote bystander
intervention from those who witness discrimination and harassment in STEM
contexts. This research will take an intersectional approach recognizing that
those who are marginalized by multiple dimensions of their identity may
experience STEM contexts differently than those who are marginalized by one
dimension of their identity. Because adolescence is a critical developmental
period during which youth are forming their attitudes, orientations and lifelong
behaviors, this research will attend to issues of bias and discrimination well
before individuals enter college STEM classrooms or the STEM workforce: namely,
during high school. Further, this work will examine the creation of equitable
STEM climates in both college-preparation classes as well as workforce
development STEM programs offered though or in partnership with high schools.
This research will provide clear evidence to document the current culture of
STEM contexts in high schools, using mixed methods, including surveys,
qualitative interviews and longitudinal measurement. Further, the project will
involve development and implementation of an intervention, which will provide
the first test of whether bystander intervention can be fostered in STEM
students and will involve training STEM students in key 21st century skills,
such as social-cognitive capacities and interpersonal skills, enabling them to
speak up and support peers from marginalized backgrounds when they observe
discrimination and harassment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER program is a
National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of
junior faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding
research, excellent education, and the integration of education and research
within the context of the mission of their organizations. This project is
supported by NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. DRK-12 seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.