* 1941195
* PFI-TT: Interferometric Imaging for Multiplexed Molecular Kinetics
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2022
* M. Selim Unlu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 10/31/2022
* USD 249,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to advance the current state-of-the-
art biological detection technologies. Both in vitro diagnostics and the
pharmaceutical industry rely on biotechnology tools to discover and develop new
molecular interactions. Since all biological pathways rely on protein-DNA and
protein-protein interactions, not only is accurate characterization of these
interactions crucial, but they are prime targets for disruption with small
molecules in disease treatment. Emerging diseases call for new diagnostic tests
and thus new molecular discoveries. This Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project
will pave the way to commercialization of a new technology based on light
interference. There will be a direct societal impact by enabling better
diagnostics and therapeutics. In addition, we will train several women
engineering PhD students in technology development and entrepreneurship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project builds on innovations in
Interferometric reflectance imaging sensor (IRIS) technology. The underlying
measurement principle is based on the interference of light reflected from an
optically transparent thin film—the same phenomenon that gives rainbow colors to
a soap film when illuminated by white light. The proposed innovation uses a
different approach than the conventional method of enhancing the signal through
complex optical resonances; instead, we exploit the power of signal averaging to
achieve very high sensitivity in a simple instrument platform. By design, the
IRIS technique is resilient to the background signal due to variations in the
solution (termed “bulk effect”). The proposed new technique will further improve
the ability to distinguish molecular binding on the surface from the variations
in the bulk solution. The proposed IRIS platform is unique among all label-free
optical biosensors with multiplexed detection of molecular binding kinetics on
Si microfludic chips as low-cost consumables. Hundreds of capture probes can be
arrayed on the IRIS chip and tested against a target molecule in parallel. The
expected low cost of the instrument will allow for integration of parallel
sensors to achieve high throughput and multiplexing
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.