* 1941204
* CAREER: Advancing Mechanistic Understanding of Nanocrystal Dissolution in Aqueous Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Vitaly Alexandrov, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 468,750.00

Nanomaterial dissolution in water is integral to a variety of chemical processes
including corrosion, degradation, decomposition and catalysis. However, several
factors including temperature, solution pH and chemistry, electrostatic
potential, crystallite size and morphology, structural defects and the challenge
of detecting short-lived reaction intermediates limit our understanding of
dissolution mechanisms. In this proposal, the principal investigator aims to
establish mechanistic pathways and rates of dissolution across several materials
classes with the primary goal of providing a unified picture of the dissolution
process using computational techniques. This new understanding will help
identify experimentally hypothesized mechanisms, suggest ambient conditions to
drive dissolution reactions along preferable routes, and aid the design of
materials less prone to dissolution. The research results will be integrated
into the engineering curriculum and a summer workshop will be organized to train
high-school teachers on topics related to computational materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop a theoretical
foundation of materials dissolution at the nanoscale by employing fully quantum-
mechanical simulations to provide a complete picture of dissolution phenomenon
through a tight integration of thermodynamic and kinetic studies. Experimental
studies of nanoparticle dissolution are rather challenging as this transient
process depends strongly on multiple interrelated factors. The PIs propose to
use atomistic simulations capable of sampling statistically rare events which
will enable insights into dissolution at a single event level under well
controlled conditions. The outcome of the proposed activities will be
fundamental understanding molecular mechanisms controlling interfacial behavior
of nanomaterials by utilizing first-principles theoretical/computational
approaches. Understanding the fundamental link between stability and activity of
materials is expected to lead to efficient and rational design of new materials
via selective dissolution/etching for improving catalyst performance. The goal
of the education part of this proposal is to implement cooperative group
learning strategy as an efficient problem-solving instructional approach into
the engineering curriculum at UNL and evaluate its impact on student learning
and teamwork skills. A summer school on integrated materials education will be
hosted by the principal investigator at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, in
collaboration with the Nebraska Department of Education, to train high-school
teachers on theory, simulation and scientific computing tools with the goal of
developing instructional material that can be integrated into the curriculum of
Nebraska high schools to attract students into STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.