* 1941668
* CAREER:Implementing Mathematical Modeling for Emergent Bilinguals
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Ji Yeong I, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2025
* USD 519,195.00

This project supports secondary mathematics teachers in teaching mathematical
modeling practices to an Emergent Bilingual (EB) population. EB students in
linguistically diverse mathematics classrooms are frequently limited to
procedural, rote instruction, despite research-based recommendations that
suggest that EBs' mathematical and linguistic proficiency can benefit from
engaging in complex mathematical tasks based on real-life situations. The
project will support teacher capacity for implementing mathematical modeling
lessons by engaging teachers in co-planning and co-teaching with researchers
skilled in EB mathematics instruction. The project will collect information
about the quality of mathematics instruction in modeling lessons, what students
learn, and how teachers changed in how they position EB students as knowers and
doers of mathematics. The outcomes of this project will be a framework for
teaching mathematical modeling to EB students, teacher professional development
materials that can be used widely to support EB mathematics teachers, and a
massive open online course (MOOC) for teachers to support their continued
learning about teaching mathematics modeling to EB
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws on three important constructs
related to teaching mathematics to emergent bilingual (EB) students: research on
the mathematics education of EB students; research on mathematical modeling; and
positioning theory. Related to mathematics education of EB students, the project
supports teachers in enacting high-quality instruction that incldues high
cognitive demand tasks, encourages EBs to engage in and explain their problem
solving process, and complements that work with linguistic and contextual
supports that support EB students' entry into the tasks. Related to mathematical
modeling, the project makes use of the conceptualization of modeling as a
vehicle for content (as compared to mathematics content of its own), and
envisions the use of modeling practices as particularly supportive of EB
students' learning of algebra. In particular, the modeling-as-a-vehicle stance
invites teachers to engage students in tasks that contain multiple mathematical
representations, which has the potential to both build students' conceptual
understandings of algebra and to strengthen EBs' language and communication
skills in the context of mathematics. With respect to positioning theory, the
project seeks to disrupt the finding that secondary mathematics teachers tend
underestimate EB students' mathematical abilities due to their English
proficiency standards, causing them to choose lower cognitive demand tasks for
these students against established research-based recommendations. The project
team will engage EB algebra and pre-algebra teachers in Des Moines Public
schools in co-planning and co-teaching lessons using mathematical modeling
practice. This co-planning and co-teaching activity constitutes in-situ
professional development for teachers. Co-planning sessions, co-taught lessons,
and regular teacher interviews will be recorded and analyzed for quality of
instruction and changes in teacher positioning of EB students. The research team
and teachers will co-analyze student learning data from observations and
district-administered standardized assessments to better understand the impact
of the modeling lessons on students' algebra learning and achievement. Eight
teachers will participate in the work over the life of the project, each
supporting EB classes of approximately 20 students per teacher. The outcomes of
these analyses will guide the development fo a mathematical modeling framework
for teaching EBs, teacher professional development materials made available for
similar work in other schools and districts, and a massive open online course
designed for teachers to develop their skills for teaching secondary mathematics
to EB students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.