* 1941962
* Workshop: FIELD2: Exploring Issues of Culture and Inclusion in Field Experiences for Minority Students with Faculty and Administrators: Bellvue, CO - July 2020
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Gillian Bowser, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 44,165.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;In this workshop, issues associated with the field experience
will be explored by facilitated discussion from the perspectives of faculty,
station directors, and others who design and implement field-based courses,
REUs, or other experiences. Participants will work together with other
participants to design frameworks to address harassment and cultural bias in the
field, first in a mini 4-hour-workshop in conjunction with a professional
meeting where many field station directors and administrators, such as from the
Ecological Society of America, are present. A smaller group of participants from
the mini-workshop will be invited to a longer fall retreat designed for faculty
and directors of field camps, stations, and informal experiences to address
issues of inclusion and harassment. The selection process will be based on
faculty who have scheduled field experiences for the 2020 spring/summer
semesters. These&lt;br/&gt;experiences can be formal (at a field station) or
informal (such as road trips or camps). Early career faculty will be encouraged
to submit field practicum ideas for consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;The FIELD2 workshop will expand on the theme to specifically address
the perspectives of both students and field leaders using a "Design Develop"
model where participants first discuss and outline designs for diversity and
bias issues in existing field experiences and then develop a curriculum for
student experiences that brings diversity and inclusion stories and issues into
a positive field experience. Project evaluators will also chart progress of
faculty perceptions on diversity, bias and inclusion in the field sciences from
the first mini-workshop through the fall retreat. The broader impacts include
greater inclusion of minority students in positive field
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.