* 1941147
* Dual language learning as a training ground for sensory processing
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Erika Skoe, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 02/28/2025
* USD 606,827.00

Sound is an important part of the human experience and the ability to perceive
sonic intricacies can have a large impact on the quality of life, especially
later in life when hearing in noisy environments becomes more challenging. There
is growing public and scientific interest in finding ways to improve auditory
processing to overcome these challenges. Similar to musical training, speaking
two languages has been proposed as a naturalistic training ground for benefiting
auditory processing. Yet despite the worldwide prevalence of bilingualism,
little is known about how the structure and function of the central auditory
system are impacted by bilingualism. This research has implications for an ever-
growing segment of the U.S. population who speak more than one language. This
work also has the potential to advance scientific knowledge by providing the
first data on how bilingualism interacts with the aging auditory system. Through
education and outreach events, findings will inform practice in real-world
educational and clinical contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test
the hypothesis that bilingualism alters the structure and function of auditory
centers as a result of the increased role that sound plays in learning and
communicating in two languages. Functional and structural plasticity in
bilinguals is predicted to benefit auditory perception of both trained
(language) and untrained (non-linguistic) stimuli and promote healthy auditory
system aging by decreasing age-related functional declines. In a large sample of
young and middle-aged adults (n=200), the project will use magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) to measure auditory neural structure, frequency-following
responses (FFRs) to measure auditory function, and psychoacoustic tests to
measure detection thresholds for speech and non-speech stimuli (e.g., tones in
noise). The dataset will focus on bilinguals who learned their second language
from an early age. Among bilinguals, the extent of the structural and functional
plasticity is predicted to reflect individual variations in bilingual
experience, including the degree of dual language proficiency, use, and
exposure. Thus, following recent trends, bilingualism is not treated as a
monolithic variable with uniform properties across individuals but instead, it
is regarded as a spectrum of experiences and abilities. Preliminary studies
supporting the hypothesis have been conducted on small populations using limited
stimulus sets; however, an integrated, large-scale study has not been conducted.
This research aims to fill this gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.