* 1941485
* Disjoint reference in real-time comprehension: Computational and cross-linguistic perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Brian Dillon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 10/31/2023
* USD 428,254.00

Language comprehension generally seems effortless for adult speakers in their
native language. But this impression masks the fact that a significant amount of
subconscious mental work is necessary to understand language in real-time. One
difficult task in language comprehension is understanding pronouns,
referentially underspecified words like 'he' or 'she' that pick up their meaning
in context. In order to understand who 'her' refers to in a simple sentence like
'Ellie likes her,' listeners rely on a complex set of linguistic and
extralinguistic cues. The linguistic cues do not seem to be arbitrary: Linguists
have identified strong cross-linguistic tendencies in how languages constrain
the possible meanings of a pronoun, with a limited amount of variation across
languages. This cross-linguistic similarity is generally taken to reflect
aspects of human cognition that are shared by speakers of all languages. Thus,
studying cross-linguistic similarity and variation in pronoun comprehension
offers one window into how the human mind creates meaning using language. A
better understanding of how speakers of different languages understand pronouns
can in turn help in the treatment of language disorders, as well as in the
development of natural language processing systems to allow computers to better
approximate human language use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate this with a cross-linguistic, psycholinguistic approach. The
research team will use eye-tracking to measure how listeners understand pronouns
in real-time. In particular, they will investigate how linguistic constraints on
pronoun reference are used by listeners in real-time: Does a language’s
grammatical constraints on a pronoun's meaning immediately influence
comprehension, or does it only restrict interpretation at a later stage? To
explore this question, the present project will investigate pronoun
comprehension in a number of unrelated languages that vary in key grammatical
properties, and use computationally implemented cognitive models to understand
the results. This project will involve advanced STEM training for researchers at
different career stages, from undergraduates to post-doctoral scholars. The
cross-linguistic component of this project will involve training and outreach
opportunities for members of underrepresented groups in linguistics. The
research team will also develop video materials to make the results of this
research accessible to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.