* 1941868
* Response system coherence in emotion
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Laura Scaramella, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 588,186.00

Emotions are an essential part of human experience. They contribute in important
ways to health, well-being and the quality of relationships with other people.
Research has shown that human emotions include internal experiences, outward
expressions, and complex physiological activity. These facets of emotion can
vary in their degree of consistency or coherence. It is generally assumed that
coherent emotional responses are crucial to well-being, health, and social
functioning. For example, accurate communication of felt emotion depends on
coherence between internal experience and outward expressions. Accuracy in
emotion communication may benefit people by improving their social connections.
Similarly, the ability to regulate one’s own emotions depends on coherence
between internal experience and physiological activity. Successful emotion
regulation contributes in many ways to health, well-being, and other social
benefits. The general consensus of much emotion theory is that emotions involve
coherence and that coherence has a positive function. Yet, very little empirical
research evidence supports these assumptions. This project systematically
investigates the nature of emotional coherence and its functional implications
for well-being. By better understanding the nature of coherence in the response
systems of emotion, it will be easier to discern healthy from unhealthy emotions
and to develop interventions aimed at improving the quality of people’s lives.
Beyond this, emotions are centrally involved in a large number of important
social phenomena, including empathy, aggression, prejudice, close relationships,
and decision making. A better understanding of emotion coherence will support
interventions in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines basic questions about the nature of coherence (Objective 1) and the
functional implications of coherence for well-being (Objective 2). The research
approach is based on the fact that behavior and physiology vary in terms of
their visibility and their signal value to others (primarily interpersonal
function) versus to the self (primarily intrapersonal function). A distinction
is therefore made between experience-behavior coherence and experience-
physiology coherence. Four studies combine tightly controlled laboratory studies
with ecologically valid approaches. To address Objective 1, coherence among
experiential, behavioral, and autonomic physiological responses is measured
during a range of emotional states, and compared to coherence during neutral
states. Consistency is assessed across the two types of coherence, over time,
among different emotions, and in different contexts. Objective 2 is addressed by
assessing prospective associations between individuals’ coherence and well-being
in correlational and intervention designs. This objective also tests
theoretically motivated mechanisms in the link between coherence and well-being:
social connectedness (as a mechanism of experience-behavior coherence) and
effective emotion regulation (as a mechanism of experience-physiology
coherence). The design allows tests of a wide range of correlates (e.g.,
awareness), potential confounds (e.g., emotion level), and moderators (e.g.,
emotion valence). The ultimate aim of the project is to advance understanding of
fundamental questions about emotion: Do response systems cohere in emotions, how
can coherence be characterized, and what functions might coherence serve for
humans? The research also aims to advance basic understanding of what
constitutes healthy versus disordered emotion. Given the central role of emotion
in well-being, psychological and physical health, social functioning,
performance, and decisions, the insights generated by the project are expected
to have important applied implications, including the identification of
potential interventions that improve well-being and help people to avoid
diseases. The research samples include people of diverse age, gender, ethnicity,
and socioeconomic status, thus enabling generalizability and informing the goal
of redressing societal disparities in health and well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.