* 1941854
* CAREER: Reproductive mode and horizontal gene transfer in nematode worms: Training early career researchers in computational evolutionary biology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Janna Fierst, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 999,667.00

An organism’s DNA comes from two sources: (a) inheritance from parents to
offspring, and (b) lateral or horizontal gene transfer (HGT) from other
organisms. The evolutionary significance of HGT in eukaryotes is a fundamental
open question in biology. Prior to the advent of next-generation genome
sequencing HGT was thought to be common in microbes but limited to eukaryotes
with endosymbionts and parasites. Published findings over the last ten years
have suggested that both ancient and recent horizontal transfer may be common in
eukaryotes but pursuing these scientific questions has been hampered by
contamination problems in assembled genome sequences and a lack of appropriate
methods for identifying HGT across entire genomes. The most significant
questions regarding HGT in eukaryotic evolution are now: (a) How does the
likelihood of HGT depend on an organism’s ecology and life history?; and (b)
What are the consequences of HGT for evolution? This project will develop the
methods necessary to pursue these questions, and distribute freely available
software packages that will enable other scientific researchers to use these
methods to identify HGT. Reference genome sequences and gene annotations will be
produced for 50 nematode species and these data will be made publicly available
through WormBase and the National Center for Biotechnology Information Sequence
Read Archive. This project will integrate research and education by training
early career scientists in computational biology and scientific research through
a new, innovative mentored summer research experience at the University of
Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of self-fertility and asexuality
affects important aspects of a species genetics including levels of genetic
variation. Sexual reproduction generates new genetic variants through
recombination and affects every aspect of organismal evolution. Self-fertility
and asexuality may therefore have consequences for HGT as these organisms may
use HGT to generate variation. Conversely, outcrossing organisms with separate
males and females may be subject to HGT due to endosymbionts and parasites. This
project takes a unique, innovative approach to study the relationship between
HGT and reproductive mode across Phylum Nematoda and will result in the
development of a conceptual framework linking reproductive mode with HGT. These
findings will advance understanding of the significance and role of HGT in
eukaryotic evolution. HGT-derived genes will be studied in a functional context
and these results will contribute to understanding the patterns of environmental
selection shaping HGT-derived genes in eukaryotic genomes. This research will
result in important discoveries regarding the ways in which reproductive mode
and HGT have shaped genome evolution and contribute novel insights to the
broader scientific understanding of how evolutionary processes shape genomic
patterns. In order to achieve these objectives this project has four specific
goals: (1) Develop bioinformatic methods for separating contaminants from true
HGT in de novo sequencing projects; (2) Develop a probabilistic approach for
identifying HGT in assembled genome sequences; (3) Utilize phylogenetic
comparative methods to analyze HGT in outcrossing, self-fertile and asexual
organisms; and (4) Develop a new, innovative summer research program for
undergraduates, Computational Research Experience at the University of Alabama
(CRE@UA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.