* 1941933
* CAREER: Fast, Furious and Fantastic Beasts: Integrative principles, biomechanics and physical limits of impulsive motion in ultrafast organisms
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Saad Bhamla, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 06/30/2025
* USD 901,968.00

In nature, certain small organisms can achieve ultrafast accelerations of
millions of g-forces in nanoseconds. These extreme organisms exploit unusual
elastic spring and latch structures to generate extraordinary amounts of power,
far outperforming human-engineered robotic systems. However, how these diverse
systems, from microscopic single cells to millimeter-sized spiders, generate
high power and survive the tremendous forces generated during rapid motion
remains unclear. To address this crucial knowledge gap, this project will
combine mathematical theory, biological experiments, and physical modeling to
better understand ultrafast motion in animals. Beyond advancing fundamental
biomechanics, this work could contribute to development of faster, smaller, and
stronger robots that use elastic power amplifiers. The project will support
science training at many levels, including K-12, undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral stages. Research and training activities will broaden the
participation of students from under-represented minority backgrounds in the
physics of living systems. The researcher will develop a field-based
invertebrate biomechanics course to bring students from many backgrounds into
the rainforest to study the biophysics of ultrafast living systems. Research
findings of this work will be disseminated through multiple outlets including
live demonstrations at the Atlanta Zoo, bilingual comic books, and social media
outlets such as YouTube and Twitter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important
gaps remain in the understanding of mechanics extreme biological spring-latch
systems, which rapidly amplify power input to repeatably deliver high power at
small length scales. This project will develop slingshot spiders as a new model
organism for studying ultrafast motion. By storing elastic energy in an
extraordinary 3-D web topology, slingshot spiders can repeatedly hurl themselves
and their webs at flying insects in less than 20 milliseconds with accelerations
exceeding 130g. Webs made of elastic silk actuated by hydraulically controlled
legs comprise an exception springs/latch system, thus slingshot spiders are
excellent models for fundamental questions concerning elastic mechanisms. Their
webs and legs are ideally suited to material characterization and modelling in
both lab and field environments. The principal investigator will bring high-
speed instrumentation into the Peruvian Amazon to capture the ultrafast dynamics
of these extreme arachnids. Combining in-situ force measurements and modeling,
this research will probe fine-tuning and integration of mechanical properties of
the web (spring) and hydraulic mechanics of the spiderâ€™s legs (latch) and will
analyze how power amplification is maximized for a spider of a given size. This
work will apply the physics of damped harmonic oscillators to reveal how
slingshot webs dissipate energy and enable repetitive loading with minimum
damage. By bringing low-cost, portable scientific tools to rainforests (Jungle
invertebrates Biomechanics Laboratory), the project will train future scientists
in invertebrate biomechanics and expand the range of potential model organisms.
By developing bilingual comics (Curious Zoo of Crazy Organisms), this work will
bridge language barriers in science communication to Hispanic
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.