* 1941583
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Quantum Networks (CQN)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Leandros Tassiulas, University of Arizona
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2025
* USD 15,933,532.00

The Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Quantum Networks (CQN) will take on
one of the great engineering challenges of the 21st century: to lay the
technical and social foundations of the quantum internet. The quantum internet
will surpass the capabilities of today's internet because of the unique
advantages of entanglement, a coordination of the quantum states of particles
serving as computational bits that is not present in the realms of classical
physics. Quantum entanglement will improve the internet in at least two
important ways. First, it will enable physics-based communication security that
cannot be compromised by any amount of computational power. Second, the quantum
internet will create a global network of quantum computers, processors, and
sensors that are fundamentally more powerful than today's technology. This will
bring unprecedented advances in distributed computing and enable secure access
to quantum computers for the public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As the architects of
the ARPANET could not fathom the full range of applications of the modern
internet, the impact of the CQN ERC may be similarly profound and multifaceted.
The quantum internet can help revolutionize national security, data privacy,
drug discovery, novel material design, and push the frontiers of science with
ultra-sensitive telescope conglomerates tied together with entanglement. In
addition to the technical innovation, CQN will work to ensure that society is
well prepared for broad, affordable, and equitable access to the quantum
internet and its economy. CQN ERC will proactively study the social and policy
implications of this budding technology and will bring a basic understanding of
quantum technology to diverse communities. At the university level, CQN will
contribute to development of a new discipline--Quantum Information Science and
Engineering (QISE). CQN will also develop other curricular innovations that help
train a diverse workforce of quantum engineers who can intuit radically new
applications of quantum information science in socially responsible ways. Under
the unique leadership of a quantum information scientist, a quantum engineer,
and a technology policy expert, this highly interdisciplinary University of
Arizona led ERC draws from core partner institutions Harvard, MIT, and Yale -
along with member institutions UMass Amherst, University of Oregon, Northern
Arizona University, Howard University, University of Chicago, and Brigham Young
University. CQN also enjoys the support of a strong industry consortium and the
leading international partners in advancing quantum internet technology. The CQN
ERC will help to support the strategic vision that is laid out in a 2020 White
House memorandum on America's Quantum Networks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
technical goal of CQN ERC is to develop one of the world's first long-distance
quantum communications networks enabled by fault-tolerant quantum repeaters,
supported on a network backbone of quantum repeaters and switches. These quantum
repeaters are special-purpose quantum processors that will enable high-speed
communication of qubits (quantum bits that live in a superposition of 0 and 1)
over a long distance. Equipped with quantum memories built with vacancy defect
centers in diamond, and spin-photon interfaces to connect them to the modern
telecommunications infrastructure, the quantum repeater and its key
subcomponents will be tested, validated and improved in two testbeds (in Tucson
and Boston). A team of computer scientists and network engineers will work with
physicists and material scientists to design architectures and protocols for a
quantum internet that seamlessly interoperates with the classical internet.
Engineering R&amp;D will coordinate with social science research on security and
privacy laws, unintended biases in quantum-network-driven applications, and
implications of open-source quantum cloud access. As a public-private
partnership of academia, the industrial base, leading international partners,
national labs and equity partners, the CQN ERC will serve as a national hub for
advancing the development of the quantum internet and road mapping its
anticipated applications and societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.