* 1941449
* Developmental cascades: How motor development alters everyday learning experiences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* John Franchak, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 631,076.00

Recent evidence suggests that acquiring new motor skills, such as learning to
sit and learning to walk, may facilitate other aspects of infants’ development,
such as spatial cognition and language learning. Despite studies linking motor
development to cognitive and language development, a key source of support is
missing: How does motor development change infants’ everyday learning
experiences? Presumably, learning to sit and to walk creates new ways for
infants to interact with other people and their surroundings, which facilitates
other developmental advances. However, few studies have measured such changes
outside of laboratory contexts. The central goals of this project are to
innovate new methods for measuring infants’ daily learning experiences in the
home, and to use those methods to create a unique, multi-modal datasets to share
with the research community. Analyzing these data will reveal how the
development of sitting and walking alters infants’ motor, visual, object, and
language experiences, and whether and how those changing experiences facilitate
later cognitive and language development. Characterizing the everyday learning
experiences that support typical development, and how they are facilitated by
motor development, may help in the design of interventions to improve
developmental outcomes in infants with motor delays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
studies will identify how infants’ everyday learning experiences change when
learning to sit/walk, and whether such changes have a facilitative role on the
development of spatial cognition and language. The first study will use a
combination of recording techniques—video, wearable head cameras and eye
trackers, inertial movement recording, and dense caregiver-report surveys—to
assess learning experiences across the entire day in the home. The effect of
motor skill acquisition on daily experiences will be determined by comparing
infants of the same age who have versus have not acquired sitting/walking. The
second study will longitudinally track how learning experiences change month-to-
month over the transitions to sitting and walking. Follow-up tests of spatial
cognition and language learning will determine which, if any, everyday learning
experiences linked to motor skills facilitate later development. Grounding
facilitative effects of motor skill in direct, longitudinal measurements of
learning experiences in the home will provide stronger causal evidence compared
with previous laboratory-based approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.