* 1941430
* EAGER: An Experiment-Based Framework for Turbulent Combustion Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Tarek Echekki, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 06/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The prediction of turbulent combustion processes that is relevant to the design
and optimization of combustion devices (e.g. spark ignition and diesel engines,
aircraft and rocket engines) presents critical challenges. These challenges can
be attributed to the complexity of predicting turbulent flows, chemical
reactions involving thousands of chemical species and the coupling between
turbulence and chemistry. The increasing availability of experimental data
obtained using laser-based non-intrusive methods has enabled new paradigms for
predicting turbulent combustion processes. These paradigms are based on
constructing turbulent combustion models starting from experimental data that
can be carried out in combustion devices through optical access. Such data-based
paradigms overcome the most limiting assumptions associated with traditional
models for turbulent combustion to overcome the complex, multiscale nature of
turbulent combustion processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present effort exploits
the emergence of high-fidelity experimental data to develop a novel data-based
modeling framework for turbulent combustion. The approach targets specifically
an experimental approach that gathers measurements for temperature and key
chemical species that represent the complexity of the combustion problem. Such
measurements are carried out on small or point volumes at relatively high
frequencies that enable an adequate assessment of the statistical moments and
distributions of the measured quantities. The novel framework elements include:
1) the development of a model reduction strategy to generate a reduced
description of the chemical system using principal component analysis, 2)
methods for recovering unmeasured chemical species, which are needed for a
complete description of the fuel chemistry, and 3) methods for combining
statistical distributions to construct means of quantities needed to assess the
flame structure and the combustion performance. Principal component analysis
produces a reduced description of the chemical system, which translates into an
efficient computational implementation of the framework, especially for
practical combustion devices. Since the measurements involve a partial account
for the chemical system (only a fraction of the chemical species is measured), a
principal challenge is related to the recovery of the unmeasured species. This
recovery is achieved through a stochastic simulation model that mixes and reacts
the individual measurements to evolve an estimate of the missing species. The
project will involve both validation of the framework elements as well as
numerical studies based on the developed framework using available experimental
and computational data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.