* 1941141
* PFI-TT: Development of an enhanced molecular cargo via flow oscillations for heart regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sharan Ramaswamy, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2023
* USD 382,274.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enhance heart function after a
heart attack, using an injectable, regenerative therapeutic. Myocardial ischemia
(MI), commonly referred to as a heart attack, is a leading cause of mortality
and morbidity in the world. Cell and tissue damage following a heart attack will
quickly inhibit the heartâ€™s ability to properly pump blood, which in turn can
lead to heart failure. While stents and grafts serve to retain heart function,
they cannot restore the damage to the heart muscle that has already occurred.
The proposed technology helps regenerate heart muscle through injectable
treatments to offer partial restoration of lost heart function. This innovation
may facilitate viable treatment option for patients contraindicated for stent
and/or graft placement, delaying onset of heart failure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a strategy to re-
vascularize and regenerate cardiac tissues. The proposed technology stimulates
stem cells using physiologically-relevant oscillating flow conditions that lead
to the secretion of high-quality exosomes or a contained cargo of molecular
factors that can regenerate heart muscle. These exosomes will be consolidated in
an injectable form for therapeutic delivery to the damaged heart muscle, thereby
leading to tissue regeneration and subsequent partial restoration of lost heart
function. The proposed work will initiate with rigorous identification of genes
and proteins in oscillatory-flow conditioned, stem cell-derived exosomes,
demonstrating cargo rich in cardio-regenerative properties. The enhanced
exosomes will be injected within an engineered tissue model system platform
consisting of differentiated cardiomyocytes within a seeded scaffold mimicking
either healthy or ischemic conditions. Cell deformation response from cellular
contraction will be longitudinally measured for evidence of improvement in cell
contractile function. The effects of oscillatory flow-derived exosome injectable
on the cardiomyocytes will be compared to controls that will include: (i)
exosomes isolated from static culture, (ii) exosomes secreted by cardiac stem
cells, and (iii) healthy/ischemic cardiomyocytes that do not receive any
exosomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.