* 1941699
* Aleutian - Alaska Workshop at Lamont for GeoPrisms Synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Terry Plank, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 02/29/2020
* USD 14,064.00

This project will support a two-day workshop at the Lamont Doherty Earth
Observatory campus of Columbia University on August 5-6, 2019 in order to
synthesize research results from the Aleutian-Alaska Subduction Zone.
Participants are drawn from ~ 20 individual projects funded by the NSF-GeoPRISMS
Program (Geodynamic Processes at RIfting and Subducting Margins), with a focus
on understanding the fundamental processes underlying great earthquakes and
other types of fault slip, hazardous volcanic eruptions and the building of the
continental crust. Approximately 50 participants will gather at Lamont for the
purposes of sharing and synthesizing results across disciplines and across the
subduction zone, from the incoming plate through the megathrust to the volcanic
arc. Over 35% of the participants will be early-career scientists or graduate
students who will be engaged in formal and informal discussions to develop a
lasting network. The primary workshop output will be publications, including
synthesis papers, that will integrate GeoPRISMS science. The other primary
output will be the scientific connections made between individual projects that
would not otherwise happen, essential to realizing the value of the focus site
approach within GeoPRISMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alaska-Aleutian
Margin is one of the focus sites for the GeoPRISMS Subduction Cycles and
Deformation Initiative. It was chosen as an ideal location to study arc
volcanism, development of continental crust, and earthquake processes over the
seismic cycle. GeoPRISMS-NSF projects funded since FY12 span topics ranging from
deformation in the megathrust to plutonic building blocks of continents to
volatile cycling from slab to surface. Approaches include laboratory deformation
experiments and geochemical analyses, and novel field deployments using portable
mass spectrometers, seafloor strain sensors, and the Alaska Amphibious Array.
This synthesis workshop is necessary to share initial findings, make cross-
project connections, and integrate results from the Alaska-Aleutian focus site.
Workshop participants will engage deeply in multi-disciplinary discussions
(including geophysics, geochemistry, experimental and theoretical approaches).
All presentations and discussions will be plenary to entrain everyone in the
issues, results and controversies of each science topic and
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.