* 1941096
* CAREER: Constraining the Nature and Distribution of Dark Matter in the Era of High-Precision Astrometry
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2026
* Gurtina Besla, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 02/28/2026
* USD 804,579.00

Stars in galaxies are observed to be moving faster than expected if galaxies are
only made up of normal material, like stars and gas. Scientists across multiple
areas of research have been working to find the explanation for these high
speeds. The leading idea is that there exists unseen, “dark matter” that makes
up most of the material inside galaxies. This extra material greatly increases
the gravitational pull on stars, making them move faster than expected. However,
astronomers and physicists still do not know the exact nature of this “dark
matter”. This program will build new models of our Galaxy that will use upcoming
surveys to measure how much "dark matter" there is and test its properties.
These models will be the first to include new knowledge about nearby galaxies,
like the Magellanic Clouds. The Magellanic Clouds are visible to the naked eye
in the Southern Hemisphere and are adding a lot of “dark matter” into our Milky
Way. This program will make these models accessible to the entire community.
This will allow the public and scientists to model the motions of stars in our
Milky Way for themselves. The investigator created the Tucson Initiative for
Minority Engagement in Science and Technology Program (TIMESTEP). The
investigator will expand the TIMESTEP program by creating new activities in
support of student career paths in the areas of Science Policy, Outreach, and
Communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will calibrate the
properties of the dark matter wake induced by the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC)
under different assumptions of the dark matter particle’s nature—cold dark
matter (CDM) vs. fuzzy dark matter (FDM) and self-interacting dark matter
(SIDM). The investigator will use a basis field expansion technique (Self-
Consistent Field Method; SCF) to analytically quantify the CDM dark matter
distribution of the Milky Way + LMC. This technique will be validated using
cosmological zooms of analogous Milky Way + massive satellite systems in the
Auriga CDM cosmological simulations. With these simulations and analytic
realizations, a new framework will be established for current/upcoming high-
precision kinematic data of halo tracers (satellites, stellar streams, globular
clusters, and halo stars). In particular, this project will tackle fundamental
questions in astrophysics: 1) Can we observe dynamical friction in action and
what might this tell us about the nature of the dark matter particle? 2) What is
the distribution of dark matter in the Milky Way?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.