* 1941664
* CAREER: Genetic factors governing axon-glial development in zebrafish peripheral nerve
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Sarah Petersen, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2025
* USD 662,376.00

Movement and sensation rely on the proper patterning of peripheral nerves, which
are made up of long tubular processes (axons) that connect the brain and spinal
cord to muscles, sensors and organs in the rest of the body. In animals with
backbones (vertebrates), peripheral nerve axons are surrounded by a specialized
class of cell, Schwann cells, that physically and chemically interact with the
neurons they surround. This study will use zebrafish larvae to better understand
the exact ways that Schwann cells interact with neurons and tissues in their
surrounding environment (especially muscle) to create properly patterned and
functional peripheral nerves. Zebrafish larvae are used because they are
transparent and develop peripheral nerves rapidly, enabling the coordinated
development of Schwann cells and neurons to be easily studied using a
combination of visualization cell movements and gene expression patterns,
together with manipulative experiments in normal and mutant animals. All the
experiments in this project are incorporated into collegiate coursework and
independent projects for undergraduate researchers, providing technical training
and education alongside scientific discovery. In addition, undergraduate
students will learn best practices in public scientific communication and
participate in community-engaged learning by creating new lessons and discovery
center exhibits for elementary and high school students. These programs are
designed to develop young scientists by improving their technical skills and
lessening the communication gap with the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
aims to define genetic factors that promote migration and differentiation of
myelinating glial cells in peripheral nerves. Neural crest-derived Schwann cells
coordinate development along axons to provide the necessary trophic support and
insulation to conduct rapid nerve impulses. However, the molecular mechanisms
that mediate the interdependent relationship between developing neurons, Schwann
cells, and their extracellular environment are not fully defined. To more fully
understand these processes, the researchers will take advantage of a novel
zebrafish model with muscle patterning defects that disrupt sensory axon
guidance and glial migration. This project has three goals: 1) characterize
Schwann cell maturation and axon elongation in wild-type and mutant zebrafish
larvae, 2) test the hypothesis that a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor functions in body wall muscle to non-cell-autonomously regulate axon
elongation and glial migration, and 3) identify muscle-derived guidance cues
that are necessary and sufficient for glial cell migration and differentiation
using in vivo gene expression analysis and in vitro culture studies. Thus, this
study will uncover key molecules that function specifically at the nexus of
neural, glial, and muscle development in vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.