* 1941045
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: On the Semantics of Evidentials
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Jon Gajewski, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2022
* USD 0.00

A central question in theoretical linguistics is what is a possible human
language. What properties do all languages share and how much can languages
differ from each other? The only way to adequately answer this question is to
investigate the structure of as many of the world's actual languages as is
possible. Consequently, there is an urgent need to study those languages that
have not yet been the subject of significant study. This dissertation project
will provide a comprehensive description and analysis of the evidential system
in such an understudied language. Evidentials are markers that indicate the
source of evidence for a piece of information reported in a sentence. For
instance, in an English sentence such as "Mary went to the party, I heard," the
source of evidence is a heard report, as is made explicit with "I heard".
Languages like English do not have dedicated markers (such as verb endings) to
indicate sources of evidence, but many other languages do have such markers. The
documentation of evidential markers will provide the source material that will
be analyzed in a doctoral dissertation. Broader impacts include a publicly
available deposit of the recordings and transcriptions in a digital archive, as
well as the linguistic training of linguists and language instructors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project will document and analyze the
evidential system of an understudied language, thus contributing an important
data point for cross-linguistic comparisons of evidential systems. This project
will investigate the distribution of the three evidential markers, namely the
direct evidential, the indirect evidential, and the reportative evidential, and
provide a semantic analysis. More generally, this project aims to locate a
specific system of evidentials within the wider spectrum of evidential systems
that have been identified cross-linguistically. The typological novelty of this
system is two-fold. First, evidentiality is linked to focus marking. In
particular, the direct evidential indicates which constituent is focalized, and
determines how focus alternatives are evaluated. This marker will be likened to
focus sensitive elements (e.g., English 'even') and discourse particles (e.g.,
German 'ja'). Within the studied language, it is possible to have more than one
evidential marker in the same clause. This is rare among languages and thus
relevant to tease apart different analyses of evidentials, as well as to
establish generalizations regarding what combinations of evidentials can co-
occur in the same sentence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.