* 1941694
* Collaborative Research: Using behavioral, computational, and neural approaches to understand correction of first impressions.
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Almut Hupbach, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,915.00

Developing correct impressions of others is critical in many situations,
including medical, legal, and interpersonal. It is sometimes hard to get past
one’s initial positive or negative impressions of other people, even when new
information is learned about them. Psychological science has shown that people
pay a lot of attention to other’s initial behaviors and draw conclusions about
those individuals based on those initial behaviors. For example, meeting someone
who is being rude to another person may quickly lead to forming a negative
impression. Even if people behave differently later on, and in different
circumstances, it can be hard to move past those original feelings. Often, the
first information people learn about another person might be false to begin
with. This can happen through mistaken interpretations of someone’s behavior,
false news or misinformation, learning information out of context, or through
gossip or rumors. These issues are of particular importance when making
important decisions regarding activities such as college admissions, hiring,
promotion, and assessing patients and clients in medicine and law. These kinds
of impressions have the potential to influence behavior, and so it is important
to understand how these kinds of impressions can be corrected. This project
examines people’s ability to accurately learn about the world around them, and
when and how new information changes pre-existing impressions and beliefs.
Understanding when and how people change their minds about other people is
critically important for understanding how to correct biased assumptions. The
information gained from this research will help illuminate how decision-makers
integrate new information about individuals, such as patients, criminal
suspects, clients, and job applicants, into their overall
impressions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two main theoretical
questions about how people correct their impressions of other people. One
question is whether updating of impressions occurs through “reconsolidation”
versus “contextualization”. Reconsolidation occurs when new information that
contradicts a first impression is integrated into the original information, such
that the original memory is changed and is no longer recalled (i.e., a long-
lasting change occurs). For example, when a public health official tries to
correct misinformation about a current health policy, the ideal case would be
that the false initial belief is completely replaced with the correct one.
Contextualization, on the other hand, is when new memories are added to the
original memory, and are tied to the situation in which the information was
encountered. As a result, the first impression can still be activated from
memory in that same situation. That is, the original memories are still
retained, along with the new memories. However, they are tied to specific
circumstances (e.g., she is rude at work, but polite when socializing). The
second question concerns the durability of, and the time course over which,
updating occurs. It is expected that updating that occurs through
reconsolidation will last longer than updating that occurs through
contextualization. This research tests how these processes influence person
perception decisions over time. The studies examine these questions using
behavioral, neuroimaging, and computational approaches. Results will have
implications for models of person memory, impression formation, and persuasion.
The project will contribute to a base of knowledge concerning how decision
makers integrate new information about other people, with relevance to
interactions with patients, criminal suspects, clients, and job applicants. This
project is co-funded by the Social Psychology and the Perception, Action, and
Cognition Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.