* 1941029
* PFI-TT: An Artificial Intelligence Capability to Accelerate Low-Cost Commercial Polymer Design
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Ramamurthy Ramprasad, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 04/30/2024
* USD 249,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes the creation of an accelerated
low-cost capability for polymer selection, design and discovery for many
industries. The proposed project will advance the development of machine
learning for the traditional, laborious and expensive trial-and-error approaches
to materials development. The total R&amp;D expenditure of the polymer
manufacturing industry is about $10 billion per year, with anticipated savings
of one estimated $100 million per year in the United States. In addition, the
acceleration of product design workflows could dramatically shorten time-to-
market for new products. Finally, the proposed project includes entrepreneurial
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will help create a data-
driven machine learning based capability and service to achieve accelerated
application-specific polymer design and development. Machine learning (ML)
algorithms “trained” on an underlying database produce predictive models, which
can (1) make instantaneous predictions of properties of a new yet-to-be-
synthesized polymer, and (2) make recommendations of new and existing polymers
that will meet design objectives. The proposed project will advance the
development of a prototype Polymer Genome online tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.