* 1941558
* RAPID - Afterslip and triggered slip associated with the Ridgecrest earthquake sequence
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Roger Bilham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2020
* USD 37,054.00

When they occur, major California earthquakes result in billions of dollars
damage. Greater awareness of earthquake risk follows each event, and also
accompanies scientific efforts to further understand seismic processes. This
RAPID is motivated by the need to quickly deploy instruments on active faults
near the July 2019 Ridgecrest earthquakes to determine how the earthquake have
stressed nearby active faults. The plan is to install six extensometers and to
quantify the potential for present and future slip on nearby faults. Data will
be acquired once per minute and stored for public access at UNAVCO.

This works is motivated by the need to urgently deploy extensometers on active
faults near the meizzocenter of the Ridgecrest earthquake sequence to determine
whether, and how, stress changes in the earthquake have stressed nearby active
faults. Stress changes tend to set up a logarithmically decaying creep rate on
nearby faults following triggered slip that can be measured using sensitive
extensometers. The seismic sequence itself was a cascade of conjugate ruptures
with progressively greater magnitude followed by thousands of smaller
aftershocks as a nearby lattice of conjugate faults relaxed epicentral strain.
The dynamic stresses from the earthquakes had extreme reach, causing slip to be
triggered on faults as far south as the Mexican border. The deployment of 6 new
extensometers supplement and existing one deployed across the surface rupture
two days after rupture. The extensometers record slip with an accuracy of 2
micrometer over a range of 2-4 meters and sample once per minute for a year. The
extensometers will record slip data for a year, which will allow for calculating
rate changes and to search for episodic slip that can be used to determine
rheological conditions in the fault zone.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.