* 1941357
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mechanisms of adaptive plasticity in speech perception
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Yunan Wu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2022
* USD 16,319.00

Comprehension suffers when a conversation partner produces speech that departs
from expectations. A strong foreign accent, a distinct dialect, or even a stuffy
nose can impact the precise realization of speech. Human speech perception is
remarkably flexible. Although comprehension initially suffers when speech
departs from the norms of a listenerâ€™s language-community, with exposure
listeners rapidly adapt and comprehension rebounds. Understanding the means by
which the human brain is able to flexibly map speech to language representations
promises to be important in advancing next generation linguistic theories, in
building more robust machine speech recognition, and in supporting individuals
communicating in non-native educational contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation research project will simulate an accent by manipulating short-term
speech input regularities to determine how speech perception adapts. This offers
the advantage of providing a detailed measure of how the weighting of specific
acoustic speech dimensions shifts as a function of short-term speech input
changes such as accent. The central hypothesis of the research, supported by
preliminary studies, is that adaptive plasticity in speech communication is
driven by error-driven supervised learning. Study 1 tests a prediction arising
from this hypothesis: when short-term speech input regularities depart from
long-term norms, supervised error-driven learning supported by phonetic category
activation will result in down-weighting of secondary acoustic dimensions
available for speech recognition. Study 2 pursues this prediction via a neural
network that implements the algorithmic theory. Study 3 addresses whether overt
phonetic category decisions are necessary for adaptive plasticity in a
naturalistic listening environment without overt phonetic category decisions.
Finally, Study 4 uses scalp electrophysiology to examine the level of linguistic
representation impacted by adaptive plasticity in dimension-based statistical
learning. In all, the project will advance understanding of how the linguistic
system tackles the challenge of communication when speech input deviates from
the long-term norms that established linguistic
representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.