* 1941013
* Focusing the lens on field safety: a workshop for field trip leaders
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Emily Finzel, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 11,875.00

This award provides travel support for 25 field-camp leaders to be able to
participate in Focusing the Lens on Field Safety: A Workshop for Field Trip
Leaders that will take place at the University of Iowa from November 7-8, 2019.
Field experiences are an important tool for training earth and environmental
scientists, and most undergraduate programs require up to several weeks spent in
the field to earn a degree. But field training is not without its risks, which
are inherently different and have the potential to be more severe than
classroom-based training. This workshop will help to guide field trip leaders
towards a culture of improving field safety protocols by contributing to the
development of a process that should ultimately become second nature and part of
the normal preparations for field excursions. Part of the proposed workshop
would be to develop materials for such a national repository. In addition,
graduate students will be invited to join in the workshop and student
participants will be given the opportunity to become ambassadors for field
safety by being involved in the dissemination of information to other entities
locally, statewide, and nationally. These opportunities will also allow graduate
students to build their professional networks within and outside the academic
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely recognized that field-based
training is pedagogically essential for integrating knowledge in the earth and
environmental sciences, and it is crucial for employment in the hydrocarbon and
environmental industries. The National Association of Geoscience Teachers (NAGT)
and ExxonMobil have been leading the way in improving field safety protocol.
However, one of the components that is underdeveloped in the current standards
are protocols for field-camp-like scenarios where students are spread out over a
wide area day after day. The outcome from this workshop will be a set of
standard operating procedures (SOP) that can be adapted to any dispersed group
field activity, whether an educational field trip, research field trip, or field
camp. These procedures will help instructors mitigate accidents through pre-
activity preparation and training that will result in fewer accidents and time
lost in the field. Ultimately, this will enhance and improve scientific
education because instructors will be confident in their safety protocols and
able to focus on student learning, students will be assured that protocols are
in place to ensure their safety, and a decrease in the number of incidents will
lead to less disruption during limited and expensive field
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.