* 1941241
* PFI-TT: High-Resolution Medical Imaging using Ultrasound
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Jeroen Tromp, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to facilitate better medical
screening and diagnostics, in particular for breast cancer detection, by
developing an ultrasound-based device capable of MRI-like and quality scans.
With a reduction in false negatives and 50% or more in false positives compared
with standard 2D/3D screening mammograms, this device could avoid 800,000
unnecessary biopsies and 7.8 million unnecessary follow-up breast scans per year
in the USA alone. This represents an overall $3.5 billion per year reduction in
healthcare expenditure. Commercially, this device is expected to have multiple
competitive advantages over existing methods, with greater comfort and safer
exam conditions while providing better diagnostic capabilities and will impact
the breast imaging device market, estimated to be $2.56 billion globally, with
55% of this market concentrated in the USA. Finally, this technology has
significant potential for many other beneficial medical imaging applications,
such as pediatrics, prostate cancer detection, musculoskeletal imaging, and
brain imaging. For these applications, further assessing the clinical benefits
of quantitative ultrasound is crucial, which will be greatly facilitated by the
development of this device.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project works
toward developing a compression-free, radiation-free, and ultrasound-based
imaging device for medical imaging. While conventional hand-held ultrasound
(HHUS) or automated breast ultrasound (ABUS) devices discard the vast majority
of ultrasound data, the device is designed to exploit the full data content.
This is expected to enable reconstruction of highly accurate images with
exceptional resolution, comparable to MRI, obtained based on 3D full-physics
seismic “full waveform inversion” methods. This project will demonstrate this
high-resolution imaging method using real ultrasound data. To date, this has
only been demonstrated using simulated ultrasound data. Challenges include
ultrasound probe design and characterization, and maximization of ultrasound
data quality. Unlike conventional ultrasound, the proposed method necessitates a
thorough characterization of probe radiation patterns. Characterization will be
achieved with accurate hydrophone measurements of transmitted ultrasound
wavefields in known media (e.g., water). Measurements are compared to full-
physics numerical simulations; the source radiation pattern will be determined
when a good fit is obtained. Fine tuning and careful selection of the emitted
signal will help reduce noise levels. The resulting high-quality data will be
tested with image reconstructions on small objects. These multiple activities
will play a critical role in obtaining high quality measurements— enabling high
resolution, full-physics, quantitative ultrasound
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.