* 1941582
* Probing the origins of approach and avoidance processes: brain, behavioral, and contextual factors
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Maria Gartstein, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 483,762.00

The ability to appropriately match an emotional response to cues in the
environment begins developing during infancy and is critical to mental health
and well-being throughout the life span. Infants learn to approach positive
stimuli, such as smiling at happy faces, and avoid dangerous or threatening
stimuli, such as turning away from angry faces. The goal of the proposed
research is to understand the brain basis of approach and avoidance processes
during infancy and the role of parent-child interactions in how those processes
develop into childhood. This research will advance our understanding of approach
and avoidance in the brain and how interactions between parents and infants
influence their development. This proposed research will bring together early
childhood specialists, students, parents and researchers to build a community
around the study of early brain and cognitive development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will measure approach and avoidance behaviors in
6- to 12-month-old infants by observing their responses to positive and fearful
stimuli and by parent-report of infants’ behavior in their home. The study will
follow these children until they are age 4 when approach and avoidance behaviors
as well as children’s decision-making will be measured. At both points in
development, the study will record children’s brain activity using
electroencephalography (EEG), a technique used to record the brain’s electrical
activity to understand how individual differences in brain activity are related
to development of approach and avoidance as well as how parent-child
interactions might influence them. The proposed research will provide a new
understanding of how approach and avoidance processes are shaped in early
development and may shed light on how we can help people develop healthy emotion
regulation beginning in infancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.