* 1942321
* CAREER: AF: New Algorithmic Foundations for Fair Division through Competitive Equilibrium
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Jugal Garg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2025
* USD 409,880.00

Fair division is the age-old problem of allocating a set of (scarce) resources
among several agents in a fair and efficient way. It arises naturally in a wide
range of real-life settings such as dispute resolution, seats in
courses/schools, computing-resources management, airport-traffic management, and
spectrum allocation. Competitive equilibrium is a central solution concept in
economics to study markets, and due to its remarkable fairness and efficiency
properties, it is also one of the most preferred mechanisms for solving fair-
division problems even though there may be no money involved in the latter case.
With the advent of the Internet and the influence of computing systems on all
parts of modern life, applications of fair division have grown immensely with a
plethora of variants based on utility models, allocation constraints, and new
fairness notions. The resulting equilibrium problems require complex constraints
and generalizations so that most of the tools and techniques developed for
markets in the last several decades do not seem to be applicable, and hence the
corresponding fair-division problems remain unresolved. This project aims to
explore many of these fundamental open questions. The project will support and
engage both undergraduate and graduate students from diverse backgrounds and
integrate the findings into multiple courses the investigator
teaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike markets, in fair-division problems items
are both goods (e.g., cake) and bads (e.g., chores), and allocation needs to
satisfy additional constraints, e.g., students are assigned to exactly one
school. The main research thrust of the project is to understand the structure
and computational complexity of competitive equilibrium of (i) goods and bads,
(ii) constrained allocation, (iii) divisible and indivisible items, and their
various combinations. The challenges posed are of fundamental importance not
only in fair division but also in equilibrium computation, mechanism design, and
continuous and discrete optimization. Work on this project will bring
significant algorithmic and complexity-theoretic insights into problems from
these diverse areas. The techniques developed will contribute to the burgeoning
literature on approximation, non-convex optimization, mathematical programming,
scheduling, and auction theory, and will open up new avenues for further
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.