* 1942973
* CAREER: Unifying Heterogeneity of Extreme-Scale Cyberinfrastructures for Higher Productivity and Performance Portability
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Esam El-Araby, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 06/30/2025
* USD 386,487.00

The goal of this project is to improve the performance portability and
productivity (ease-of-use) of application development for extreme-scale
heterogeneous reconfigurable architectures. This goal is in the scope of NSF's
10 Big Ideas, i.e., "Harnessing the Data Revolution", and a recent national
report, i.e., "Extreme Heterogeneity 2018". The project will enable scientists
in domains such as quantum simulation, experimental High-Energy Physics (HEP),
and Fossil Energy (FE) to focus on the inherent characteristics, e.g.,
parallelism, of their applications rather than be burdened by the technological
details of the underlying hardware. The project also significantly increases the
longevity of domain scientists' legacy code. This project integrates the PI's
research and teaching activities. The outcome from the project will produce
undergraduate and graduate students who can contribute to solving problems in
large-scale cyberinfrastructure. The project aims to include women and minority
groups, through The Office of Diversity, Equity and Inclusion at the University
of Kansas (KU), to receive training and engage in research collaboration with
our group. This project will enable higher productivity in post-exascale
(extreme-scale) heterogeneous architectures, advancing the PI's long-term
research goals. These project goals align with: (1) the mission of the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) of NSF and the mission of NSF at large in
promoting the progress of science and advancing the national prosperity and
welfare, and (2) key strategies in the Kansas Building an Environment for
Science and Technology (B.E.S.T.) for Innovation report. In addition, this
project contributes to improving Kansas cyberinfrastructure, with a focus on
building a workforce that will improve the state economy through STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tackles three barriers to the
efficient and wide spread deployment of extreme-scale high-performance
reconfigurable computing (HPRC) systems: (1) the imbalance in processing
heterogeneity where processing resources are integrated in different ways and
proportions, (2) lack of hierarchical parallel programming models and/or
insufficiency of existing models, and (3) lack of accurate formal models that
are capable of describing the instantaneous and transient behaviors of HPRCs
rather than only describing average behaviors. These challenges, especially the
first two, have hindered wide adoption of HPRC by a broad range of HPC users and
more specifically scientists in domains such as quantum simulation, experimental
High-Energy Physics (HEP), and Fossil Energy (FE). Three research activities are
proposed in this project: (1) development of a portable node-level abstraction
layer and run-time libraries that will manage and transparently provide to the
end-user a unified view of the hardware resources independent of their type
(virtualized hardware), while exploiting inherent features of FPGAs, (2)
creation of a new parallel domain-specific language (DSL) derived from
Partitioned Global Address Space (PGAS) models using a multi-layered C-to-
hardware compilation that supports a system-wide multi-level hierarchy of
granularity and parallelism while also providing application portability, and
(3) formulation and implementation of formal models and discrete-event
simulation tools for design space exploration based on stochastic Markov chains
and queueing networks. The proposed concepts and techniques will be implemented
and evaluated to demonstrate their portability on three distinct heterogeneous
large-scale HPC systems: (1) an experimental multi-node HPC cluster populated
with Xilinx FPGA accelerators, (2) an Intel Hardware Accelerator Research
Program (HARP) system, and (3) a DS8 state-of-the-art OS-less HPRC system from
DirectStream.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.