* 1942900
* CAREER: Neural Network-Inspired Information Processing Beyond the Binary Digital Abstraction
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Xuan Zhang, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This project approaches the question of higher performance and better energy
efficiency in electronic chip design with two key insights from biological
systems: non-Boolean information encoding (analog processing in brain), and co-
localized memory and computation (as in brain synapses). The specific objective
of this project is to create a design framework for efficient information
processing with intrinsic non-binary representations and in-memory memory and
computation. If successful, this project can shed light on the fundamental role
of information encoding and its physical implementation in determining system
energy efficiency, as well as provide practical design automation methodology to
infuse computation and learning into the analog/mixed-signal (AMS) domain before
the digitalization step. Apart from its technological impacts, the integrated
educational plan of this project is to empower students from all backgrounds
with interdisciplinary experience and to cultivate a community of lifelong
learners with social awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable
joint optimization of circuit, architecture, and algorithm in a seamless manner
across wide-range of applications including in-memory computing (IMC) and near-
sensor processing (NSP), and consists of three major research thrusts: (1) to
advance AMS design automation, novel neural network-inspired model abstraction,
and hardware substrate will be developed to enable a streamlined design flow
that uses AMS circuits as building blocks for information processing; (2) to
support flexible and efficient in-memory computing architecture, this project
will build intelligent and malleable peripheral interfaces and compilation
framework by leveraging the AMS design methodology developed earlier; (3) to
address the energy efficiency challenge in resource-constrained sensor systems,
it will explore a context-aware analog-to-information frontend design by
developing efficient near-sensor processing with multiple signal channels and
multiple sensing modalities. These will serve as building blocks towards
understanding the holistic interactions and design trade-offs of performance,
efficiency, safety, and security in heterogeneous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.