* 1942540
* CAREER: Accelerated Insulation Aging due to Fast, Repetitive Voltage Pulses from Wide Bandgap Power Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Mona Ghassemi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Title: &lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Accelerated Insulation Aging due to Fast, Repetitive
Voltage Pulses from Wide Bandgap Power Electronics
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;By 2030, it is expected
that 80% of all electric power will flow through power electronics systems. Wide
bandgap power modules that can tolerate higher voltages and currents than
silicon-based modules are the most promising solution to reducing the size and
weight of power electronics systems. These wide-bandgap power modules constitute
powerful building blocks for power electronics systems, and wide bandgap-based
converter/power electronics building blocks are envisaged to be widely used in
power grids in low- and medium-voltage applications and possibly in high-voltage
applications for high-voltage direct current and flexible alternating current
transmission systems. One of the merits of wide bandgap devices is that their
slew rates and switching frequencies are much higher than silicon-based devices.
However, from the insulation side, frequency and slew rate are two of the most
critical factors of a voltage pulse, influencing the level of degradation of the
insulation systems that are exposed to such voltage pulses. The shorter the rise
time, the shorter the lifetime. Furthermore, lifetime dramatically decreases
with increasing frequency. Thus, although wide bandgap devices are
revolutionizing power electronics, electrical insulating systems are not
prepared for such a revolution; without addressing insulation issues, the
electronic power revolution will fail due to dramatically increased failure
rates of electrification components. This research plan pioneers overcoming the
accelerated aging of insulation systems under wide bandgap-based voltage pulses,
and its goal is to characterize, model, and mitigate this insulation degradation
issue under atmospheric pressure. The integrated education plan will help to
train the next generation of high electric field and electrical insulation
engineers/ researchers, who are needed to maintain the competitive vitality of
the U.S. power electronics and power system workforce regarding the two trends
toward (I) high-power-density designs in various applications and (II) the
increasing use of power electronics, leading to the accelerated aging issue. The
education plan also includes outreach to students in grades K-12 and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accelerated aging and degradation
of insulation systems in power system components as a consequence of exposure to
the high slew rates (ranging from tens to hundreds of kV/μs) and repetitive
(frequencies ranging from hundreds of kHz to MHz) voltage pulses that originate
from emerging wide bandgap-based power electronics systems are one of the most
significant barriers for the acceptance and utilization of wide bandgap power
modules. This research endeavor aims to (1) characterize, (2) model, through a
“theoretical-based Multiphysics” approach, and (3) mitigate the accelerated
aging problem. Through comprehensive experimental investigations, the
accelerated aging issue will be characterized, and the experimental data will
also be used to validate the Multiphysics models developed. Furthermore, optimal
mitigation methods to solve the accelerated aging problem will be determined
through the models that will be developed and verified experimentally. Moreover,
high-frequency electromagnetic transient models for rotating machines,
transformers, cables, and transmission lines will be developed to determine (i)
overvoltages, (ii) electrical stress, and (iii) thermal stress on different
components including motor and transformer windings, and stress grading systems
in electrical motors and cable terminations under wide bandgap-based voltage
pluses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.