* 1942717
* CAREER: Integrating causal evolutionary processes into phylogenetic comparative biology
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Josef Uyeda, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 12/31/2024
* USD 777,537.00

Studies of “evolution-in-action” have revealed much about the causes of
evolutionary change, including why it sometimes fails. However, it is not always
obvious when these causes are also responsible for extinction and adaptation
over million-year timescales--the timescale primarily relevant to the evolution
and maintenance of biodiversity. With increasing rates of global change, it is
vital to understand how and why species either adapt and survive, or fail to
adapt and perish. This project builds a bridge between the causes of evolution
studied over short timescales and the long-term outcomes evident from existing
evolutionary diversity with a new set of computational tools and resources for
biology research and education. New models will integrate field, genetic and
experimental studies with patterns of trait change from across the tree of life.
The research will apply these models to comprehensive datasets in mammals and
fishes to better understand the causes of trait change over million-year
timescales. The research will also develop and implement freely available
classroom resources that specifically address issues of scale and causation over
short and long evolutionary timescales--educating the next generation of
citizens and scientists to the pressing challenge of predicting how current
global change will affect the long-term outlook of biodiversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent controversies suggest strong limits on what
inferences can be made from macroevolutionary data alone. One solution to these
limitations is to synthesize what we know about the causes and limits of
evolution from field and experimental studies into macroevolutionary methods.
This project identifies three "injection sites" where such information can be
integrated into comparative models to elucidate the causes of macroevolution.
The research will develop new models that integrate measurements of genetic
variation, natural selection and population data with macroevolutionary scale
data. It will also enable integration of biomechanical models based on knowledge
of trait functions. By uniting macroevolutionary models with knowledge and data
on how microevolutionary data affect the evolutionary process, this research
will open new paths for studying the causes of macroevolution. These models will
be further connected to the field of causal inference--which has revolutionized
artificial intelligence by rethinking how statistical methods represent
causation. Finally, the research will address unfilled gaps in biology pedagogy
by developing and investigating how to make the non-intuitive shift from
Mendelian genetics to macroevolution in biology curricula. This will be
accomplished by developing and implementing novel, software-based Open Education
resources across multiple institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.