* 1942255
* CAREER:  Stochastic Biochemical Network Processes in Cellular Commitment to Fate
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Carlos Lopez, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 11/30/2022
* USD 690,465.00

At the molecular level, the cell is a crowded place and there are myriad ways
that molecules collide and interact to provide the underpinnings for essential
biochemical processes. A tangled web of biochemical reactions lies at the core
of all cellular responses that guide each cell toward a specific fate. However,
the number of molecules and their local microenvironment are in constant
fluctuation from one cell to another, giving rise to multiple potential
responses from each cell to the same signal. How is it that persistent cell-
population behaviors emerge from biochemical processes that are governed by
randomness (sometimes called "noise")? How do cells make such monumental
decision of when to live and when to die in such a noisy environment? This work
contributes to our understanding of this challenging question by exploring how
noise in network-driven cellular processes can affect cellular commitment to
fate. Specifically, we will explore how changes in the number of proteins, as
well as intrinsic chemical reaction noise, contribute to different outcomes. A
successful result from this work will lay the foundation to understand
biochemical reaction networks as probabilistic rather than deterministic
processes and enable us to develop novel theories to explain the role of noise
in cell-population behaviors and their associated decision processes. This award
will also provide significant resources to train the next generation of
quantitative biologists who will gain experience at the interface of chemistry,
physics, biology and computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As modern technologies
are brought to bear at single-cell resolution, we are learning that
stochasticity is ubiquitous feature in cellular processes. Despite evidence for
non-genetic cell-response variability in cell populations, mechanistic
interpretation of single-cell experiments typically appeal to a deterministic,
non-existent "average cell", to describe network-driven biochemical mechanisms.
Therefore, the role of stochastic molecular processes in biochemical networks
and cellular commitment to fate is poorly understood. This shortcoming is not
due to a lack of physicochemical theories to describe cellular processes, but
rather to the computational and statistical challenges associated with the
simulation of cellular network-driven processes subject to molecular noise, and
the acquisition of data necessary to fully capture stochastic phenomena. The
overarching goal of this award is to develop a mechanistic interpretation of
cellular processes that can explain how molecular noise affects information flow
in biochemical networks and predicts network-driven execution due to biochemical
cues. To attain these goals, the work leverages high performance computing
approaches, coupled with Bayesian statistics, and stochastic reaction kinetics
to gain a foundational understanding of how noise impacts signal-processing in
biochemical networks. Specifically, the work will explore how stochasticity from
extrinsic (e.g. gene-expression) and intrinsic (e.g. complex formation)
molecular sources contribute to cell-response variability and cell-population
outcomes. The work focuses on apoptosis execution mechanisms, to explain non-
genetic cellular heterogeneity in the response to programmed cell death cues.
The work will also identify molecular sources that contribute to heterogeneous
cellular response in apoptosis. The knowledge gained from this work could shift
existing paradigms for our understanding of cellular commitment to fate,
generalizable to other areas. The opportunities for training, dissemination, and
collaboration afforded by this award will ensure that the work will have
significant impact across multiple areas of biology as well as provide the
environment to train the next generation of quantitative
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.