* 1942881
* CAREER: PHIRED UP: Phage-Host Interactions integrated into Research on Epiphytic Ecology and Disease using Undergraduate Participation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2026
* Britt Koskella, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2026
* USD 569,150.00

Bacteriophages, the viruses that infect bacteria, are the most ubiquitous and
diverse entities on Earth, infecting the vast majority of bacteria. Lytic phages
that infect and kill their bacterial host cells can alter bacterial community
profiles (who is there and at what density) as well as competitive dynamics
among strains, with clear potential to shape host-associated microbiomes. Phages
can also impact the outcome of eukaryotic disease, either directly by infecting
and killing bacterial pathogens within hosts or indirectly by changing the
microbiome, which is known to play a role in many plant and animal diseases.
This project uses monthly sampling of pear trees from an urban environment
(Berkeley city) across multiple years and large-scale genomic sequencing efforts
to determine the role phages play in Fire Blight disease, an agriculturally
relevant disease of many orchard species. By fully integrating undergraduate
research using a peer mentoring ladder, this exploration of phage infection and
community dynamics in leaf-associated bacterial microbiomes will help identify
both which bacteria are naturally targeted by phages, and how these phages shape
change in pathogen densities and microbiome community composition. Bacterial and
phage culturing approaches will be combined with a multi-omics analysis of the
pear tree microbiome to fully elucidate how phages adapt to bacteria in nature
and how such adaptation impacts the microbiome in health and disease. The long-
term aim is to use these data on natural phage-mediated selection to determine
if and how phages can be used to reshape microbial communities and prevent
disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolutionary interactions of phages and their
bacterial hosts has been studied extensively in the lab, but few studies have
examined these dynamics in nature. The project integrates a four module
undergraduate research program with high-throughput, culture independent
sequencing of both bacterial and viral communities to examine the role of phages
in bacterial community turnover and disease using a novel Pear Tree disease
system (Callery ‘Bradford’ pear trees infected with the agriculturally relevant
pathogen Erwinia amylovora). Through the tight integration of teaching and
research, the combination of culture-dependent screening and culture-independent
‘omics’ approaches will allow for tracking of bacteria-phage dynamics over both
short (monthly) and long (yearly) time scales. Overall, the project aims to
build an unparalleled temporal and spatial dataset on phage host range with
which to examine the role of phages (both lytic and temperate) in bacterial
community assembly, stability, and pathogen invasion. The project uses both
classic empirical approaches to study the strength and scale of phage adaptation
and new computational approaches to predict how phages shape microbial networks.
The data generated will offer unprecedented insight into bacteria-phage dynamics
in nature and viral host range evolution in a complex community setting. The
research further develops basic understanding of plant microbiomes and viromes,
and will also support the development of a new disease ecology model system that
is both amenable to undergraduate training in the emerging microbiome field and
unique in its potential to gain insight into virome-microbiome interactions in
both health and disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.