* 1942360
* CAREER: Astrocytic Integration of Cortical Wake Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Kira Poskanzer, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 10/31/2022
* USD 278,000.00

The fundamental biological importance of sleep is demonstrated by the fact that
sleep is observed widely across the animal kingdom, and that sleep deprivation
can be harmful both physiologically and cognitively. Likewise, the importance of
wake is axiomatic: reproduction, feeding, and escape from predation depend on an
animal being awake. However, until recently, the neural circuits that regulate
wake and sleep have remained poorly understood. One strand of inquiry has
implicated a non-neuronal cell type in sleep-wake control. This cell—the
astrocyte—makes up the largest class of non-neuronal cells in the brain, and it
has been shown to affect the activity of surrounding neurons. However, the ways
in which astrocytes are involved in sleep and wake are largely unexplored. This
project tests whether astrocytes sense wake-specific signals and respond to
these signals by changing the state of the brain. To perform these experiments,
advanced imaging tools to watch different forms of cellular activity in the
brain are used. The broader impacts of this project aim to make
interdisciplinary research accessible and routine to trainees early in their
careers. The motivation for this lies in the fact that trainees with experience
in physical sciences are more likely to become tool builders themselves, and
that watching science happening in real time can excite and empower trainees to
think deeply about the biology around them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuromodulatory
signaling is critical for animal behavior, in part by shifting the brain among
various states, and the most dramatic brain state shifts are arguably those that
occur between wake and sleep. However, how neuromodulatory inputs arising in
subcortical nuclei are integrated at the level of the cortex to regulate
population-level state shifts remains unclear. Several neuromodulatory receptors
are expressed on both cortical neurons and astrocytes, raising the possibility
that astrocytes are partners with neurons in sensing neuromodulatory cues to
initiate and/or maintain wake in the cortex. Astrocytes are an attractive target
for coordinating large-scale neuronal circuit changes, and they have also been
implicated in sleep/wake via brain state-dependent changes in extracellular
balance and morphology. The overarching hypothesis for this project is that
neuromodulatory signaling to astrocytes, and subsequent astrocytic effects on
population neuronal activity, is critical for integrating wake-state signals in
the cortex, the largest area of the mammalian brain. The research addresses
these questions using advanced two-photon imaging, modern neurobiological tools
to modulate neural activity, and astrocyte-specific technology to probe the cell
biological responses of astrocytes to neuromodulatory cues, and map astrocytic
dynamics across wake and sleep, in preparation to test the effects of astrocyte
activation on wake state and neural signaling in a cortical
circuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.