* 1942583
* CAREER: Towards a Robust Theory of Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Yang Cai, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 12/31/2024
* USD 476,048.00

The ever-growing technology platforms such as sponsored search, online
marketplaces, crowdsourcing, and sharing economies are becoming cornerstones of
the modern economy. A central problem faced by these online markets and
platforms is how to design the right incentive structure, so that the
participants, who are only interested in optimizing their own utilities, are
motivated to take actions that will help to realize the designer's goals. The
classic economic theory of mechanism design is dedicated to addressing this
problem. However, it is not yet robust or realistic enough to provide concrete
guidelines for practice due to several shortcomings such as the strong reliance
on distributional assumptions, the focus on optimal but impractical mechanisms,
as well as the lack of attention to the role of information. The goal of this
research is to build a robust mechanism design theory by offering new frameworks
and solutions to alleviate and resolve these shortcomings. In tackling these
weaknesses, this project not only improves the practicality of mechanism design,
but also develops insights to answer some of the long-standing theoretical open
questions. This project includes an education plan that incorporates course
development of both graduate and undergraduate courses as well as training for
graduate students and research opportunities for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;More concretely, this project focuses on the following three research
thrusts. (i) Weakening Bayesian assumptions: a common but unrealistic assumption
in mechanism design is that the participants' preferences are drawn from a known
distribution. The investigator plans to revisit mechanism design under two
alternative and realistic distribution access models: (a) sample access to the
distribution and (b) max-min robust learning -- given only an approximate
distribution, learn a mechanism that performs well under the unknown true
distribution. (ii) Understanding the tradeoff between simplicity and optimality:
the optimal mechanism is usually too complex to be practical. The investigator
will develop a framework to design simple and approximately optimal mechanisms
and address open questions in multi-item auctions and two-sided markets. (iii)
Information design via an algorithmic lens: unlike traditional mechanism design,
which focuses on influencing participants via direct incentives, information
design studies how information revelation can shift the participantsâ€™ behavior.
The investigator aims to understand the design of information structure via an
algorithmic lens, focusing on the computational complexity of the optimal
information revelation scheme. This work will rely on tools from optimization,
learning theory, statistics and machine learning, and statistical physics, and
forge new connections between these fields and mechanism
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.