* 1942418
* CAREER: Targeting therapeutic liposomes to fungal infections
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Anita Shukla, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2025
* USD 565,826.00

Fungal species have not garnered the same attention as their microbial (e.g.
bacteria) counterparts despite the fact that more than 150 million people are
estimated to have serious fungal infections worldwide, leading to 1.6 million
deaths annually. The arsenal of antifungals is highly limited compared to
antibacterial agents, and many existing antifungals suffer from complications
including host toxicity that hinder their clinical use. With rising antifungal
resistance, it is critical to develop effective antifungal therapies that
overcome these limitations. Nanoparticles are highly promising for this
application; however, there has not yet been a significant focus on developing
antifungal nanotherapeutics. The goal of this CAREER project is to investigate
methods of targeting newly developed nanoparticles containing antifungal drugs
to fungal cells. Molecules that have been shown to interact with fungal cells
and fungal cell enzymes will be used to decorate these nanoparticles and promote
their interactions with fungal cells. The antifungal activity of these
formulations is expected to exceed that of the free drug and to limit host
toxicity. This work will lay the foundation for a paradigm shift towards
targeted nanomaterials for infection treatment. This project will also engage
the broader community through interactions with public school science teachers
to develop teacher-driven STEM curriculum for high school classrooms using an
inquiry-based learning approach focused around advances in nanoengineering. A
new undergraduate nanoengineering course at the Investigator's institution will
support this curriculum development by working with teachers and classrooms in
implementing “science kits.” These kits will be developed by the undergraduate
students to provide an economical, grade appropriate activity demonstrating a
nanoengineering concept and its relevance to our daily
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Investigator’s overarching research mission is
to identify and develop biomaterials addressing critical clinical needs in the
areas of drug delivery and regenerative medicine, with a focus on infectious
diseases. Toward this mission, this Career project’s focus is on improving
treatments for fungal infections by investigating the use of peptide ligands to
target newly synthesized antifungal liposomal nanoparticles to fungal cells. The
peptide ligands selected will be based on recent advances in the study of
peptides as antimicrobial agents and protease inhibitors. The project will
investigate whether the decoration of liposomes with these peptide ligands
enables targeting of fungal cells and will elucidate the mechanism by which
potential targeting occurs. The central hypothesis is that targeted antifungal
formulations will exhibit improved antifungal activity and reduced host cell
toxicity compared to free drug and non-targeted formulations. This hypothesis
will be tested through three research objectives. The FIRST Objective is to
develop and characterize antifungal formulations with and without targeting
peptides. These formulations will contain a drug from each of the major
antifungal drug classes. The physicochemical properties of the liposomes (size,
charge, morphology) will be thoroughly characterized. The SECOND Objective is to
study the antifungal activity and potential targeting mechanism of these
formulations in vitro using Candida as the model parasitic fungus. Studies are
designed to test the hypothesis that the mode of targeting (e.g., cell wall
binding versus intracellularization) will be dictated by the peptide ligand
choice; targeting mechanism will in turn, affect the activity of the
encapsulated drug based on the drug mechanism of action. Toxicity to human red
blood cells and endothelial cells will be investigated as a measure of
selectivity. The THIRD Objective will further elucidate the antifungal activity
and targeting capability of these formulations using select in vivo studies in
Candida infected Galleria mellonella insects and mice. This approach will
clarify whether active targeting has advantages over passive targeting. This
objective also has the potential to provide information on EPR (Enhanced
Permeability and Retention) in fungal infections. This work will lay the
foundation for a paradigm shift towards targeted nanomaterials for infection
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.