* 1942702
* CAREER: Welfare-Centric Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Joshua Blumenstock, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 03/31/2025
* USD 362,455.00

Many decisions that once were made by humans are now made using algorithms.
These algorithms are typically designed with a single, profit-related objective
in mind: Loan approval algorithms are designed to maximize profit, smart phone
apps are optimized for engagement, and news feeds are optimized for clicks.
However, these decisions have side effects: irresponsible payday loans,
addictive apps, and fake news can harm individuals and society. This project
will develop and test a new paradigm for prioritizing the social impact of an
algorithmic decision from the start, rather than as an afterthought. The key
insight is use machine learning to predict who will benefit from a decision and
how, and then design algorithms that balance these predicted benefits alongside
traditional profit-related objectives. The research goals of the project are
complemented by an educational plan to develop new curricula at the intersection
of welfare economics and fair machine learning. The project will also support a
series of workshops to educate policymakers and practitioners on how to use
machine learning in a way that prioritizes the well-being of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project have three main
thrusts. The first is to develop a theory of welfare-centric machine learning: a
formal, quantitative framework for weighing the social welfare effects of an
algorithm alongside traditional, private optimization criteria. This involves
first defining a notion of social welfare, based on principles of welfare
economics, and characterizing how welfare can be impacted by a decision
algorithm. It then integrates recent advances in multi-objective machine
learning to formally balance social welfare maximization with traditional loss
minimization. The second thrust is to prove empirical methods for measuring
social welfare from 'digital trace' data. Scalable methods for estimating
welfare and welfare impacts are required if we want algorithms to maximize those
impacts. The final thrust highlights the broad relevance of this framework by
applying it to real-world data from three different decision-making contexts:
(i) In consumer credit, it will show how welfare-sensitive credit scores can
balance the need for profit maximization with the desire to make socially-
responsible lending decisions. (ii) In content recommendation, it will
demonstrate how content providers can jointly optimize for quality and
engagement, and provide regulators with tools for estimating the 'social cost
per click.' (iii) In the design of humanitarian aid programs, it will illustrate
how welfare-centric algorithms can enable policymakers to effectively and
transparently balance multiple social objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.