* 1942146
* CAREER: Virtual Body Ownership Illusions for Bias Reduction and Fostering Inclusivity in STEM Classrooms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Tabitha Peck, Davidson College
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2025
* USD 318,280.00

There exist numerous well-known negative stereotypes that are prevalent in
society, including those about age and technical ability, gender and
mathematical ability, and race and intelligence. These stereotypes are so
prevalent that simply reminding someone about their age, gender, or race can
negatively affect performance on a challenging exam. Such negative stereotypes
about mental aptitude have been linked to the underrepresentation of women and
minorities in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. Further, this underrepresentation and lack of diversity in people
working with technology has been shown to limit innovation and creativity in
technological fields. This project will investigate novel uses of virtual
reality technology to combat the negative effects of stereotypes about women and
underrepresented minorities that currently deter them from participating in STEM
disciplines. Virtual reality technology enables its users to see the world
through the eyes of, and take on certain behavioral characteristics of, someone
else. This project will advance the understanding of the effects of virtual
reality by investigating its ability to buffer people from negative stereotypes
by briefly taking on the characteristics of someone else. This virtual
perspective change is expected to limit the negative effects of stereotype
threat that deter students from underrepresented groups from majoring in STEM
disciplines, and therefore increase recruitment and retention of
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
integrates research and education initiatives investigating the effects of
virtual avatars on reducing the negative effects of stereotypes and biases in
the classroom. The project will 1) demonstrate that avatars can positively
mediate implicit behavior in ways that affect attitudinal changes lasting
outside of virtual environments, 2) formulate a protocol for inducing lasting
behavioral changes based on different hardware specifications, 3) produce a
novel methodology for personalizing avatar and environment specifications given
an individual's unique characteristics, and 4) deploy curriculum guidelines for
the integration of virtual reality technology applications into classrooms to
positively affect group behavior and increase retention for underrepresented
groups in STEM disciplines. Personalized virtual experiences, along with
curricular guidelines for deployment, will be generated and evaluated through
data collected from a multi-institutional experiment in introductory computer
science courses at three different institutions: a private liberal arts college,
a public state university, and a community college. The results of this multi-
institutional experiment will be used to assess and demonstrate virtual
realityâ€™s potential to mediate negative effects caused by stereotype threat and
implicit bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.