* 1942907
* CAREER: Perceivability: Enabling Safe and Secure Autonomy via Synergistic Control, Observation and Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Dimitra Panagou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/28/2025
* USD 583,953.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will address fundamental
questions in control and estimation theory by establishing the concept of
perceivability: the structural property of a system that describes the ability
to build knowledge about an environment dynamically, in the face of constraints.
Autonomous systems (e.g., drones, self-driving cars) must be able to safely and
timely learn the environment they operate in, to enable them to interact safely
with humans and each other. This process depends on the structure (e.g.,
dynamics, constraints) and goals of the system, and information that is
unreliable due to sensor faults, or untrusted due to malicious actions. The
fundamental perceivability question is: “Is it feasible to safely learn a given
environment for given dynamics, sensing and communication capabilities, under a
given learning algorithm, within a given time horizon?” If the answer is
negative, then one may wonder: “What parameters of the system can be changed
such that the environment can be learned? What are the synergies between control
and observation that safely enhance the generation of knowledge?” The project
will develop the foundations of perceivability, and computationally-efficient
learning and control techniques towards increasing system safety, autonomy and
resilience. It will be complemented by an educational and outreach program that
will engage underrepresented groups and K-12 students and disseminate the
results via outreach activities and institutional STEM programs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Perceivability introduces a game-changing concept in systems science
that aims to bridge the gap between learning, estimation and control, and
enables new capabilities in systems engineering. An environment is called
perceivable within some time horizon if there exists a safe control input, and
therefore a safe trajectory of the physical system, that enables the collection
of data over which the environment can be learned. Perceivability can thus be
thought of as a generalized property of an intelligent system: a merging of
reachability and observability that tightly links the knowledge-building process
with the system dynamics and constraints. The project will investigate how the
system structure and the underlying control, estimation and learning mechanisms
(i) enable the ability to characterize whether an environment is perceivable
within a given time horizon, over safe system trajectories while using uncertain
(i.e., faulty or malicious) information, and (ii) how the system structure
and/or the knowledge-building mechanism can be altered to achieve safe knowledge
generation. The innovations will enable autonomous systems to accomplish
intelligent, complex tasks in safety-critical and time-critical
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.