* 1942893
* CAREER: Macroevolutionary Biomechanics: Integrating Morphology, Mechanical Models, and Phylogenetic Comparative Methods to Understand the Evolution of Swimming Performance in Frogs
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Daniel Moen, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2025
* USD 531,948.00

Biomechanics has contributed a rich understanding of the physical principles
that dictate organismal form and function, but the field has been slow to
incorporate study of the evolution of mechanical diversity. In this CAREER
project, the principal investigator (PI) will combine experiments on live
organisms, computer modeling, and statistical analyses of the evolution of
species differences to understand the evolution of diversity of body form and
movement. The project will focus on (1) how different body structures scale with
body size; (2) how the size of these structures and different behavioral
strategies affect aquatic locomotion (i.e. swimming); (3) how sensitive swimming
performance is to variation in such variables; and (4) how these relationships
between form and function have affected long-term evolutionary change in
swimming performance across &gt;140 species of frogs and toads around the world.
The key intellectual contribution of the project will be to develop an
evolutionarily explicit approach to studies of form, function, and their
diversity across species. The project will also more broadly support scientific
capacity in the USA by (1) training secondary science teachers in research
methods, evolutionary concepts, and integration of research into their
classrooms; (2) training undergraduate students in the study of animal movement
and research methods through in-class research projects; and (3) training young
researchers in biomechanics to more directly incorporate evolutionary analysis
methods into their projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates
biomechanical modeling, kinematics from high-speed videos, and phylogenetic
comparative methods to understand the evolution of form-function relationships
and their impact on macroevolution of morphology and swimming performance in
anurans. The project has three key aims. In Aim 1 the PI will examine the
evolution of allometry in locomotor morphology, highlighting how to leverage
phylogenetic comparative methods to best estimate interspecific allometric
scaling exponents. In Aim 2, he will address the mechanics and scaling of
swimming in anurans. He will develop and empirically test a mathematical model
of the complete swimming stroke in frogs, then use the model and phylogenetic
comparative methods to explain the scaling between peak swimming velocity and
body mass. In Aim 3, the PI will examine the sensitivity of swimming performance
to different morphological variables through both mathematical and statistical
modeling, and he will test the tempo and mode of morphological and swimming
performance evolution as a function of mechanical sensitivity. The intellectual
merit of the project primarily stems from integrating disparate methods
(experiments, mathematical modeling, phylogenetic analyses) and providing an
evolutionary comparative framework for testing general physical principles and
their influence on the macroevolution of form and function. The broader impacts
of the project will result from developing secondary education in scientific
research and evolutionary concepts in the PI's state, integrating research
training into undergraduate laboratories, and training young researchers in
biomechanics in phylogenetic comparative methods workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program of BIO-Integrative Organismal Systems and
the Established Program to Support Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.