* 1942942
* CAREER:Correlated and Topological Quantum Transport in Novel 2D Crystals and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Sanfeng Wu, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 501,496.00

Nontechnical abstract: Quantum technologies are viewed by many as the next great
technological revolution, which will deeply impact future economic growth and
national security. The research aims to solve some of the most fundamental and
critical problems confronting future quantum technologies by identifying novel
materials that host on-demand quantum particles and phases. To achieve this
goal, quantum properties of such new materials need to be protected from
environmental noise. In two-dimensional crystals quantum electronic properties
can be remarkably engineered, offering ability to protect phases from noise.
Various interesting quantum states are explored here, focusing on the electronic
states organized and protected by correlations and topology. The results will
help push forward the frontier of fundamental quantum science, and enable new
technical routes toward future quantum technologies. The project trains next
generation of quantum scientists and engineers, as the experiments incorporate
comprehensive and high-quality educational components for both graduate and
undergraduate students. Various educational and outreach activities will be
developed for encouraging and training students from underrepresented groups,
and educating K-12 students and the public on quantum
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: Topological quantum matter
offers tremendous opportunities for discovering fundamentally new phenomena and
applications in electronic systems. For instance, the search for a class of
correlated topological quantum matter that hosts non-Abelian anyons is the first
step towards developing topological quantum computation. The key to realizing
the potential relies on the development of new quantum materials. A rich,
largely unexplored material class for topological quantum matter is the family
of two-dimensional (2D) crystals. In this project, the principle investigator
aims to search for a variety of new, highly tunable topological and correlated
quantum states of matter based on novel 2D crystals and their associated
structures. Several candidate systems, including devices made from atomically
thin WTe2, GdTe3 and their twisted bilayers, are explored. The investigator
utilizes and innovates a set of nanofabrication and quantum transport
measurement tools for investigating the novel quantum electronic phenomena in
these systems, focusing on superconducting, magnetic, and/or topological phases,
including the non-Abelian quantum states. The outcomes are expected to generate
impact on several sub-fields, including 2D materials, topological matter, non-
Abelian physics and quantum information devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.