* 1942053
* RAPID: A Smart and Mobile Sensor Fusion Framework for Earthquake Hazard Reduction, Situational Assessment, and Relief Efforts
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Karen Panetta, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 98,516.00

Natural disasters including earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes and anthropogenic
disasters, such as wildfires, are dynamic situations requiring constant
monitoring as numerous hazards are constantly emerging that hinder humanitarian
efforts and create deadly conditions for rescue workers and victims. Most
disaster area assessment, and search and rescue efforts, rely heavily on visual
imagery captured from cell phones, aerial video and other forms of media.
Currently, real-time assessment for disasters depends entirely on the human
operator's ability to visually identify the subject of interest in the video, or
images captured. Further, damaged buildings and roadways, debris, smoke, fire,
and environmental conditions such as rain complicate the human observer's
ability to monitor situations for detecting victims and hazards. It is essential
that rescuers can assess hazardous conditions before risking their lives and be
armed with smart technologies that enable them to respond to dynamic situations.
The recent events in Southern California (earthquakes) and Louisiana (Hurricane
Barry) provide perishable data that will enable maturation of the proposed
research activities. This plus the integration within the Smart Mobile Disaster
Data Collection unit for response provides further justification of the RAPID
award mechanism.

The researchers will create a Smart Mobile Disaster Data Collection and
Assessment tool for detecting and mapping out situational hazards using
intelligent data fused information collected from multiple sensor technologies.
Furthermore, this project aims to create a first-of-its-kind public database of
collected imagery and media from disasters to help researchers and agencies
share information or to assist in developing best practices and collaborative
strategies. This project will also enable better visualization of disparate
sources of data, thus making it conducive for human operator to detect hazards
and victims. This research will also enhance safety and security applications
across a wide range of areas including firefighting, disaster relief, and
search-and-rescue. The approach of seamlessly utilizing and visualizing sensor
information in a situational map to guide responders' actions and enhance their
efficiency reduces the risk factor for responders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.