* 1942110
* CAREER: Environmental Impacts of Closed Loop Food Production: Aquaponics as a Case Study
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Andrea Hicks, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2025
* USD 509,710.00

New food production technologies are needed to feed the increasing global
population, which is predominantly expected to inhabit urban areas. One option
is aquaponically produced protein and vegetables. Aquaponic food production
(where seafood and plants are grown in a closed loop system) is an innovation in
food production, particularly with respect to growing food in urban areas. The
main goal of this CAREER project is to generate new insights on the
sustainability of aquaponics as a food production technology, while engaging
students, aquaponic producers, and the general public around the issue of food
sustainability. This project will quantify the life-cycle sustainability impacts
of shifting food production to aquaponics with respect to the relevant food,
energy, and water systems. These insights are critical to evaluating sustainable
food production technologies for a growing urban world
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will 1) generate comprehensive
data and new insight of the environmental and economic impact of aquaponics
production at commercial scale across different plant and seafood species, 2)
create new life cycle assessment impact categories specifically suited to
aquatic food production systems, 3) optimize placement of aquaponic facilities,
and 4) develop a new integrated model to be used by researchers and aquaponic
facilities for determining their environmental and economic impacts of
production. This work involves analysis across multiple scales, species,
functional units, impact categories, and boundaries of aquaponic food
production, in order to holistically determine the relative sustainability
impacts of this novel food production system. This approach is targeted to
result in fundamental new ways of conducting life cycle analysis and techno-
economic assessment for these systems, which is critical for reducing the impact
of future large-scale systems and avoiding potential unintended consequences or
burden shifting as the technology is optimized and employed to feed a greater
number of people with fewer resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.