* 1942642
* CAREER: Microbial regulation of individual and social behaviors in honey bees
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2026
* Svjetlana Vojvodic Kruse, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 672,058.00

Recent research has shown that gut microbes can influence development, overall
health, and behavior. Human social disorders, such as autism, also appear linked
to altered gut microbiota, suggesting that gut microbes can have effects on
social behavior in highly social animals. How exactly gut microbes affect host
behavior, and what role the gut microbiome plays in social interactions remains
unclear. Previous research on the microbiome and behavior has been performed on
non-social model organisms, like mice and fruit flies, which do not form large,
complex societies. Besides humans, complex social behaviors have also been
observed in social insects; therefore, the proposed research will focus on the
gut microbiome and behavior in European honey bees. The project will
specifically investigate how modifications to gut microbiome can influence
individual honey bee learning and their social interactions. This research will
shed light on the evolution of complex interactions between gut microbes and
their hosts, and will identify possible mechanisms by which gut microbes impact
host behavior. In light of the worldwide honey bee decline, the research is
potentially of applied agricultural importance, because the gut microbiome could
be used to improve overall honey bee health. This research will promote research
training for undergraduate students, with opportunities for veterans and other
groups underrepresented in scientific research. Researchers will also work with
local schools to create teaching modules based on the proposed project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gut microbiome has recently been shown to strongly
affect host behavior, neurogenomic state, nutrition, and overall health in model
organisms. The research tests the hypothesis that changes in the gut microbiome
have strong and measurable effects on individual- and group-level behaviors in
honey bees. Honey bees have a number of features that make them ideal to study
host-microbiome interactions, including: their well-characterized gut
microbiome; a relatively simple gut microbiome in comparison to solitary model
species; and the fact that honey bees have emerged as a model for studying the
molecular and physiological underpinnings of highly social behavior. A well-
established classical conditioning procedure, the proboscis extension reflex,
will be used to quantify the effect of a gut microbe treatment on individual
learning and memory, while any changes in social behaviors will be evaluated by
constructing the interaction contact networks. Finally, RNA sequencing will be
used to develop specific gene expression profiles from the host brain and gut
tissues. The combination of these three approaches will link genetic and
cellular changes induced by changes in the gut microbiome on honey bee
individual and social behaviors, further building on the understanding of
intricate interactions between hosts and their
microbiomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.