* 1942395
* CAREER: Regulation of clathrin-independent endocytosis by modulators of Rho GTPase function
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Derek Prosser, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,013,464.00

The cell surface is an important structure that defines the boundary between the
inside and outside of the cell and contains proteins that help the cell to
interact with and respond to its environment. Proteins are delivered to the
surface using a process called exocytosis and are removed when a cell
internalizes pieces of its surface in a process known as endocytosis. Balancing
these two events allows the cell to control which proteins are on the surface at
any given time and makes it possible to add new material or remove damaged
proteins that may be harmful. This project combines cell biology, molecular
biology and genetic approaches to study poorly understood pathways for
endocytosis, termed clathrin-independent endocytosis (CIE), that are present in
many cell types. Through this research, this project will provide cutting-edge
research and training opportunities at many levels of education, including
undergraduate and graduate trainees as well as high-school students. A major
goal is to give young scientists the opportunity to see how the things they
learn in the classroom can be applied to make new and exciting discoveries in
the field of membrane biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses
budding yeast, a simple yet extremely powerful genetic model organism that has
provided insight into many basic cellular functions that are conserved through
evolution, including exocytosis and endocytosis. Although yeast was originally
thought to use only clathrin-mediated endocytosis, studies in a mutant strain
where this pathway was blocked revealed the existence of a new clathrin-
independent pathway. This second pathway requires numerous proteins including
Rho1, which regulates polymerization of the actin cytoskeleton and coordinates
repair of the yeast cell wall. Rho1 undergoes cycles of activation and
inactivation, and its activity can be restricted to specific sites within a
cell. The relationship between Rho1 activity and location, and how these relate
to its role in endocytosis, are poorly understood. Thus, this project will
achieve several goals: (1) define the ability of proteins that regulate
localized Rho1 activation and inactivation to regulate clathrin-independent
endocytosis; (2) examine relationships between protein complexes that regulate
exocytosis and endocytosis; (3) identify cargos that are internalized by
clathrin-independent endocytosis under high osmolarity conditions that are known
to facilitate this pathway; (4) examine the role of the osmotic stress response
pathway in clathrin-independent endocytosis; and (5) identify genes that promote
cargo internalization in mutant yeast strains lacking both clathrin-mediated
endocytosis and the known clathrin-independent pathway to determine if
additional pathways exist. Overall, the results of this research will provide
new insights into the molecular machinery that controls clathrin-independent
endocytosis, an important but poorly understood process in all eukaryotic cells.
Using a simple model organism such as yeast makes it possible to rapidly
identify the key components of these pathways, which in turn will make it
possible to better understand related pathways in other organisms, including
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.