* 1942971
* CAREER: Molecular Design of Electrochemically-Mediated Systems for Isomeric Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Xiao Su, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2025
* USD 523,425.00

Selective separation of biologically-active molecules from the liquid-phase can
be one of the most expensive steps in pharmaceutical and biochemical
manufacturing. Isomers are molecules that have the same atom composition but
differ in structural arrangement, and enantiomers are isomers that are non-
superimposable mirror images of each other. Isomeric purification can be an
extremely difficult separation process. Over the past decade, more than half of
drugs were marketed as enantiomers, including therapeutics for cancer, AIDS,
neurologic diseases, and arthritis. While one enantiomer often provides superior
clinical performance, the opposite enantiomer can be potentially toxic.
Electrochemical approaches offer a fundamentally new avenue to enhance molecular
selectivity in isomeric separations. In particular, the careful design of
electro-adsorbents can dramatically increase separation factors towards valuable
enantiomers, improve the rate of the separation process, and minimize chemical
and solvent use. By developing selective electrochemically-active interfaces,
this project is expected to provide new technologies for small molecule
separations and fine chemical purification and contribute to long-term
sustainability in chemical manufacturing and processing. The investigator also
seeks to impact the broader community through closely aligned outreach
activities, incorporating educational activities and mentorship across graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 education. Educational goals involve the creation of in-
class modules to translate concepts of separation processes to society and
increase inclusion of underrepresented minorities and women in STEM. The
investigator also seeks to establish a pipeline for peer-mentoring and
international exchange, which will raise global awareness of sustainability in
the chemical industry and environment and train the next generation of chemical
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop electrochemically-
mediated approaches for isomeric separations, both of structural isomers and
enantiomers. Enantioselective separations in particular are tremendously
challenging owing to the similarity in size, shape, chemical functionalities,
and structures between enantiomers. Molecular-level design is required for the
discovery and development of new technologies for isomer separations. The
investigator seeks to create selective electrochemical interfaces through a
combination of computational screening, spectroscopic measurements of binding
interaction, and synthetic control. By tuning redox processes with
electroresponsive polymers, stereoselective interactions will be tailored
through a combination of steric effects, charge-transfer interactions, and
electrostatics; the goal of which is to achieve reversible binding to valuable
complex ions such as bioactive and pharmaceutical molecules. The project is
expected to provide fundamental understanding of supramolecular interactions,
elucidate electrochemically-driven mechanisms for separation, and provide
rational design principles for effective discrimination of general classes of
enantiomers. The outcomes of this project are expected to broadly impact
separation science by introducing new field-assisted concepts to chromatographic
and adsorption-based technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.