* 1942467
* CAREER: Next-Generation Flow Cytometry - A New Approach to Cell Heterogeneity
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Ku-Lung Hsu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 03/31/2025
* USD 681,000.00

Metabolism is the biochemical process that supplies energy, molecular building
blocks, and chemical signals to control cellular functions essential for life.
With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Ku-Lung (Ken) Hsu from the University of Virginia to
investigate how individual cells control the metabolism of fats and lipids. Dr.
Hsu is developing novel chemical compounds that attach to enzymes (protein
catalysts) to probe the metabolism of fats and lipids inside of cells. These
probes illuminate how cells are similar or distinct based on their metabolic
status. Uncovering distinctive metabolic identities within a massive assortment
of cells shows how seemingly identical cells differentiate into specific cell
types (e.g. a nerve versus a muscle cell). The metabolic signals discovered
through these studies may enable the development of new cell types or properties
to push the boundaries of cell engineering. Graduate students receive unique
training in chemistry and chemical biology to foster their development as
outstanding leaders and role models in society. The research project is
integrated with an educational outreach program designed to broadly impact
Native American students communities by teaching how lipid (bio)chemistry
influences healthy food choices and eating behaviors in
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program aims to understand metabolic
regulation of cellular function at the single-cell level. The significance of
the studies is to establish a fundamental understanding of how identical cells
differentiate into functionally distinct cell lineages. The hypothesis is that
metabolism imparts asymmetry by providing essential chemical signals that
specify a cell's function and fate. Small molecule reporters are integrated with
flow cytometry for massively parallel analysis of dynamic metabolic regulation
across millions of live cells with unprecedented molecular resolution.
Establishing metabolism as a mechanism for asymmetrical specification of cell
biology reveals completely new cell phenotypes and has broader impacts in cell
biology and engineering. Thus, the research studies are foundational for
establishing chemical probes for single-cell analysis that can be combined with
modern "omics" methods to open new opportunities for probing cellular function
with high resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.