* 1942684
* CAREER: Elucidating Mechanisms and the Effects of Zeolite Framework, Acid Site Location and Strength in Methanol-to-Hydrocarbon Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* David Hibbitts, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 573,472.00

Zeolites are crystalline materials that have been used commercially for many
years as agents for separating gas mixtures and as catalysts for refining crude
oil to fuels and chemicals. Alternatively, zeolites can be used to process
methanol, which can be formed from natural gas, biomass, or coal refining, into
a wide range of fuels and chemicals. Such processes are collectively known as
methanol-to-hydrocarbons, or MTH, reactions. This research project will explore
reaction mechanisms for MTH and how zeolite structure and acid strength
influence the efficiency, selectivity, and stability of MTH catalysts. The
outcomes of this research project will improve how we utilize our nation's
natural gas, shale gas, and biomass resources for the production of liquid
transportation fuels and chemicals. The computational methods developed during
this project will be released to the public, thereby providing researchers
around the globe access to the protocols. The project researchers will develop a
three-week on-campus internship for secondary school science teachers to help
them implement computational science-based lesson plans for their classes. The
project researchers will provide opportunities for high school and undergraduate
students to participate in computational catalysis
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methanol reacts over zeolites with a pool of
hydrocarbon co-catalysts in two cycles: the alkene and aromatic cycles. In both
cases, methanol reacts with alkenes and arenes to form carbon-carbon bonds prior
to isomerization and carbon-carbon bond scission reactions which form a mixture
of alkene and aromatic products. Hydride transfer reactions can form alkanes and
dienes, the latter of which can form aromatic species and polyaromatic coke
precursors that deactivate catalysts. An atomistic understanding of these
pathways will be built by dispersion corrected density functional theory (DFT)
calculations that estimate the free energies of adsorption, reaction, and
activation. Zeolites can contain multiple unique acid site locations, and
reacting species and transition states can take many distinct orientations
around each site. Experimental techniques currently cannot distinguish between
those orientations, but the development of novel calculation techniques allows
discrimination between acid sites and their roles in the overall reaction
scheme. The role of acid site location will be investigated using models of the
H-ZSM-5 zeolite (MFI framework) by contrasting the behavior of various T-site
locations. The role of zeolite framework will be determined by contrasting
H-ZSM-5 with H-SSZ-13 (CHA framework), which has distinct pores and
connectivity, which should show differences in kinetic and transport behavior.
Acid strength effects will be examined by comparing H-SSZ-13 with the zeotype
H-SAPO-34 (both CHA) which have the same structure but differ in their
composition and acid strength. Together, these results will describe the
unconfounded effects of acid site location (e.g., channels vs. intersections in
MFI), zeolite framework (MFI vs. CHA), and acid site strength (H-SSZ-13 vs.
H-SAPO-34). DFT-calculated free energies will be used to parameterize kinetic
Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations which will identify reactive and unreactive
pathways and account for transport effects to understand crystallite size
effects when combined with DFT-calculated diffusion barriers for transport-
limited species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.