* 1942508
* CAREER:  Enabling the Design of Versatile Hybrid Materials using Polymerization-Induced Nanostructural Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Robert Hickey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Part 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving simultaneous
maximization of contrasting materials properties such as toughness and modulus
is a daunting challenge for single-component materials. Biology is able to
diverge from the inherent limitations of single-component materials by
hierarchically organizing multiple components (biopolymers and minerals) with
disparate physical properties. The static structure and hierarchical order of
biomaterials is only part of the story; biology and living systems create
complex materials through nonequilibrium processes. The goal of the CAREER
proposal is to investigate nonequilibrium chemical functionalization and self-
assembly methods to create multifunctional hybrid polymeric/inorganic materials.
Two polymer/nanoparticle material systems will be explored: 1) flexible and
electrically conductive co-continuous networks and 2) nanostructured materials
exhibiting exceptional strain-stiffening mechanical properties. Establishing and
integrating nonequilibrium chemical processes into materials design will
potentially lead to new materials with applications in infrastructure,
transportation, health care, and information processing. The research aims of
the proposal will be integrated into teaching methods by: 1) developing
polymer/materials science modules and labs for professors at nondoctorate-
granting institutions within Pennsylvania to augment the undergraduate
curriculum and 2) creating open-access video-standard operating procedures
(VSOP) for all interested researchers to learn detailed methods for polymer
synthesis, sample preparation, and
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hybrid polymer/inorganic materials field has
been working under the premise that equilibrium concepts will lead to the
complex materials seen in nature, yet biology utilizes nonequilibrium processes
to create biomaterials. The overarching aim of the proposal is to identify
design criteria using nonequilibrium chemical functionalization and self-
assembly methods to create multifunctional hybrid polymeric/inorganic materials
via polymerization-induced nanostructural transitions. In this research, in-situ
polymer grafting and in-situ block polymer synthetic methods from polymers
attached to nanoparticle surfaces will be used to create flexible and
electrically conductive co-continuous networks and nanostructured materials
exhibiting strain-stiffening properties. The synthetic approach used here will
facilitate complex polymer architecture formation in situ and will generate
hierarchically ordered materials in which polymer and nanoparticle domains are
organized from the nanometer to the micrometer scale. Characterization methods
using X-ray and neutron scattering, oscillatory shear dynamic mechanical
spectroscopy, and dielectric relaxation spectroscopy during polymerization will
reveal the self-assembly mechanism, and lead to fundamental insight for
designing hierarchically-ordered materials. Merging in-situ polymerization and
structural characterization to investigate structure-property relationships will
establish foundational science in nonequilibrium processing that mimics natural
systems and harnesses simultaneous property combinations, which are not
currently possible in hybrid polymer/inorganic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.