* 1942145
* CAREER: Testing alternative routes of adaptive phenotype-environment matching across heterogeneous landscapes in wild populations
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Daniel Warner, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2025
* USD 966,427.00

This research will examine how animals adjust to environmental variation across
different life stages by focusing on a small lizard species that lays eggs in
diverse habitats. Environmental conditions vary at small spatial scales (for
example, moving between sunny and shady patches), which can present challenges
to organisms that are adapted to specific conditions. Plants and animals have
strategies that allow them to cope with this variation, and it is important for
scientists to understand how such strategies are deployed so responses to
environmental changes can be better predicted. The goals of this project are to
1) quantify the strength of natural selection acting on the way embryos develop
in response to environmental variation, 2) determine if newly-hatched offspring
seek suitable habitat, and 3) examine whether mothers select nest sites with
conditions that have life-long benefits for their offspring. Understanding these
three different ways of dealing with environmental variation will help
ecologists predict how animals will respond to environmental change. This
project also aims to improve science education in Alabama by creating a summer
fellowship program for middle school teachers. Teachers will conduct research
and develop lesson plans for their classrooms to better prepare them to teach
science as a process. Teacher fellows will also mentor middle school students in
science fair projects, which in turn, will enhance science literacy in schools
that are under-served in science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural
selection has favored several routes that enable organisms to overcome
challenges imposed by heterogeneous environments. First, plastic responses to
the environment can modify phenotypes so that they are suited to the surrounding
environment (Environmental Matching Hypothesis). Second, rather than the
environment shaping an individual’s phenotype, individuals can actively seek
environments that are suited to their phenotype (Matching Habitat Choice
Hypothesis). Third, parents can select specific microhabitats that shield their
developing offspring from environmental variation, thereby exposing them to
“good” developmental environments that have life-long positive effects (Silver
Spoon Hypothesis). These strategies can maximize fitness in heterogeneous
environments at different life stages (via embryo responses, post-natal habitat
choice, or parental behavior). However, despite many empirical studies of each
hypothesis, most do not simultaneously consider these explanations as alternate
or interactive routes that influence the evolution of developmental plasticity.
The goals of this project are to (1) test these alternative hypotheses for how
organisms deal with environmental heterogeneity, and (2) empirically quantify
selection on developmental reaction norms in wild populations and identify
behaviors that facilitate or limit the evolution of plasticity. This research
will integrate laboratory and field studies of brown anole lizards that inhabit
islands that vary in habitat structure and ambient conditions. The integration
of novel lab and field approaches will set new standards for empirical studies
of selection on plasticity, and the consequences of matching habitat choice and
maternal nesting behaviors in the wild. Overall, this work will provide an
integrative assessment of how organisms deal with environmental heterogeneity in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.