* 1942917
* CAREER:Identifying Brain Anatomy and Function for Risky Behaviors in Large-Scale Imaging and Genetics Studies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Gideon Nave, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 679,879.00

Humans vary in their tendency to engage in behaviors that risk their own and
othersâ€™ health and longevity. Such risky behaviors impose significant costs on
societies, and much public spending is devoted to reducing their prevalence.
This project seeks to identify the features of the human brain that underlie
individual differences in the tendency to engage in risky behavior, as well as
its associated genetic disposition. Unlike previous research on the topic that
has relied on small non-representative samples, this project will use the
largest collection of brain scans currently available, about 100,000 images. It
will combine these images with genome-wide data and survey measures about risky
behavior and analyze the data using advanced statistical techniques. This
project will provide unique insights into the neuroanatomical and
neurofunctional underpinnings of individual differences in risky behavior, and
illuminate the causal relationships between genes, brain and behavior. As
features of brain anatomy and function are sensitive to the influence of
(early-) life environmental factors during sensitive developmental periods, the
project can provide insight into how such factors influence the development of
risky behavior during adulthood. All analyses will be based on pre-registered
protocols and publicly available data and code, and as such will facilitate
future research by generating reusable variables and analysis scripts. The
educational plan includes the organization of workshops to facilitate a dialogue
between geneticists, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) researchers, and social
scientists, as well as the development of teaching materials that introduce
concepts in neuroscience and genetics to the next generation of scientists,
business students, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
integrates research, education and outreach programs aiming to break new grounds
in the understanding of the neuroanatomical, neurofunctional and genetic
underpinnings of individual differences in risky behavior. The proposed research
includes high-quality T1, diffusion tensor imaging and resting-state functional
MRI images. The research will combine this data with self-reported measures of
risky behaviors, common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), results from
large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of risky behaviors from
independent samples, and demographic and environmental variables. The overall
aims of this projects are to identify brain features that are robustly
associated with the tendency to engage in risky behavior; annotate previously
reported genetic associations of risky behavior using in-vivo brain images;
employ statistical techniques to provide lower bounds of causal relationships
between brain features and risky behavior; and to use machine-learning
techniques for aggregating multimodal measurements across the brain to predict
individual-level risky behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.