* 1942928
* CAREER: A Stochastic Framework for Uncertainty Quantification on Complex Geometries: Application to Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Johann Guilleminot, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 01/31/2025
* USD 563,164.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research focusing on the integration of complex geometries in predictive
stochastic computational modeling. Recent technological breakthroughs in, e.g.,
additive manufacturing and tissue engineering, have revolutionized the way
materials and structures are processed, fabricated, and manufactured. By
enabling the production of parts with unprecedented levels of material and
geometric complexities over multiple length scales, these breakthroughs have
also greatly enhanced the challenges in computational modeling and experimental
testing. One of them is the quantification of part response uncertainties over
complex geometries. This CAREER project aims to develop a stochastic modeling
framework that will enable the automatic and robust integration of complex
geometrical features into high-dimensional, predictive computational settings.
This approach will pave the way for theoretical developments and virtual testing
paradigms in fields where uncertainty in behavior must be quantified on real-
world geometries. As part of the project, an extensive educational and outreach
plan is also planned. This component notably includes: (1) hands-on research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, (2) activities to engage
and educate a broad audience on basic science concepts with impactful
applications, and (3) activities to increase the participation of K-12 students
and underrepresented groups in computational mechanics, materials science, and
STEM at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to bridge the gap
between geometrical complexity and uncertainty quantification methodologies.
While there has been considerable progress in the development of probabilistic
frameworks accounting for multiple sources of uncertainties in computational
physics, the proper integration of complex (e.g., nonconvex) geometrical
descriptions into stochastic approaches remains mostly unexplored. In this case,
the characteristics of the geometrical features and the intrinsic properties of
material uncertainties are intertwined through processing conditions, which
uniquely challenges the state-of-the-art in stochastic modeling and uncertainty
quantification. To advance new knowledge and tools, the objectives of this
project include: (1) the development of appropriate probabilistic
representations for a broad class of stochastic constitutive models across
(spatial) scales, (2) the construction of efficient generators for sampling on
complex large-scale domains, and (3) the development of robust probabilistic
methodologies for model identification, propagation, and validation. To address
these issues, the research will combine theoretical derivations for stochastic
modeling on constrained state spaces, computational developments for random
generation through fractional partial differential equations, Bayesian inference
for underdetermined statistical inverse problems, and experimental
characterization on additively-manufactured bone-like titanium
scaffolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.