* 1942523
* CAREER: Towards a Principled Framework for the Modeling and Control of Non-equilibrium Thermodynamic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Yongxin Chen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The proposed research is on modeling and control of non-equilibrium
thermodynamic systems. These are physical systems that operate far away from
thermodynamic equilibrium. Examples include miniaturized engines and biological
processes. The classical theory of thermodynamics requires slow (quasi-static)
operation and is therefore unsuitable for many applications, as in nano-
technology, where time constraints are stringent. The research project seeks to
close the gap between theory and applications by establishing a principled
framework for modeling and control of non-equilibrium thermodynamic systems. The
tools resulting from this project promise new possibilities for future nano-
devices as well as a deeper understanding of mechanisms behind the apparent
efficiency of biological processes at micro scales. The interdisciplinary nature
of the research, bridging control engineering with thermal physics, will impact
and cross-fertilize science and education in both. New course materials and
experimental modules resulting from the research will attract and train talented
physics and engineering students with an interdisciplinary perspective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-equilibrium thermodynamics aims at physical systems
that operate far from thermodynamic equilibrium. In contrast to classical
irreversible thermodynamics where slow (quasi-static) operation and
linearization of the underlying nonlinear dynamics provide a reasonable
approximation of the physical response, non-equilibrium theory that explains the
realm of fast transitions has not been achieved at present. Thus, while heat-
transfer problems in mild temperature gradients can be handled within the
context of the classical theory, most thermodynamic systems, especially those of
minuscule size such as molecular and biological machines, operate far from
equilibrium and, in addition, often experience high levels of thermal noise.
General principles and reliable modeling and control that is suitable in such
conditions, is crucial for the next generation of technologies of miniaturized
devices. Thus, the aim of this research is to elucidate far-from-equilibrium
thermodynamic transitions as well as help interface with control methods for
devising future engineered thermodynamic systems. Specifically, the goal of this
proposal is to lay down theoretical foundations for modeling and control of non-
equilibrium thermodynamic systems. The proposal builds on these two
complementary threads, modeling and control, focusing on control synthesis that
ensures optimality or near-optimality when operating far from equilibrium. The
proposed research is expected to advance the understanding of non-equilibrium
dynamics, provide design tools and quantify attainable performance, and thereby
enable future technological developments. The impact of the research extends to
dynamical systems where uncertainty and noise are dominant, such as in social
network games involving human interactions and in deep learning, drawing on
analogies to non-equilibrium thermodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.