* 1942044
* CAREER: Computing Program Invariants using Abstract Domains Search
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Elena Sherman, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 387,933.00

Computer software has become embedded in the very fabric of how society works
and plays. However, as software continues to increase in size and complexity,
program analysts and software engineers find it increasingly challenging to keep
computer software secure, reliable, and safe. To do so, they use what is called
software verification. Program invariants are an essential part of software
verification; they are summaries of possible program behaviors. Unfortunately,
current methods for computing program invariants are not keeping pace with
software complexity, resulting in approaches that do not scale well, or which
compute imprecise, i.e., weak program invariants. In addition, while better
strategies for developing program invariants are available, they are too
difficult for most engineers to apply without highly specialized training. This
project will produce novel techniques to overcome these limitations to compute
strong program invariants, and to do so far more easily. Since program
invariants touch on so many parts of software engineering such as generating,
debugging, verifying, and optimizing computer code, improved accuracy and
efficiency can transform software development. In addition, the investigator at
Boise State University in Boise, Idaho will work closely with regional industry
professionals both to enhance their verification training, as well as to
collaborate in co-developing a graduate-level class on applied program
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use an approach for computing
program invariants called abstract interpretation. Key to effective abstract
interpretation is choosing an appropriate abstraction level for static code
analysis. On the one hand, if the abstraction is too fine, it will not scale
well. On the other hand, if the abstraction is too coarse, it will compute weak
invariants. This project will result in a novel approach for finding suitable
abstractions that allows for a scalable, precise, and far more accessible method
of computing program invariants. The resulting Search-based Static Analysis
(SBSA) framework will significantly improve upon current static analysis methods
and use search techniques to automatically optimize abstract interpreter
configurations. It will also facilitate new research directions that require
strong program invariants. There are three project objectives, to: (1)
investigate search techniques to find the best abstract domain, (2) explore
mechanisms for guiding the abstract domain search based on software concrete
semantics, and (3) improve precision by strategically partitioning software into
components and then analyzing them separately to enable better
search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.