* 1942727
* CAREER:Ontology-powered Named Entity Recognition and Robust Semantic Similarity Metrics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Prashanti Manda, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2025
* USD 398,488.00

The goal of this project is to develop novel methods (i.e. natural language
processing methods) for recognizing groups of terms (i.e. ontology concepts) in
published biology research. Ontologies are a system to organize information
(e.g. biology terms and relationships of those terms). Ontologies can be easily
analyzed by computers, making large scale biological analyses possible.
Currently, the translation of knowledge from scientific publications to an
ontology-powered format still relies largely on manual curation of literature;
this process is unscalable and tedious. Advances pioneered by this new project
will enable knowledge discovery from scientific literature and will power
computational analyses to answer complex biological questions. Educational
impacts of this project will involve the development of new courses on cutting
edge natural language processing methods to train the next generation of
interdisciplinary computer scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
advance the state of art in development of machine learning models in the domain
of automated curation and knowledge discovery in scientific literature. The
research aims to advance and establish new paradigms in the area of deep
learning methods/techniques for biological literature, towards two specific
research outcomes- 1) development of novel deep learning models for ontology-
based named entity recognition, and 2) development of robust semantic similarity
metrics for evaluating the above deep learning models. Robust semantic
similarity metrics are essential to accurately evaluate the performance of the
deep learning models that will be developed here. These similarity metrics will
be broadly applicable in several areas of biology such as hypothesizing
candidate genes for evolutionary transitions, rare human disease diagnosis, etc.
For further information visit the project website at
https://prashanti.github.io/deeplearningNER/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.