* 1942949
* CAREER:Dissecting the Impact of High Temperature on Clock Function and Clock-Controlled Growth Processes in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Dawn Nagel, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,086,080.00

Understanding how plants respond to variable environmental temperatures requires
a comprehensive understanding of the underlying regulatory pathways.
Coordination between important biological processes and external signals is
communicated by the circadian clock. The circadian clock is an internal
timekeeping machinery that enhances fitness and is found ubiquitously in
bacteria, plants, fungi and animals. Both temperature and the clock affect
fundamental processes such as growth in plants. For example, crop productivity
is affected by even modest temperature increases, depending on the time of day.
Through identification of new temperature regulators of clock function or links
to clock-controlled growth responses, the project seeks to uncover novel
mechanistic insights into how temperature impacts the clock, growth, and
resilience. Therefore, the goal of this research is to understand how extreme
temperature impacts clock function and growth in plants. Integrated within this
proposal is a 10-week summer research class followed by mentor-guided research
experiences to promote recruitment and retention of transfer community college
students that are members of under-represented minority groups. This module is
designed to train and retain transfer students for advanced education and
careers in agriculture. The mentored research experience will fill an existing
need for research opportunities for under-represented transfer students at the
University of California-Riverside. Through interactions in the lab, students
will develop a sense of community, along with purpose and professional
connections. Completion of this research will have a broad impact on our
understanding of the dynamic nature of plant genomes in response to stress and a
positive impact on the US workforce and ultimately global food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although massive genome reorganization occurs in
response to heat stress in plants, the underlying mechanisms involved are not
known. The overall hypothesis to be tested is that plant survival under heat
stress is directly dependent on the time of day, and that multiple
transcriptional regulators are responsible for integrating temperature signals
to the clock to modulate timed responses. This project aims to 1) Characterize
the role of Heat Shock Factors on clock function under high temperature, 2)
Investigate how clock-controlled heat stress responses impinge upon growth-
related processes, and 3) Determine how heat stress impacts translation of key
clock and clock-controlled genes. The short-term broader impacts of this project
will be to increase knowledge of the dynamic nature of plant interaction with
the environment, and provide a pipeline for recruitment and retention of under-
represented community college transfer students in plant sciences. Students will
receive training in molecular biology techniques, genetics, genomics, and
bioinformatics approaches, mentoring and teaching, critical thinking skills, and
career development through publications and presentations. These skills provide
an advantage for admission to competitive graduate programs in STEM or help them
to secure research jobs in academic labs or biotech companies of their choice.
In the long term, the results will increase understanding of the dynamics of the
clock and environmental temperature and the impact on an organismâ€™s behavior and
physiology. In addition, the results could contribute to engineering next-
generation strategies to improve yield and stress tolerance in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.