* 1942068
* CAREER: The Legacy of Wildfire on Carbon Watershed Biogeochemistry
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Rebecca Barnes, Colorado College
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2023
* USD 101,339.00

Wildfires occur more regularly and with greater severity throughout the western
United States. In addition to threatening our safety, these fires also change
ecosystems. Severe fires release large amounts of carbon into the atmosphere,
contributing to climate change. Wildfires also change the way carbon and water
move and are stored within ecosystems. This project aims to understand how
severe fire alters the movement and fate of carbon from land to water over
multiple timescales and forest types. Field observations, laboratory
experiments, and computer models will quantify the size and fate of terrestrial
and aquatic carbon pools. Results will improve our ability to understand the
feedbacks between a changing climate, increasing wildfires, and forest carbon
cycling. In addition, this project will create a partnership between Colorado
College, a small liberal arts school, and two large research focused
universities: University of Utah and Texas A&amp;M University. This partnership
will provide increased opportunities for undergraduates, providing research
experiences both within and outside the classroom. The project will train more
than 75 undergraduate students and two postdoctoral scholars. Results from this
project will be shared with the Colorado Springs community through an outreach-
oriented exhibit at the Fine Arts Center at Colorado College via a partnership
with an artist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Severe fire results in large shifts in
terrestrial ecosystem carbon (C) stocks and alters watershed hydrology, shifting
flow paths and thus the sources and processing of organic matter to aquatic
ecosystems. Currently, terrestrial ecosystem C models do not adequately
incorporate inland waterways, resulting in a significant overestimate of net
ecosystem production, i.e. the size of the terrestrial C sink. The overarching
goal of this research is to better understand how disturbance alters C
processing along flow paths within the terrestrial environment and the fate of C
within aquatic ecosystems. The project will leverage field campaigns, seasonal
and year-round precipitation and stream water collection, controlled laboratory
experiments, and modeling efforts at four sites across Colorado that form a
“natural experiment”. Project study sites include two subalpine sites and two
montane sites, each consisting of one landscape with tree reestablishment and
one with few to no established seedlings or saplings, almost 20 years post fire.
C stocks and processes will be quantified and characterized across these
gradients to better identify causal relationships that will help predict how
ecosystems will respond to ongoing and future disturbance. Further, project
results will have important implications for incorporating disturbance and
aquatic systems into ecosystem C models, with the potential to inform
paleoecological reconstructions of fire’s impact on ecological
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.