* 1942906
* CAREER: Getting to the Point: Exploring How Energetics Influences the Evolution of Biological Puncture Systems Across Phyla
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Philip Anderson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 02/28/2025
* USD 923,294.00

Anyone who has had a bee sting or pricked their finger on a rose thorn is
familiar with biological puncture. The objective of this research is to
understand what makes biological puncturing tools (fangs, spines, stingers,
etc.) so effective. To do this, the project will: 1) study how much energy
different biological tools use to puncture tissue, and 2) see how energy use has
influenced the evolutionary history of puncturing tool design in various living
groups. To accomplish these goals, the research will combine experiments with
mathematical analyses, and show how a fang, spine or stinger’s shape, along with
how it is moved, interacts with the nature of the material that is punctured to
produce specific kinds and amounts of damage. These data will be used to
understand how energy flows during puncture and uncover how puncturing ability
evolved in snakes, wasps, and cacti. Improved knowledge of the effectiveness of
puncture in nature will facilitate advances in robotics and biomedical
technology, such as developing puncture resistance in soft robots and better
understanding of how biological tissue is damaged during traumatic impacts. The
researchers will train undergraduate and graduate students, and develop a suite
of educational modules in partnership with local teachers that will be
disseminated across the country. These materials will integrate natural and
applied sciences and will include lesson plans and resources aimed at a range of
educational levels. Lesson plans will not require expensive materials, and will
be translated into several languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Puncture is a
widespread mechanism of both defense and attack in the biological realm, with
examples found in many phyla, spanning orders of magnitude in scale. This
research will examine how the physical principles underlying performance
influence the function and evolution of biological puncture systems. The
diversity of these systems allows exploration of how organisms that differ in
scale, structure and kinematics have evolved to overcome common mechanical
challenges. Examining commonalities across systems also gives insight into the
physical laws that underlie those challenges. This research will employ a
combination of experimental data collection and comparative analyses to achieve
two aims: 1) controlled experimental analyses will establish a set of energy
balance equations that model how morphological, material and kinematic variables
influence biologically-relevant puncture mechanics, and 2) comparative analyses
using the models will explore the evolution of puncture mechanics in venomous
snakes, parasitoid wasps and cacti. Results of these analyses will be used to
identify common principles that underlie the evolution of multiple mechanical
puncture systems, and thus give insight into how physics influences the
evolutionary rules of life. This program will create a framework that can be
used by others for a broad range of topics, including identifying kinematic
performance variables of particular adaptive value in prey capture systems;
examining the role of rate-dependency in biological materials on tissue damage
during high impact; and developing fracture resistant materials for soft
robotics. This framework will also be used to develop adaptable teaching modules
aimed at a range of educational levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.