* 1942815
* CAREER: Strain-driven phase transitions in 2D van der Waals based devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Stephen Wu, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Title&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Strain-driven phase transitions in two-
dimensional van der Waals based devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The conventional focus for advancements in computing have
strongly relied on the continued shrinking of the field-effect transistors (FET)
that makes up almost all integrated circuits. Since the fundamental physical and
economic limits of transistor scaling are now being reached, new types of
devices are being explored for added functionality beyond conventional
transistor switching. This project explores the use of strain in two
dimensionally (2D) bonded materials, such that applied stretching or compression
may induce various phase-changes in these systems. Since these phase-changes are
not limited to electrically conducting versus non-conducting as in on/off states
of conventional transistors, additional functionality may be engineered through
other changes in materials properties under strain. This type of strain-induced
phase-change device would not operate under the same physical mechanism as
conventional transistors, and therefore are not subject to the same limitations.
By impacting the building blocks of modern nanoelectronics, there may be large
impacts in various aspects of computing technology that are currently limited
due to various power, speed, or efficiency limitations of conventional
transistors. This project also seeks to use the research framework to promote
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) to traditionally
underrepresented communities by connecting with the Eastman School of Music at
the University of Rochester. Examples of activities include running summer
educational courses in music and electronics to local grade 7-12 students to
create unconventional instruments that may be used in live concert
performances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to understand the foundational principles of using device-scale gate-
controllable strain in two-dimensional (2D)-bonded materials to create new types
of phase change transistors. By exploring a new mechanism of transistor
switching using strain, limitations associated with conventional field-effect
transistor operations may be overcome. With the wide variety of phases in the
two-dimensional materials class close to strain-tunable phase transitions, the
opportunity exists to set the basis for a wide variety of gate-controllable
exotic states of matter. The device platform used in this project uses dynamic
strain applied from ferroelectric oxides in combination with static thin film
stress capping layers to demonstrate phase-switching in the Mo1-xWxTe2 class of
two-dimensional materials. Using the MoTe2 semimetallic to semiconducting phase
transition as a starting point, critical issues are identified that may still
limit the implementation of reliable dynamic device scale strain in 2D systems,
with the goal of expanding this "straintronic" concept to higher-endurance
higher-yield operation as well as adding new phases to control within the
Mo1-xWxTe2 class of materials. Additionally, learned foundational concepts from
room-temperature operation in single 2D systems allow for the translation of
this dynamic strain engineering concept to low temperatures and to van der Waals
heterostructures, widely expanding the applicability of dynamic strain
engineering in 2D systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.