* 1942559
* CAREER: Designing Flexible Complex Systems with Coupled and Co-Evolving Subsystems under Operational Uncertainties
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Koki Ho, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 06/30/2025
* USD 599,890.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will address a
grand challenge in complex system design: enabling the design of flexible large-
scale complex systems under future operational uncertainties in demands,
environment, and performance. With growing global trends in increased complexity
of engineering systems and their prolonged service lives, staged deployment and
co-evolution have become an economic option for the development of such large-
scale systems. Deploying the system progressively in stages, starting from
affordable stages, enhances flexibility and mitigates potential risks against an
unknown and evolving future. A broad range of industries (e.g., public
infrastructure, healthcare, aerospace, and defense) suffer from high development
costs and large operational uncertainties in the deployment of these systems,
however. There is an imperative need for a rigorous built-in flexibility design
methodology to optimize and coordinate the flexible subsystem-level design and
co-deployment that ensure system-level performance; this problem is extremely
challenging due to its prohibitive computational complexity. How can engineers
design a flexible complex system with coupled subsystems and its staged
deployment plan in a rigorous and scalable way? This program seeks to answer
this question in order to transform complex system design and enable systems to
adapt effectively to future uncertainties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
will develop a novel scalable design framework and associated computational
techniques for staged deployment optimization of flexible large-scale complex
systems by efficiently handling operational uncertainties at the early design
stage. The created local scenario discretization scheme offers a unique
computationally efficient approach to manage staged co-deployment by decoupling
weak dynamic interaction among subsystems. Moreover, the decomposition-based
design method introduces an innovative bottom-up staged-deployment design,
leading to a parallelizable and more scalable design approach than the
traditional top-down approaches. The resulting unified flexible design
optimization methodology will bridge the gap between high-level flexibility
analysis and detailed-level design decisions. An integrated educational
component of the project will directly impact STEM educational curriculum and
K-12 outreach activity planning by applying the researched flexible staged-
deployment concepts to transform the traditional fixed syllabus-based pedagogy
into a flexible and modular one. The developed flexible pedagogy will enable the
education and outreach activities to adapt to the diverse and uncertain needs,
interests, and backgrounds of the students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.