* 1942841
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biocultural dynamics of the postpartum interval
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Barbara Piperata, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 25,200.00

In biocultural research, anthropologists are interested in the complex
interactions between biology and culture that occur throughout the human
lifecourse. One important part of the lifecourse is the time immediately
following the birth of a child, when mothers experience physiological changes,
may be vulnerable to various stressors, and potentially receive help from other
individuals. This doctoral dissertation research examines the relationships
between maternal postpartum depression, culturally relevant social support, and
maternal levels of the hormone oxytocin, to better understand the postpartum
period from a biocultural perspective. The project will advance fundamental
knowledge about maternal dynamics and the biocultural nature of our species. The
research may also have broader public health impact by informing culturally
appropriate interventions for improving postpartum maternal health. In addition,
the project will support graduate training, international research
collaborations, and community science outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
cooperative breeding model has been used to describe patterns of infant care in
humans. Mothers especially benefit from help during the immediate postpartum
when the stress of caring for an altricial infant co-occurs with physical
recovery from pregnancy. This project focuses on maternal characteristics in the
immediate postpartum, thereby extending beyond previous work that focused
largely on reproductive fitness and infant outcomes. Following a cohort of women
who share cultural expectations regarding postpartum support, this study will
examine whether greater discordance between received and expected social support
in the postpartum is related to maternal depressive symptoms, and whether
oxytocin and social support levels are related. The project will characterize
local cultural expectations of social support via interviews with women. A group
of 150 pregnant women will be interviewed during their third trimester, and
again approximately 40 days postpartum to determine congruence between received
support (reported and directly observed) and cultural expectations of social
support, depressive symptoms, and urine oxytocin
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.