* 1942226
* CBET Energy Storage Workshop: Frontiers of Materials, Architectures and Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* David Mitlin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,000.00

This award supports the organization of a workshop on Energy Storage: Frontiers
of Materials, Architectures, and Techniques. The workshop will be held in the
Reno, NV/Lake Tahoe, CA area in March 2020, and it is expected that there will
be about 150 attendees. The workshop will take place over one-and-a-half days
and will include interactive sessions and a poster session to explore and define
current critical "Big Science Questions" in electrochemical energy storage. The
energy content of commercial lithium ion battery systems has been increasing in
an incremental, evolutionary manner. To achieve break-out advances, new
paradigms are required that are separate from established technologies such as
ceramic high energy cathodes and graphite-based anodes electrodes. These new
component improvements will enable higher performance energy storage systems
that help increase the capacity of intermittent renewable energy electricity
generation by solar and wind and increase the performance of electric and hybrid
electric vehicles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop has eight planned topic
sessions so that all the participants will have the opportunity to contribute
their views on key future research directions. The structure will use a Topic
Chair, invited speakers, and breakout discussion model for each topic. Topics
planned are Industrial Perspectives, Li and Na Metal Batteries, Solid State
Electrolyte Batteries, Emerging Li-Ion Cathodes, Hybridized Battery-Capacitors
and Fast-Charge Systems, Redox Flow Batteries, Nonaqueous Beyond Li Batteries,
and Aqueous Beyond Li Batteries. The organization of the workshop is designed so
that a diversity of researchers from academia, national laboratories, and
industry can participate in a collaborative environment. The workshop will be
explicitly structured to attract the widest possible cross-section of
individuals with travel grants to support graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and early-career academic investigators. The outcome of the workshop
will be a publicly available white paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.