* 1942063
* CAREER: Mechanisms of microbial adaptation in variable biotic environments
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Benjamin Wolfe, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,024,173.00

Microbes can rapidly evolve to adapt to their environment. For example,
pathogenic bacteria and fungi can quickly evolve resistance to antibiotics in
medical and agricultural settings. Much of the understanding of microbial
evolution comes from studies of microbial species growing alone in a
monoculture. But most microbes live in multispecies communities (microbiomes)
where neighboring species may impact how quickly and in what ways they evolve.
Whether the process of microbial adaptation observed in laboratory monocultures
translates to complex real-world microbiomes remains unclear. This research
project will use two groups of microbes (the mold Penicillium and the bacterium
Staphylococcus) that are involved in cheese production to understand how
interactions between microbial species impact their evolution. Discoveries from
this experimentally tractable cheese rind system may inform how biotic
interactions impact adaptation of microbial species in microbial communities. In
addition to providing research opportunities for graduate students and
undergraduates, this CAREER research project leverages the popular appeal of the
cheese model system to broaden access to independent research experiences and
improve scientific literacy. This research will also have direct societal
impacts on the American public by providing an in depth understanding of the
ecology and evolution of widespread microbes that can both provide benefits and
wreak havoc in human and natural
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial, fungal, and other
microbial species live in multispecies communities where they constantly face
the challenges and opportunities of neighboring microbial species. The
ecological consequences of these biotic interactions are beginning to emerge
through co-culture experiments and cultivated model communities. The longer-term
evolutionary consequences of biotic interactions within microbiomes are poorly
understood. The work will identify the mechanisms that control microbial
adaptation in variable biotic environments. Using the adaptation of wild
Penicillium and Staphylococcus to the cheese environment as a model system, this
research will identify conserved mechanisms of microbial interactions and how
these interactions impact the rate and mode of microbial evolution. RNA-
sequencing and metabolomics will be used to identify mechanisms of interactions
between target Penicillium and Staphylococcus species and neighbors within the
cheese rind microbial community. Experimental evolution in the lab will
determine how species interactions impact the adaptation of Penicillium and
Staphylococcus in the cheese environment. Comparative genomics and
transcriptomics will identify the genetic mechanisms that drive adaptation of
Penicillium and Staphylococcus. A new undergraduate research course at Tufts
University will fulfill an increased demand for original research experiences as
students complete many of the research activities of the project. A summer
microbiome camp for cheesemakers and high school teachers from throughout New
England will teach concepts and skills in microbiomes and microbial evolution.
Feature articles and infographics on MicrobialFoods.org will teach a global
audience about microbial evolution and diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.