* 1942274
* CAREER: An Investigation of Mentors' Practices that Help Minoritized Undergraduates Persist In STEM
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Joi-Lynn Mondisa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 12/31/2024
* USD 551,865.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who
exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent
education, and the integration of education and research within the context of
the mission of their organizations. This project awarded to a CAREER scholar has
the goal to discover and understand effective, evidence-based mentoring
practices and strategies that support the success of minoritized undergraduate
science, technology, engineering, mathematics (STEM) students and the
intentional preparation of mentors. This project integrates research and
education by developing a theoretical framework, mentoring modules, case
studies, presentations, webinars, and a graduate course. This award is supported
by the EHR Core Research program which supports fundamental STEM Education
research initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentoring has been shown to
positively affect and influence the persistence of historically minoritized
students in STEM, specifically Blacks, Hispanics/Latinx, and American
Indians/Alaskan Natives. Yet for mentors in higher education, minimal examples
exist that detail effective mentoring approaches, strategies, and competencies
that help minoritized mentees to persist and succeed. The goal of this inquiry
is to use a rigorous mixed-methods study design to better understand mentoring
approaches, coping strategies such as methods used to respond to stressful
situations, and perceived competencies of faculty mentors of minoritized
students in STEM fields. This work will identify a representative sample of
mentors who help minoritized undergraduates persist in STEM; interview these
mentors about their approaches and coping strategies; survey mentors and mentees
about the mentors' competencies using the validated Mentoring Competency
Assessment survey; and interview mentees about their experiences with their
mentors. The new knowledge will add to the mentoring literature and its
theoretical development based on the assets of the guiding theories of
intersectionality and community cultural wealth, and the select nature of the
mentors under study. The project will result in the creation of knowledge and
tools that support education about effective mentoring across local, regional,
and national platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.