* 1942937
* CAREER: Bridging Formal and Everyday Learning through Wearable Technologies: Towards a Connected Learning Paradigm
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Sharon Lynn Chu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 765,988.00

A significant problem in science learning is that students do not always see the
relevance of the concepts they are learning. This lack of perceived relevance
may then lead to less student engagement in science. This project will
investigate how to connect 4th to 6th grade students’ out-of-classroom, everyday
experiences with formal in-classroom science instruction through the use of
wearable and visualization technologies. Students will use wearable technologies
to capture their everyday experiences related to science and reflect on these
experiences through a web-based interface. A dashboard application will support
teachers in tailoring their classroom science lesson plans accordingly. The
project will contribute to our understanding of how to design wearable
technologies for connecting learning across contexts and will inform a framework
of teaching science that is better grounded in students’ everyday experiences
with science concepts. Students from two highly diverse K-12 schools will
participate in the project. Outcomes of the project will lead to the design of
new structures for connected science learning that are responsive to diverse
student experiences and backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In investigating
connected learning across both everyday experience and formal school contexts,
the project consists of a 4-phase work plan over five years. Phase 1 will
explore how to support 4th to 6th grade students with wearable technologies to
reflect on their everyday experiences through the lens of science concepts.
Phase 2 will conduct iterative participatory design sessions with pre- and in-
service teachers to investigate how to support them in incorporating students’
everyday science reflections into school instruction through interactive
dashboards. Phase 3 will develop an exemplar system that integrates the designed
wearable with the teacher dashboard. Two evaluation studies will be conducted
with two partner schools: the first study will address a single science concept,
and the second study will be longer-term, allowing teachers to have free-use of
the system for any number of science concepts over a semester. Phase 4 will
identify guidelines for connected learning technologies and determine the extent
to which these guidelines may generalize to other education levels (e.g., STEM
college sophomores). Both qualitative and quantitative data will be collected
across the phases to assess the impact of the connected learning system on
students’ perceived relevance of science, motivation to engage in science,
scientific thinking or mindset, and teachers’ classroom instruction. Workshops
will also be conducted to introduce teachers to the paradigm of connected
learning, and the associated technologies. Overall, by connecting students’
science-related everyday experiences with formal instruction, the project will
lead to more personally relevant student learning, and ultimately to an
educational approach that is more receptive to a diverse student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.