* 1942697
* CAREER: Facilitating Dependable Neuromorphic Computing: Vision, Architecture, and Impact on Programmability
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Anup Das, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2025
* USD 453,252.00

Machine learning is enabling rapid growth in new applications that rely on
sustained and automated interpretation of data better than humans. Neuromorphic
chips mimicking biological neurons and synapses execute machine learning
algorithms in an energy-efficient manner. However, current neuromorphic
architectures are inherently unreliable. They introduce errors during execution,
limiting the dependability of machine learning. This project will address
dependability challenges of neuromorphic computing, by looking at all levels,
from building error-resilient machine learning algorithms to designing fault-
tolerant hardware. This project will advance the field by 1) making neuromorphic
computing reliable, efficient, programmable, and easy-to-use for the community,
2) teaching future science and engineering students how to make machine learning
algorithms error-resilient, 3) creating job opportunities through national and
international internships and collaborations, 4) raising interest of high school
students in STEM through neuromorphic computing-enabled robotics workshops, and
5) building an integrated neuromorphic community through a new focused
conference on neuromorphic computing. The research activities will be tightly
integrated into teaching. Throughout this project, robot workshops will be
organized annually for Drexel's Eureka (STEM for girls) and Philadelphia's high
school students, jointly with the City of Philadelphia, to raise this
community's interest in STEM. The project will also recruit undergraduate and
graduate students in research and outreach activities, with emphasis on female
and minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses broad
research questions with far-reaching implications in dependable neuromorphic
computing: What are the reliability issues in neuromorphic architectures and how
to model them? How do these reliability issues manifest as errors and impact the
performance of machine learning algorithms? How to improve error tolerance in
these algorithms by exploiting error resilience and self-repair properties in
the brain, and how to proactively mitigate reliability issues in neuromorphic
architectures to avoid errors in the first place? This project seeks to answer
these research questions through the following three key research activities: 1)
embedding biological self-repair properties in machine learning algorithms; 2)
designing fault-tolerant hardware to implement these algorithms; and 3)
proactively mitigating reliability issues and facilitating fault tolerance in
hardware through algorithm/architecture co-design and design/technology co-
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.