* 1942398
* CAREER: Mechanisms of RNA-mediated control of gene expression in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Sarah Keane, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 05/31/2025
* USD 889,357.00

Title: CAREER: Mechanisms of RNA-mediated control of gene expression in
bacteria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria have evolved multiple means to sense
their environment and respond to changing conditions, including temperature. One
strategy that some bacteria have evolved to sense temperature is the placement
of temperature-responsive sequences in messenger RNAs. These ‘RNA thermosensors’
change their structure in response to changing temperature, exerting control
over the production of particular proteins. This project will investigate the
structural requirements for temperature sensitivity and elucidate RNA-RNA
interactions that impact bacterial virulence. This research will report on
ubiquitous and important process in RNA-mediated mechanisms including melting
and annealing. This work will inform on RNA molecular recognition and the RNA
structure-function relationship. Further insights into RNA structure, stability,
and intermolecular interactions will aid in the engineering of new RNA-based
biosensors. This project will also integrate research and education to foster
scientific training and education of high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students. As a component of this project, undergraduate students will be trained
in cutting-edge biomolecular nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and
will contribute to a public database containing RNA chemical shift information.
Outreach activities aimed at engaging young students from traditionally
underrepresented backgrounds will include demonstration of magnetic resonance
imaging techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching scientific objective
of this project is to gain insight into how non-coding RNA molecules from the
bacterial pathogen L. monocytogenes function independently and in concert to
control gene expression. An RNA thermosensor controls the translation of a key
transcriptional activator, PrfA, which ultimately controls the expression of a
cluster of virulence genes. Objective 1 will reveal the biochemical and
biophysical properties that govern temperature sensing in RNA thermosensors.
Objective 2 will characterize, in atomic detail, the structure and
conformational changes that occur in the prfA RNA thermosensor at various
temperatures. Objective 3 will elucidate the structural and molecular link
between the RNA thermosensor and a metabolite-binding riboswitch, which function
together to mediate expression of virulence genes. To accomplish these
objectives, we will use a multidisciplinary approach combining biochemical,
biophysics, and structural techniques including NMR spectroscopy, small angle
X-ray scattering, and X-ray crystallography. This project will lead to a deeper
understanding of how certain pathogenic bacteria sense and respond to
temperature signals and how RNA molecules remodel and interact to control gene
expression. This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics and Genetic
Mechanism clusters of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.