* 1942422
* Conference: Plant Genome Engineering: From Lab to Field, Breckenridge, Colorado, April 3-6, 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Thale Jarvis, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2022
* USD 15,900.00

The Keystone Symposia meeting on Plant Genome Engineering: From Lab to Field
will bring leaders in plant genome biology together to unravel the complexity of
plant genome engineering. It is anticipated that the conference will catalyze
rapid advances in scientific knowledge, supporting improved agricultural
practices to feed the world while minimizing negative impacts of agricultural
activities. Additionally, this conference will enhance infrastructure by
providing a forum to enable networking and formation of new collaborations among
senior scientists, trainees, and junior investigators in the plant genome
editing field. Keystone Symposia conferences also provide additional value and
importance to nurturing the next generation of scientists by providing them with
the opportunity to actively take part in discussions and poster sessions.
Moreover, this conference will acquaint trainees and investigators new to field
with the state-of-the-art science in the field, provide opportunities for
critical scientific feedback, and promote career development for trainees and
new investigators, including opportunities both to see successful scientists
present cutting-edge science and to network with prospective mentors and others
who might contribute to their scientific and professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Keystone Symposia conference on
Plant Genome Engineering: From Lab to Field focuses on the latest gene editing
advances, with an emphasis on the development of new tools and to understand how
these tools might be used to dissect plant gene function and develop new crop
traits. Although this field is still very young, it is maturing at a rapid pace.
Originally, plant genome research had the primary goal to develop and implement
tools and reagents that effectively target specific DNA sequences, a goal shared
by researchers working on diverse systems, including plants, animals and fungi.
With the advent of Transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) and
shortly thereafter CRISPR/Cas systems, the DNA targeting problem was solved.
Thus, the current goal of the field is to efficiently implement gene editing in
specific biological systems. Therefore, this conference brings together
scientists who work on tool development, plant transformation, plant breeding
and crop trait development. This conference will provide a platform which should
enable a swift transfer of the benefits of the technology to that field. This
conference will help build a community of researchers interested in overcoming
the obstacles in plant gene editing, which include the delivery of gene editing
reagents to plant cells and improved methods of plant transformation. This
community is essential to move the field forward, as found by evidence of a
previous National Science Foundation (NSF) conference which identified certain
bottlenecks in plant gene editing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported
jointly by the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.