* 1942480
* CAREER: Neural mechanisms of auditory object recognition
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Chad Meliza, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project will investigate how listeners are able to comprehend speech in
challenging acoustical conditions like cocktail parties. Speech-recognition
technology dramatically underperforms human hearing in such conditions, which
has been a barrier to improving voice-based computer interfaces and prosthetic
speech-to-text assistive devices. This research will address this gap by
examining a perceptual illusion called auditory restoration, in which the brain
fills in words and other sounds that have been interrupted by brief, loud
noises. This phenomenon implies that the brain constructs robust internal models
of speech sounds, and that it uses them to determine what is being said from
limited or degraded information. To learn how these internal models work, this
study examines perceptual restoration in zebra finches, a species of songbird.
Zebra finches employ complex vocalizations to identify themselves to each other,
and need to be able to understand who is singing in noisy social settings. The
project combines methods of measuring behavior and brain activity to probe the
neural circuits underlying auditory restoration in finches. By identifying these
circuits and how they are wired up, this research will give insight into
fundamental perceptual processes that allow humans to communicate through
speech, and more broadly, that enable the brain to construct coherent
experiences from sensory information that is often incomplete and unreliable. A
better understanding of the neural mechanisms of auditory perception also
promises to enhance the performance of speech-recognition algorithms to
facilitate communication. The educational component of the proposal addresses a
growing need in the field for computational proficiency at earlier stages in
training. The investigator plans to implement a curriculum to encourage and
support early exposure to computational and systems neuroscience, serve as a
recruitment tool for systems neuroscience labs, and contribute to the
university's goals of increasing data literacy and skills in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Auditory restoration has been widely observed in a
broad range of mammalian and avian species. It is likely to contribute to
humans’ remarkable ability to reliably decode phonemes from speech in extremely
noisy conditions. The research will advance the understanding of this phenomenon
by bringing a well-characterized animal model of auditory processing to
investigate a well-established human psychophysical paradigm. The approach
combines in vivo extracellular and intracellular electrophysiology with operant
behavior to examine how bottom-up and top-down processes interact within the
auditory cortex to support auditory restoration in zebra finches. Aim 1 examines
how auditory experience affects behavioral auditory restoration. Aim 2
determines where the neural correlates of top-down and bottom-up restoration
emerge in the auditory processing hierarchy. Aim 3 begins to dissect the
mechanism by investigating how specific cell types and their intrinsic neural
dynamics contribute to tolerance for noise. The educational objectives include
the development of a curriculum to train students in data science and best
software practices for systems neuroscience and will impact the broader
community through freely distributed, interactive instructional materials and
training the next generation of data scientists in
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.