* 1942956
* CAREER: Investigating the mechanistic basis of host adaptation in close and distant relatives within Xanthomonas species complex
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Neha Potnis, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 01/31/2025
* USD 849,698.00

Increased global trade, modern agricultural practices and global climate change
have predisposed agro-ecosystems to the increased risk of outbreaks of old and
new diseases. These outbreaks impacting food security are a major societal
concern. To manage disease outbreaks, understanding various mechanisms employed
by diverse pathogenic species to infect a common host or, at times, to acquire
infectivity on a new host is crucial. While molecular mechanisms underlying
pathogenesis on a given host have been uncovered in individual pathogenic
species, understanding whether these mechanisms are conserved across diverse
species infecting common host remains elusive. The goals of this project are to
1) understand various mechanisms that diverse pathogenic bacteria use to
specialize on a common host, 2) identify traits that allow pathogenic bacteria
to acquire infectivity on a new host. This knowledge will help resolve complex
interactions between plants and pathogens and foster development of effective
strategies to respond and manage pathogen populations. The educational goals
include fostering STEM research interests by providing research opportunities
for high-school students from high-need schools in Alabama and first-generation
minority undergraduate students, and raising public knowledge of emergence of
plant disease outbreaks, their influence on plant health and, ultimately, on our
lives. The project will educate students on what makes bacterium pathogenic and
how diseases emerge in the modern era of agriculture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conceptualizing host range of plant pathogenic bacteria
has been a challenge. Population genomics, association analyses, and
transcriptomics approaches have proposed a new paradigm stating host range as an
overlapping genetic continuum involving multiple genetic determinants with small
to major effect. However, functional validation of the select candidates has not
been sufficient to uncover the basis of host range. Using Xanthomonas species
complex as a model system where both pathological convergence as well as recent
host range expansion have been observed, the project will test the idea that
host range determinants are not restricted to the pathogenic phase, but
asymptomatic early phase is equally important in determining overall dynamics of
essential pathogenicity determinants. Deploying forward and reverse bacterial
genetics, pathogen transcriptomics, experimental evolution and high-throughput
sequencing tools, the project will test the following hypotheses; i)
functionally conserved essential determinants from diverse pathogen species are
involved in the infection of a common host causing the same disease, although
their temporal dynamics may vary depending on contribution of other variable
fitness determinants; ii) genetic exchange of adaptive traits in closely related
species under host selection pressure and in presence of competing species is
responsible for host range expansion. The project will identify genetic
determinants during infection process that govern qualitative and quantitative
differences across different pathogenic species. Understanding of the fitness
adaptations that explain emergence of novel pathogen lineages will reveal
pathogen weaknesses. This project will advance the knowledge of genetic
mechanisms and their functional significance underlying host adaptation in
modern agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by IOS-
Plant Biotic Interaction and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.