* 1942273
* CAREER: Facilitating the use of genomic data in evolutionary biology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Rachel Schwartz, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2025
* USD 999,061.00

The question of how species are related is one of long-standing interest. Only
when species relationships are understood is it possible to understand how and
why species have changed over time (i.e. by comparing them based on how closely
they are related). Surprisingly, despite extensive study, the relationships
among some groups of species remain controversial. For example, in the last six
years, large efforts to understand how birds are related by sequencing their
genomes have produced conflicting results. This research project seeks to
understand why, despite sequencing large amounts of genomic data for many
species, scientists continue to struggle to understand some species
relationships. In this project, subsets of genome sequence data will be examined
to determine which types of data provide accurate information about species
relationships, and which data confound the understanding of relationships and
indicate other evolutionary patterns. Using this knowledge, software will be
developed that allows biologists to rapidly process genomic data to quickly and
accurately understand relationships among species they work on, and therefore
the ways in which these groups evolved. As this research highlights the need for
current and future scientists to be able to work with large and complex
datasets, the project will (1) provide computational training for hundreds of
biologists, and (2) support the development of computational and research skills
for diverse undergraduates as part of an inclusive community, with the objective
of supporting their future research careers. Research-based courses for
undergraduates will reduce the hurdles faced by students who have limited
resources to engage in unpaid independent research, or may be excluded from paid
opportunities due to a lack of experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to move phylogenetics (i.e. the understanding of species
relationships) from using more data, to using data with optimal information
about species relationships. First, subsets of the genome that support well-
established species relationships will be identified. These subsets will be used
to evaluate support for alternative hypotheses among species with more
controversial relationships, and identify the correct relationships. Second,
machine learning methods will be used to determine genomic subsets that result
in more accurate phylogenies based on their characteristics. Finally, these
approaches to data filtering will be automated in freely-available, easy-to-use,
open-source software, to facilitate their use in research projects relying on
accurate estimates of species relationships. Computational training will be
provided through semi-annual workshops for researchers; training for others to
lead similar workshops around the world will also be provided. Undergraduates’
computational and research skills will be developed through courses using real
genomic datasets for novel research. Together, the research and education
components of this project will support a greater number and diversity of
researchers who have the skills and software to effectively conduct research in
evolutionary biology and various areas of research relying on computational
skills to analyze large datasets. Regular updates on this research will be made
available at https://schwartzlaburi.github.io/. This project is jointly funded
by the Cyber-infrastructure for Biological Research program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.