* 1942587
* CAREER: Microbial contributions to host phenotypic flexibility
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Kevin Kohl, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,298,917.00

Understanding how animals physiologically respond to changes in their
environment is a large challenge in biology. Scientists have discovered that
animals host diverse communities of microbes (microbiomes) that help their hosts
in many ways, such as digesting fiber or training the immune system. This
project focuses on how animals respond to changes in diet and the role of the
animals' microbiomes in these responses. For example, animals can change many
aspects of their digestive system (intestinal length, activities of digestive
enzymes, etc.) in response to changes in nutritional composition. However, not
all species respond the same way: herbivorous, omnivorous, and insectivorous
rodents respond differently to varying levels of dietary protein and fiber. To
ascertain if these differences are due to the animals’ physiology or their gut
microbiome, microbiomes of rodent hosts with different feeding strategies will
be inoculated into germ-free mice and then these animals will be given
contrasting diets. This research will determine whether the different
microbiomes allow hosts to respond differently to changes in diet. Understanding
these dynamics could be important for species conservation, agricultural
practices, etc. Additionally, this grant will fund an undergraduate research
experience where students design independent research projects on microbial
isolates. This program will allow for students to generate hypotheses, design
experiments, and analyze their own results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenotypic
flexibility, or the ability of organisms to modulate phenotype in response to
environmental changes, allows animals to maintain performance in face of
environmental variation. The hologenomic theory of evolution states that natural
selection acts on the collection of host and microbial genomes as a unit. One
poorly understood aspect of the hologenomic theory of evolution is how much of
phenotypic flexibility is facilitated by the host versus by host-associated
microbes. Diet is one environmental variable that yields phenotypic flexibility
in animal physiology. For example, animals fed high fiber diets generally
lengthen their small intestines and enlarge portions of their hindgut. However,
not all animal species respond the same to changes in diet composition. Is the
source of this variation in responsiveness driven by the animal genome or by
host-associated microbes? This question will be tested by inoculating germ-free
mice with microbial communities from different wild rodents. Inoculated mice
will then be fed diets varying in protein and fiber content to test whether
distinct microbial communities yield differences in phenotypic flexibility.
Moreover, students in a Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE)
will culture specific microbial species with varying functional capabilities.
Students will then design independent research projects to test original
hypotheses. Furthermore, these isolates will be powerful for follow-up studies
to identify particular microbial taxa that drive aspects of host phenotypic
flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.