* 1942124
* CAREER: Fundamentals of Learning from People with Applications to Peer Review
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Nihar Shah, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 01/31/2025
* USD 532,211.00

In a wide variety of applications -- such as peer review, recommender systems,
hiring, college admissions, peer grading, A/B testing, and crowdsourcing -- it
is common to elicit and process data from people. Such data often suffer from
issues such as miscalibration, subjectivity, strategic behavior, and biases.
These issues are further amplified in applications (such as those listed above)
in which the data comprises evaluations of a set of items by people, where every
person evaluates only a subset of items and every item is evaluated by only a
subset of people. These issues degrade the overall quality of these applications
and also lead to unfairness towards some of its participants. For example, data
from people often have biases pertaining to certain demographics; subjective
opinions or strictness/leniency of the human evaluators can lead to unfairness;
some participants may indulge in strategic behavior which can be detrimental to
the overall system. This project will design algorithms for eliciting data from
people and processing it in a manner that mitigates these issues to the maximum
possible extent. The project will have a particular focus on the application of
peer review of scholarly research. It will make a significant real-world impact
through the research outcomes for applications that depend on data from people,
outreach to drive positive policy changes, and synergistic educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the issues of
miscalibration, subjectivity, strategic behavior and biases in learning from
people along three fronts. First, using tools from information theory and
statistics, it will establish the fundamental limits on the extent to which
these problems can be mitigated. Second, it will develop algorithms that will
provably achieve (or approach) these limits, and are also computationally
efficient. The research on this front will employ tools from machine learning
and statistics, game theory and social choice theory. Finally, the project will
transform the theory into a useful toolkit for practitioners, as well as
outreach towards driving positive policy changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.