* 1942134
* CAREER: Geometry-inspired approaches to information theory and learning
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Varun Jog, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2021
* USD 26,894.00

Information theory and geometry are closely intertwined; theoretical
developments in one domain have stimulated significant breakthroughs in the
other. In geometry, a large body of literature is devoted to studying the sizes
and shapes of low-dimensional projections of geometric objects. However, few
parallels exist in information theory. On the other hand, information theory has
a rich set of tools to analyze extremal problems, which have no suitable analogs
in geometry. This project aims to combine the individual strengths of both areas
to expand the set of mathematical tools that can be brought to bear upon the
study of geometry and information theory. An important goal of the project is
the practical applications of results and insights gained through such a study.
Motivated by applications in modern data analysis, such as random projections,
tomographic reconstruction, and neural network-based algorithms, this project
will explore geometry-inspired approaches in modern machine learning. The
planned research is highly interdisciplinary and serves to bring together
different communities in engineering, mathematics, and computer science. The
project will contribute to the intellectual development of undergraduate and
graduate students through teaching and research mentorship. Besides, the
investigator will engage regularly with K-12 students via the Wisconsin Math,
Science, and Engineering Talent Search, and deliver talks at local middle and
high schools on topics related to geometry and information
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three distinct technical
thrusts. In the first thrust, novel notions of entropy will be developed to
characterize the randomness of lower-dimensional projections of a random
variable, addressing a conspicuous gap in the geometrization of probability
literature. In the second thrust, a new framework for solving extremal problems
in geometry using information inequalities will be developed. Novel information
inequalities will be investigated and applied to tomographic reconstruction and
analysis of X-Ray and Radon transforms. Finally, the third thrust will consider
new directions in the theory and applications of machine learning by using tools
derived from geometry, information theory, and optimal
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.