* 1942554
* CAREER: Nano Electro-chemo-mechanics and Interfacial Stability in All-solid-state Lithium Battery
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Akihiro Kushima, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2025
* USD 513,392.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will focus on understanding
the fundamental reaction mechanisms in all-solid-state lithium batteries to
identify the root causes of the failures. All-solid-state battery is one of the
promising candidates as the next generation energy storage technology beyond Li-
ion batteries. It uses solid electrolytes eliminating the use of the flammable
liquid electrolyte and is expected to improve safety as well as the energy
density. However, the solid nature of the electrolyte causes several issues such
as slow ionic conductance and mechanical fractures leading to the premature
failure of the device, in particular at the electrochemical interfaces where
complex interactions between chemical reactions and mechanical deformations take
place. The fundamental insights obtained in this study can be strategically
utilized to design the solid electrolyte composition and the interfacial
structure to significantly improve the ionic conduction and the mechanical
stability for enhancing the performance and the cycle lifetime. It will
contribute to develop advanced energy storage devices beyond current Li-ion
battery technologies leading to a more sustainable society and economy in the
country and the world overall. The research will also incorporate educational
and outreach programs to train undergraduate/graduate students and attract K-12
students to STEM fields. In addition, the project organizes an exchange program
with an international automobile company contributing to the development of the
industry and produce next generation scientists/engineers who have both
industrial and academic experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
discover the underlying science and the unit processes of the failures in all-
solid-state lithium batteries at the electrochemical interfaces. To achieve the
goal, an in-situ transmission electron microscopy technique developed by the PI
will be employed. It enables precise evaluation of the interplay between the
strain/stress evolutions and the changes in the microstructure/chemistry at the
interface during electrochemical reactions in atomic- and nano-scales. This
method is systematically incorporated in the research to address the important
questions for understanding failures in all-solid-state lithium batteries: 1)
How does the microstructure of the electrolyte/electrode change during
charging/discharging? 2) How does the lithium metal penetrate through the solid
electrolyte? and 3) What causes the solid electrolyte to fracture? Atomistic
simulations will be performed to construct a theoretical framework on the
reaction kinetics and the mechanical properties at the interfaces. This, in
combination with the experimental observations and measurements, further
promotes the understanding of the reaction/degradation
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.