* 1942963
* CAREER: Foundational statistical theory and methods for analyzing populations of attributed connectomes
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Joshua Vogelstein, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 04/30/2025
* USD 498,809.00

Understanding the brain has been called science’s final frontier due to its
astonishing complexity. It provides people with their unmatched cognitive
capabilities and is the source of some of our most debilitating disabilities. A
widespread view among brain scientists is that brains are essentially large
complex networks, with each node and edge of the network itself being a complex
object. Thus, to understand ourselves and to fight disorders including
depression (the world’s leading burden of disease) and suicide (a current
epidemic), the scientist on this project will develop mathematical and
statistical tools to study networks and apply them to brain networks. This will
provide a deeper understanding of human brains and contribute to preventing
dysfunction and restoring function. All the tools they develop will also be
integrated into a course, and all of the science, including papers, code, and
educational materials, will be generated in the open source, so that everyone in
society will have access to this content. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
will establish foundational theory and methods for analyzing populations of
attributed connectomes. Their approach, “connectal coding,” will enable brain
scientists to (1) infer latent structure from individual connectomes, (2)
identify meaningful clusters among populations of connectomes, and (3) detect
relationships between connectomes and multivariate phenotypes. The methods they
develop will naturally overcome the challenges inherent in connectomics: high-
dimensional non-Euclidean data with multi-level nonlinear interactions. Their
procedures will extend the current state-of-the-art in terms of theoretical
guarantees, computational scalability, empirical performance, and
interpretability of results. The efficacy of the methods will be demonstrated on
datasets spanning experimental modalities, scales, and taxa, in collaboration
with domain experts who acquired the data. They will also generate educational
resources to complement their methods, data, and code to democratize
connectomics. All project results will be available at
https://neurodata.io/graspy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.