* 1942303
* CAREER: Machine learning and signal processing methods for analyzing single-cell sequencing data
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Sheida Nabavi, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2025
* USD 392,375.00

High throughput genome sequencing technologies, also known as next generation
sequencing technologies, have revolutionized genomics and medicine. This
achievement is mostly owed to employing computational methods to extract
information from massive numbers of small fragments of genomes resulting from
the new sequencing technologies. More recently, sequencing individual cells,
known as single-cell sequencing, shows significant advancements over
conventional sequencing of a large population of cells, called bulk cell
sequencing. This is because single-cell sequencing enables discovery of new
biological knowledge at the cellular level and a better understanding of the
function of an individual cell, which cannot be obtained via bulk sequencing.
The emerging and fast-growing single-cell sequencing technology has attracted
much interest and has had major impacts on several fields, such as microbiology,
neurobiology, immunology, and developmental biology. With rapid advances in
single-cell technologies, single-cell sequencing data and their applications
continue to grow, while computational methods for analyzing these data are
lagging behind. Compared to bulk sequencing, single-cell sequencing introduces
new challenges in data analysis due to the low amount of DNA and RNA from a
single cell and the extra steps in the sequencing process for single cells.
Moreover, thousands or millions of cells are sequenced in parallel in any given
experiment, leading to massive data sets to analyze. This project will build a
strong computational foundation for analyzing single-cell sequencing data. The
project outcome will contribute to advancing biological sciences and improving
human health by providing insight into critical biological unknowns requiring
single-cell resolutions, such as evolution of cancer cells and development of
stem cells. The project will also contribute to education and training in the
high in-demand and multidisciplinary field of bioinformatics and computational
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data analysis using advanced computational
methods plays an essential role in extracting accurate and meaningful
information from single-cell sequencing data. Current single-cell sequencing
data analysis methods have been adapted from bulk sequencing technologies. The
current methods, however, are not designed to cope with the new challenges in
single-cell sequencing data analysis, such as extensive noise, zero inflation
and missing data, non-uniform genome coverage, data multimodality, and large
amount of data. This project aims to address the new challenges in analyzing
single-cell sequencing data by developing novel computational methods and
algorithms based on signal processing and machine learning techniques. The focus
of this research is on identifying genomic variations in the form of copy number
variations using DNA single-cell sequencing data, and clustering cells using RNA
single-cell sequencing data. The developed methods and algorithms will
significantly advance knowledge in extracting accurate information from complex
and massive single-cell sequencing data by (i) providing optimal representation
of genome coverage data by applying sparse optimization, (ii) modeling and
reducing noise by employing denoising methods in signal processing, (iii)
exploring information across cells by applying data-driven learning models and
(iv) incorporating prior knowledge by adapting network and word embedding
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.