* 1942665
* CAREER: Functional Structure and Dynamics of Complex Carbohydrates Via Sensitivity-Enhanced Solid-State NMR and Database Development
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Tuo Wang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 12/31/2022
* USD 515,578.00

Complex carbohydrates are essential to many biological processes such as energy
storage, building of molecular structures, and cell recognition. The structural
complexity of carbohydrates determines their physical and chemical properties
but also presents a technical barrier to high-resolution structural
characterizations. In this interdisciplinary project across chemistry, biology
and computer science, new methodologies will be developed to obtain atomic- and
molecular-level insight onto the function-structure relationship of
polysaccharides in native cellular environments. The research will reveal the
fundamental principles of how microbes construct their cell walls, which will
promote the development of carbohydrate-based/targeted biomaterials and
antifungal agents. The advances in biophysical methods and database development
will benefit the research community and set up the stage for further
investigations of carbohydrates from various organisms such as algae, bacteria,
plants, and animals. As Louisiana is one of the most under-equipped states in
biomolecular NMR, the new courses and outreach programs will allow students to
gain exposure to spectroscopy and database, which will expand the research
capability of the state and foster the training of the next generation of
biophysical scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI
will develop innovative methods that integrate database and software development
with solid-state NMR and Dynamic Nuclear Polarization (DNP) spectroscopy to
enable structural analysis of complex carbohydrates in intact cells. The team
will develop a sample screening protocol and DNP toolbox to enable structural
elucidation of unlabeled whole-cells and thus overcome a long-standing barrier
due to the difficulty and expense of isotope-labeling. In addition, the project
will implement two new functions to a carbohydrate database to facilitate
structural analysis, and determine the supramolecular assembly of
polysaccharides in four molds and yeasts. This project will resolve the
polymorphic structure of insoluble and disordered glycans in their native state,
thus filling a long-standing gap in carbohydrate chemistry and life science. The
PI will engage in a broad dissemination of education and outreach activities,
including (i) developing a solid-state NMR course on theory and experimentation
for graduate curriculum; (ii) designing an experimental module 'Fingerprints of
Carbohydrates' for undergraduate laboratory and two outreach programs for high
school students; (iii) supporting student travel to gain experience on the
state-of-art national facilities and interact with leading experts; (iv)
training undergraduates from diverse scientific majors to conduct
interdisciplinary research; (v) enhancing course engagement and active learning
through new teaching methods 'designed mistakes' and 'students peer-teaching';
and (vi) coding database and analytical software to benefit the research
community. This strong commitment will allow postdoc, graduate, undergraduate
and K-12 students, many from underrepresented minorities, to gain exposure to
the frontiers of biophysical and biomolecular
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.