* 1942777
* CAREER: Investigating the origins of developmental and regenerative neurogenesis.
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Michael Layden, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2025
* USD 840,192.00

Understanding the mechanisms that control how embryonic cells become neurons
(neurogenesis) is important because nervous systems regulate nearly every aspect
of an animal’s life. Many basic aspects of the biology of these cells that would
allow scientists to more effectively deal with neural dysfunction and disease is
still not understood. The research project will identify the mechanisms of
neurogenesis during development and regeneration in a species of sea anemone
capable of regenerating its nerve cells, and that is particularly well-suited
for state-of-the-art experimental manipulations that would be much more
difficult to perform and evaluate in other animals. Because scientists have
previously studied a very small number of animal species that undergo
development and regeneration, studies in novel animals such as Nematostella are
necessary in order to understand the full range of developmental mechanisms that
can be used to regulate neurogenesis and promote regeneration, as well as to
better understand how alterations to developmental mechanisms contributed to
nervous system evolution. The outcomes of this work will improve our fundamental
understanding of neurogenesis, and potentially guide future efforts to improve
regenerative therapies. The project will also broadly impact STEM students by
engaging undergraduates in an advanced lab course where they will conduct
cutting-edge research testing hypotheses related to the goals of this project.
The focus of the lab is to teach students how to acquire and integrate new
knowledge that improves their understanding of scientific questions. The course
increases both their scientific literacy and critical reasoning skills, better
preparing them for careers in a wide range of STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates mechanisms of neuronal
induction and neuronal subtype patterning during developmental and regenerative
neurogenesis in the cnidarian sea anemone Nematostella. The approach combines
gene expression analysis, gene specific functional disruptions, and RNA
sequencing to identify mechanisms that neuralize naïve cells and integrate
spatial cues to generate specific neuronal subtypes during development and
regeneration. The choice of Nematostella as a model is driven in part by the
fact that it is one of few animals that allow for direct comparisons between
both developmental and regenerative programs in the same species, and that as a
cnidarian it will allow researchers to infer the ancestral state from which
centralized nervous systems evolved. The results of these studies will enable
investigators to begin generating and comparing models of the gene regulatory
networks that are responsible for the neurogenesis of specific cell subtypes
during both development and regeneration. Additionally, the data set on
developmental regulatory networks will allow scientists to better test
hypotheses about the origin and evolution of complex centralized nervous
systems. The main outcomes of this work will be a more complete view of the
degree to which developmental and regenerative neurogenesis overlap, and the
first comprehensive data set describing neurogenesis in non-bilaterian
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.