* 1942429
* CAREER: Towards Trustworthy Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Khairi Reda, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2025
* USD 425,330.00

Tools that create visualizations of data are increasingly important for
discovery and decision-making in a range of domains, from science and
engineering to commerce. Data analysts use these tools to rapidly slice and dice
their data, often inspecting a large number of visualizations in the process.
Though useful for exploration, these visualizations can also expose random data
fluctuations, which could be mistaken for real patterns. If analysts are not
careful in interpreting these apparent patterns, they could inadvertently make
false discoveries or take incorrect decisions. The goal of this research is to
reduce the risk from spurious patterns arising in interactive data analyses. The
project comprises three stages: (1) developing techniques for capturing analyst
beliefs, expectations, and intentions as they conduct visual analysis; (2) using
this data to develop algorithms that forecast the reliability of emerging
visualizations; and (3) evaluating strategies for communicating the risk of
false patterns. The resulting techniques will be validated and incorporated in
tools for detecting RNA modifications from noisy sequencing data, in
collaboration with bioinformatics researchers. The expected impact of this
project is to aid analysts in assessing the reliability of insights, while
guarding against visualizations that seem convincing but that are likely to be
misleading. This in turn could broaden the adoption of visual analytics tools,
increase the confidence in conclusions, and potentially reduce the incidence of
false discovery. As part of this research, the team will develop interactive
educational materials for training students in reliable data-driven inference.
These learning modules will be disseminated in a format that allows
customization by data science instructors for inclusion into existing curricula.
Lastly, the project will provide opportunities for graduate research training
and incorporate K-12 outreach activities that introduce young learners to data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project comprises three main activities: (1)
Prototyping techniques to incrementally elicit analysts' belief and prior
knowledge as they make sense of data. The elicited knowledge will then be used
to distinguish between a gamut of intentions: from planned analyses with
substantive hypotheses, to purely exploratory actions with minimal expectations.
(2) The project will next develop a model to predict the reliability of apparent
patterns and insights unearthed at different points in the analysis cycle. To
build this model, the research team will use a variety of features, including
the specificity of analyst intents, the degree to which their expectations are
borne out in the data, as well as their behavior and interactions with
visualizations. The elicitation techniques and the insight reliability model
will then be refined in a series of visual analysis studies and through
crowdsourced experiments, in which participants' declared priors and discoveries
are used to improve the accuracy of the model in forecasting spurious patterns.
Lastly, (3) the project will identify and characterize strategies for
communicating the risk of spurious insights to analysts in real time. In
particular, the team will evaluate techniques for directly visualizing risk
indicators, as well as indirect methods whereby the visual encodings of the data
will be adjusted depending on how risky it is predicted to be. The developed
interventions will be evaluated both in experiments and in a bioinformatics
application, to assess whether they reduce the rate of false discovery. The
expected results include new methods for eliciting analyst beliefs, techniques
to forecast and communicate the trustworthiness of insights, and instructional
materials for teaching robust data analytic practices. The products will be
disseminated in publications, and in the form of open-source software and
learning modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.