* 1942707
* CAREER:Functional diversity and ecosystem function provisioning by a guild of macrofaunal consumers in riverine ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Carla Atkinson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,046,774.00

Freshwater ecosystems harbor incredible diversity and are experiencing more
rapid biodiversity losses than any other ecosystem type. Despite this, little is
known of the ecosystem services provided by these diverse ecological
communities. Freshwater mussels are a highly imperiled, species-rich group of
long-lived animals that play critical roles in maintaining water quality, and
strongly impact freshwater ecosystems. While the ecological value of freshwater
mussels is widely appreciated, their life history and role in the cycling of
important nutrients is often overlooked. The density of these organisms is quite
variable and can be very high. Variation in both mussel densities and
characteristics make them ideal for studies of the impacts of animals on the
cycling of limiting nutrients (i.e., nitrogen and phosphorus) in rivers. The
proposed research will integrate the study of communities of freshwater mussels
with investigations of critical ecosystem services. Research results will also
be used to introduce ideas on the role of biodiversity in ecosystem function
into the instruction of undergraduate courses, K-12 day camps, and after school
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of measurements across
organismal, community, and ecosystem scales, this project will examine the
interactive role of species traits and community composition in altering the
fluxes and stores of energy and nutrients in river ecosystems. There has been
great interest in recent years in ascertaining the direct roles of animals in
creating biogeochemical hotspots, but their indirect role in microbially-
mediated nutrient transformations and the trait-specific context-dependency of
this has been overlooked. This research will examine how freshwater mussels
influence nutrient transformations in streams by linking species traits, system-
wide observations, and experimental manipulations to ask: 1) Do species traits
(e.g. stoichiometry, body size) influence the role animals play in nutrient
cycling and does this vary with environmental context? 2) Do animal aggregations
significantly alter nutrient cycling and transformations via the active transfer
of nutrients from the sediments to the water column? 3) Do species traits and
population fluctuations influence nutrient cycling and transformations across
space and time? This research will advance scientific understanding by
investigating how community composition and coincidental trait diversity
influences biogeochemical cycling over time and space while also informing
conservation of a highly imperiled group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.