* 1942518
* CAREER: Biomechanical Signatures in Vertebrate Embryonic Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Kazunori Hoshino, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2025
* USD 548,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will study key
developmental stages of vertebrate embryos. Specifically, a novel biomechanical
method will be used to quantitatively assess how tissues and organs form.
Mapping the characteristics of cells and tissues during embryonic development
has been a broad topic of interest in biology. Current methods to analyze tissue
growth are invasive and either damage tissue or are potentially toxic. This
study will observe the formation of live embryonic bodies safely. Specifically,
the work will generate a 3-dimensional stiffness map of zebrafish embryos during
their growth. The process of functional tissue and organ formation is well
conserved among vertebrates. Therefore, the knowledge obtained from zebrafish
embryos is applicable to human embryos. A better understanding of embryonic
structural development will promote studies in developmental biology and
biomedical sciences. The results of this work may ultimately enable monitoring
of embryo development in humans and contribute to public health. This research
will be integrated into the PI's educational efforts through the design and
development of low-cost, do-it-yourself robotic systems, which can be easily
modified and used in K-12 schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
obtain a spatiotemporally-resolved, whole-body 3D map of the elastic modulus of
healthy and abnormal zebrafish embryos, which will be used to quantitatively
profile their growth and pathology. Three aims will be pursued: (1) Obtain a
whole-body 3D elastic modulus map via integrated mechanical indentation, high-
resolution 3D light microscopy, and finite element methods. (2) Validate the
spatiotemporal stiffness measurement during embryonic development as a
significant biomarker through correlation studies with molecular analysis. (3)
Assess the effect of tissue indentation on embryonic development to prove that
the tissue indentation can be conducted safely without perturbing growth. The
study will advance a methodology of tissue phenotyping through the label-free,
in situ, biomechanical characterization of embryonic development. This approach
offers advantages over current methods, such as histology-based tissue
phenotyping and genomic analysis, which do not directly quantify the mechanical
properties. The biomechanical characterization method will be used to study
somitogenesis during embryonic development, which is governed by the mesenchymal
to epithelial transition (MET), one of the most fundamental cellular processes
throughout tissue and organ development. The biomechanical method can be easily
adapted to quantify other cellular and tissue processes that are known to
involve stiffness changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.