* 1942680
* CAREER: Spatial-Temporal Imitation Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Yanhua Li, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2025
* USD 385,710.00

Humans make daily decisions based on their own "strategies" (such as taxi
drivers' passenger-seeking processes and commuters' transit mode choices).
Understanding and incorporating human decision-making strategies will bring
significant benefits to the growing gig-worker population and transportation
marketplace. For example, learning the decision-making strategies from taxi
drivers, personal vehicle drivers, and urban commuters can facilitate the
service providers (e.g., taxi/ride-hailing companies) to better serve the
passengers, and enable the urban planners to design better road networks and
transit routes to meet the needs of urban travelers. The goal of this project is
to develop, implement, and evaluate a unified framework to learn the decision-
making strategies of human agents from their generated mobility data, with
applications to explain and incentivize their decisions to promote individual
and societal well-being. Moreover, in this project, the investigator will
integrate research, education, and outreach by developing new courses for both
undergraduate and graduate students, reaching out to K-12 students, and engaging
women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several
technical challenges to learn human decision-making strategies from their
mobility data: Human decision-making strategies may vary over time and space,
i.e., spatial-temporal dynamics challenge. The mobility data collected may cover
only a part of the spatial regions and time periods, i.e., spatial-temporal
sparsity challenge. Most human agents are not "experts", thus the generated
mobility data are noisy and uncertain, i.e., non-expert challenge. A large
number of human agents interact with each other when making decisions, i.e.,
interaction and scalability challenge. Human decisions are governed by many
(sometimes hidden) factors, which make it hard to infer explainable information
from their decision-making strategies, i.e., explainability challenge. Human
agents have diverse reactions to offered incentives, making it hard to design
targeted incentive mechanisms to consider both agents' inherent decision-making
strategies and their online feedback, i.e., incentive design challenge. This
project will address these research challenges, and include the development of a
novel spatial-temporal imitation learning framework for learning decision-making
strategies from individual and interactive human agents, and an interactive
system that provides human agents with explainable learning results and online
incentives to promote their decision-making strategies. The spatial-temporal
imitation learning framework and associated algorithms have the potential to be
transformative in both the data and urban sciences by enabling efficient and
accurate discovery of human decision-making strategies from their mobility
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.