* 1942714
* CAREER: Big Data Climate Causality Analytics
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Jianwu Wang, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2025
* USD 469,360.00

A fundamental problem in climate science is climate causality analysis that
studies the cause-effect relationship among climate variables, such as
temperature and humidity. By studying how the climate system works from a
causality perspective, the findings could be used for many research areas
including climate variability, climate dynamics, climate simulation, and extreme
climate prediction. Nowadays, climate causality study faces many computing
challenges, such as processing very large and high-dimensional datasets, and the
complexity of modern computing resources. To tackle these challenges, this
project targets novel causality discovery algorithms and related scalable
computing techniques. The project is expected to greatly aid Earth System
scientists and climate scientists to explore new hypotheses and use cases
related to climate causality. The project includes an integrated program of
research, education and outreach to help better understand and evaluate climate
simulation, fostering workforce development for a multidisciplinary research
community on "Data + Computing + Climate Science", and raising interest in both
IT technology and climate studies among K-12 students, and various
underrepresented groups. The project thus serves the national interest, as
stated in NSF's mission, by promoting the progress of science and advancing
national prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER
project is to study efficient and reproducible causality analytics for large-
scale climate data, so that climate scientists can easily test their causal
hypotheses, reproduce existing studies and compare different causality analytics
results. To handle the increasing dimensionality and resolution of
spatiotemporal climate datasets, the project will study incremental causality
discovery algorithms for large-scale climate datasets and parallel causality
discovery for spatiotemporal climate data. To address the variety of both causal
discovery algorithms and climate simulation/observation datasets, the project
will study how to effectively measure climate causality results from different
causality algorithms and different climate datasets, and integrate causality
results through ensemble techniques. To cope with difficulties in conducting and
reproducing causality analytics with large-scale climate datasets, the project
will study cloud computing for big data climate analytics pipeline construction
and execution optimization. The project will be evaluated from two perspectives.
From the computing perspective, the research will be evaluated in terms of
algorithm computation complexity, algorithm accuracy and algorithm scalability.
From the climate perspective, the applicability of the research will be
evaluated by collaborating with climate scientists in their specific research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.