* 1942500
* CAREER: Job Embedded Education on Computational Thinking for Rural STEM Discipline Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Colby Tofel-Grehl, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 01/31/2025
* USD 735,942.00

This project will develop a new way of engaging teachers in professional
learning that is situated in their classrooms while they perform the tasks of
their paid employment. Traditional professional development structures
frequently place financial and professional pressures on teachers, which limits
participation. Rural teachers in particular may have fewer opportunities due to
barriers of distance, limited resources, and lack of available staff. In
addition, they often rely on the income from second jobs to meet their financial
obligations, meaning they are unable to take advantage of optional professional
development opportunities offered after school hours, on weekends, or during
summers because they cannot afford the lost income or travel time. Further, they
are most likely to be underqualified and most likely to spend their entire
teaching careers at their first district—prospectively teaching multiple
generations of students from their community. The state of Hawaii has a high
proportion of such rural schools and a shortage of STEM teachers — especially in
the area of computer science. This project will investigate a professional
development model using fading scaffolds (support that is gradually reduced over
time) as part of participants’ paid summer school teaching. Through this model,
20 rural teachers will learn to integrate computational thinking, coding, and
science content while working with students from their own communities, with 10
becoming master teachers supporting others throughout the state. Improving
teachers’ ability to prepare students to benefit from opportunities in STEM and
computing will advance students’ opportunities for future prosperity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will develop a professional
development model that allows rural secondary teachers to learn and develop
computational thinking related teaching skills with long-term support and
scaffolds in place to both build their knowledge and the long-term capacity of
their school districts. Using a design-based research approach, this project
entails extensive participant interviews, video observations, and analysis of
classroom artifacts. Cultural-historical activity theory analysis will be
applied both collectively and within a comparative case study format to
understand individual teacher development within the context of their own
content and classrooms over time. These data will inform subsequent iterative
design decisions to revise strategies and materials for greater meaningfulness
and utility in supporting teachers' implementation of computer science and
computational thinking applications. This project will enhance academic
achievement of approximately 1000 students (predominantly Pacific Islanders, a
group largely underrepresented in STEM fields with a unique cultural identity)
in meeting the Next Generation Science Standards and Hawaii's computer science
education standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER program is a National
Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior
faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research,
excellent education, and the integration of education and research within the
context of the mission of their organizations. This project is supported by
NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. DRK-12 seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.