* 1942219
* CAREER: Programmable In-network Security
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Ang Chen, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 12/31/2024
* USD 445,888.00

Attacks on the Internet cost the economy billions of dollars. While today’s
Internet was developed to provide widespread connectivity to individuals and
businesses across the world, the networks that support the Internet do not have
built-in security mechanisms. This project is focused on solving that problem by
investigating future network designs based on new network technology that would
support security and provide defense across a wide variety of attacks. The
project vision is to develop Programmable In-network Security, or ‘Poise’. Poise
aims to design and integrate a wide range of defenses directly inside the
network, leveraging the technology trend of network programmability. If
successful, a Poise network would support security as naturally as today’s
networks support connectivity. This project will develop new scientific
foundations for network security, investigate practical use cases, release open-
source tools, and produce educational materials. The potential impact of Poise
is to make future networks fundamentally more secure than they are today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents a vision of Programmable In-network
Security, or ‘Poise’, informed by the recent trend that network devices are
becoming increasingly programmable, and with a goal of supporting security as a
first-class network attribute. The project plans to take a three-pronged
approach to realizing this goal. First, Poise aims to transform a programmable
switch into a defense platform by designing a wide range of security
applications that reside in the switch. Second, Poise aims to transform a
network of programmable switches into a defense fleet, by architecting defense
applications into the network paths and synchronizing them for whole-network
defense. Third, Poise seeks to ensure that the defense applications,
individually and collectively, are themselves secure against attacks. In its
ultimate embodiment, a Poise network would toggle a wide array of defenses
rapidly on and off as traffic flows through, mitigating attacks in real time.
This project will advance the state of the art in network security in the above
three dimensions and will produce scientific foundations and reusable system
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.