* 1942313
* CAREER: The role of seasonal migration in avian diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Kristen Ruegg, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,216,329.00

The goal of this project is to explore the role of natural selection on the
wintering grounds of seasonal migratory birds in maintaining or opposing
adaptive divergence. The project takes advantage of the wealth of information
available for one of the most widely studied groups of animals. Additionally,
the work will provide important information across all habitats for use in
conservation of Neotropical migratory birds, over half of which are declining,
by predicting the capacity of seasonal migratory animals to adapt to rapid
environmental change. The project includes a 3-part plan to improve STEM
education for underrepresented minority groups at the local, national, and
international level: 1) Bird Camp – a multi-day educational outreach program
targeting low-income schools in Fort Collins, Colorado; 2) Birds without Borders
– a series of Spanish language (with English subtitles) videos that highlight
the work of Latin American and female scientists developed with nature
documentary film makers; and 3) Mexico Bioinformatics Workshop – an
international genomic sequencing and bioinformatics workshop in collaboration
with US and Mexican scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical models have
long supported the idea that strong migratory connections across the annual
cycle will promote local adaptation to wintering areas, but empirical research
to support this hypothesis is unexplored. This knowledge gap resulted from
technological hurdles related to the inability to track migratory movements and
assess patterns of adaptive divergence across the genome. The goal of the
proposed work is to take advantage of recent advances in tracking technology and
genomic sequencing to test theoretical predictions regarding the role of
previously unexplored events on the wintering grounds in the process of adaptive
evolution. The proposed work will leverage and synthesize population genomic and
migratory movement data for 11 species of migratory birds to provide the first
empirical test of the hypothesis that strong migratory connections across the
annual cycle promote local adaptation to wintering areas. Genetic estimates of
gene flow across time and space will be combined with habitat modeling to answer
basic questions about the role of ecology and phenology in the process of
adaptive divergence in seasonal migratory birds. The integration of ecological,
molecular, and statistical approaches across a range of species will allow
fundamental evolutionary questions to be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.