* 1942256
* CAREER: Control Points on nutrient cycling in hypereutrophic lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Grace Wilkinson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 01/31/2022
* USD 311,623.00

Lakes are important places in the landscape for capturing, transforming,
emitting, and storing carbon given their small surface area. Human activities in
watersheds are causing many lakes and reservoirs to become over-enriched in
nutrients. This is called hypereutrophication. Over-enrichment can cause a
variety of problems in ecosystems, including changes in carbon cycling. While
substantial progress has been made in understanding the processes that control
carbon cycling in lakes and reservoirs, relatively little is known about how
those processes operate in water bodies with extremely high nutrient
concentrations, a condition which is becoming increasingly common. This research
is aimed at identifying the key controls on carbon cycling in lakes and
reservoirs under extreme nutrient loading. This will help predict how these
ecosystems will respond to future environmental stresses. In addition to carbon
cycling, lakes and reservoirs also provide important ecosystem services that are
threatened by eutrophication. Managing freshwater resources to protect ecosystem
services is vital for societal well-being. Yet, decisions about freshwater
resources require educated water stewards working at the local level. This
project will provide extensive training in aquatic ecosystem management to local
water stewards, empowering their communities to make informed, data-driven
decisions about lake and watershed management.

In order to identify when and where the important drivers of carbon cycling are
operating in lakes under extreme nutrient enrichment, high frequency sensors
will be deployed in high-nutrient lakes to capture carbon cycling dynamics
throughout the entire year. One of the focal study lakes is located on the Iowa
State University campus. The live-streaming data and monitoring activities will
be incorporated into educational opportunities across campus. An additional 20
lake-years of high frequency data will be collected through a lake management
education and volunteer training program for local water stewards. All of the
sensor-based measurements will be paired with less frequent synoptic sampling to
quantify the pools of carbon and nutrients entering and cycling in the lakes.
These time series will be used to quantify the aerobic, anaerobic, and physical
transport processes controlling carbon cycling dynamics and to determine the
environmental drivers of carbon cycling rates. This information, combined with
long term water quality monitoring data from 130 lakes embedded in a nutrient-
rich landscape, will be used to estimate aquatic carbon cycling rates at a
regional scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.