* 1942669
* CAREER: Advanced data analytics for early detection of Alzheimer's disease using wearables and smartphone
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Behnaz Ghoraani, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2025
* USD 524,191.00

Alzheimerâ€™s disease (AD) burdens the United States economy by at least $250
billion annually. Its prevalence is predicted to triple by 2050 unless further
discoveries facilitate the prevention of the disease. Because of challenges in
screening for AD, it often remains undiagnosed until cases advance and
sufficient neuronal injury has occurred that reversal of the disease is
unlikely. What is desperately needed is a cognitive screening tool that can
objectively detect at-risk individuals and monitor the disease progression with
no specialized staff or medical equipment. Driven by rapid advancements in
wearable sensors and their growing social acceptability, this CAREER program
will develop novel data analysis approaches required for the early detection of
AD. Such a tool could initiate further biomarker testing and early interventions
in order to alleviate neuronal damage before it becomes too late. In addition,
an integrated educational and outreach program is designed to both foster
interdisciplinary research training and to increase participation of
underrepresented students in STEM disciplines. This project will create learning
modules to target middle and high school students through school demonstrations,
on-campus laboratory research, and summer experiences, with a focus on engaging
female students at an early stage. It will integrate research outcomes in
engineering curriculum with a focus on neurodegenerative diseases in order to
ignite interest in engineering education among female and minority students.
Knowledge gained from this project will be disseminated via research
publications, tutorials, and workshops, as well as broader outreach activities
to the area public library, science museum, and
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a major departure from
current efforts to address current technical obstacles in individualized and
longitudinal monitoring. Current data analysis approaches do not consider
individuals' variability in their methods. They are trained using data from a
well-characterized group of subjects and then applied to a new subject,
regardless of differences. As a result, they do not consider the variation of
patterns between subjects, which is critical for the detection of abnormal
patterns due to the disease versus the differences within a subject.
Additionally, none of the existing approaches consider intra-subject variations
that may occur over time. This limitation is particularly critical for
longitudinal monitoring of the cognitive impairment severity because these
approaches are unable to distinguish longitudinal disease-related changes from
changes due to aging. The planned approach to address these challenges in both
data analytics and clinical practice is as follows. First, the project
significantly improves the early detection of at-risk individuals during initial
assessments of cognitive decline by developing innovative individualized deep
learning approaches. These novel approaches will be based on an encode-decoder
architecture to explore raw gait data for features related to cognitive decline,
while a novel domain adaptation technique will be developed to customize the
architecture according to an individual's variability. Second, it significantly
improves the detection of the disease progression rate by developing novel
adaptive deep learning approaches for longitudinal monitoring of cognitive
decline. The approach will be based on deep learning methods with heterogeneous
data fusion ability to enable the analysis of free-walking gait, along with
speech data. A novel unsupervised domain adaptation based on reinforcement
learning techniques will be developed to customize the model according to the
intra-subject variations over time. The key transformative aspect of the
proposed research is the development of data analytics that are based on
available sensor data, but which provide individualized models that show change
over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.