* 1942363
* CAREER: Legendrian and Contact Topology in Higher Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Roger Casals Gutierrez, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2025
* USD 356,921.00

The present project studies Legendrian and contact topology in all higher
dimensions. Contact structures are the underlying geometric structures reigning
the behaviour of light wavefronts in semiclassical ray optics, the evolution of
thermodynamical systems and, in general, the study of real-valued functions and
their first-order variations. In conjunction with its classical applications to
control theory and Hamiltonian dynamics, contact topology has also recently
found surprising applications to fluid mechanics and chemistry, including the
study of Cholesteric Liquid Crystals. This project aims at providing an
understanding of these contact structures through the manipulation of Legendrian
wavefronts. These wavefronts are geometric in nature and part of this project
aims at systematically describing efficient algorithms to manipulate these
fronts. This will significantly enhance our ability to qualitatively study many
dynamical systems in terms of the combinatorics of front diagrams. Phrasing
problems in terms of front diagrams allows us to bring the strength of the
theory of singularities into the study of contact structures. Thus, classical
questions such as the stable behaviour of a given Hamiltonian system, the number
of periodic orbits and the presence of surfaces of section will potentially be
answered through the front-end development perspective offered by the
combinatorics of front diagrams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In technical terms, this
project shall be studying the classification of codimension-2 contact
submanifolds and developing the study of Legendrian Kirby Calculus and Weinstein
structures in all higher dimensions. The project addresses existence and non-
uniqueness questions in higher-dimensional contact knot theory, the construction
and manipulation of Weinstein handlebodies and their higher-dimensional
Legendrian wavefronts. The project includes new applications of these goals to
complex geometry, through the study of Stein structures, mathematical physics,
including applications to Homological Mirror Symmetry, and singularity theory.
The techniques proposed in this project will also have immediate applications to
the computation of Floer-theoretic invariants in higher-dimensional symplectic
topology and the study of Lagrangian fillings and the wrapped Fukaya category.
The central tools in the project combine higher-dimensional geometric topology,
the theory of h-principles and Legendrian invariants. The project includes a
central conjecture on the classification of Lagrangian fillings for algebraic
Legendrian links and an existence and uniqueness h-principle for higher-
dimensional contact submanifolds. The techniques to be employed in the study of
these conjectures include explicit constructions obtained via the manipulation
of Legendrian fronts and wrinkled singularities, and the use of pseudo-
holomorphic curves in order to compute their contact invariants. In addition,
the project will also incorporate the development of invariants for higher-
dimensional contact knots and the use of microlocal sheaf theory as a guiding
connection to the theory of cluster algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.