* 1942565
* CAREER: A Chemoproteomic Strategy to Decipher Epitranscriptomic Pyrimidine Modifications
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Ralph Kleiner, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 11/30/2024
* USD 780,000.00

The goal of this project is to understand how ribonucleic acid (RNA) chemistry
affects fundamental biological processes. Recent evidence has indicated that
enzyme-installed modifications on RNA can regulate how genes are expressed in
cells; however, there are major gaps in our understanding of this phenomenon,
including which RNA molecules are modified, which enzymes catalyze the
modifications, and how these modifications affect RNA function. This project
seeks to address these questions through the application of innovative
approaches integrating chemistry and biology, and will provide unique training
opportunities for students at the interface of these disciplines. The research
is also combined with an education and outreach plan aimed at broadening
secondary school and undergraduate level engagement with nucleic acid chemistry
and biology. These efforts will include the development of a video-based series
aimed at disseminating landmark results in the primary scientific literature to
New Jersey high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Epitranscriptomic
modifications on eukaryotic mRNA have been implicated in gene expression
regulation. In particular, a diverse set of chemical modifications of cytosine
are known to exist in mRNA, but a definitive understanding of the distribution
of these marks, the enzymes that mediate their installation, and ultimately
their biological function, is lacking. This project aims to address these
questions by developing metabolically-incorporated chemical probes to capture
RNA cytosine-modifying enzyme activity in cells. The probes will be integrated
with proteomic and transcriptomic workflows and genetic perturbations in order
to profile relevant RNA modifying enzymes, map their cellular substrates,
identify reader proteins, and interrogate the functional consequences of
cytosine modifications on mRNA behavior. Together, these research approaches
will reveal insights into the regulation of cellular RNA through enzymatic
modification and provide powerful tools for probing RNA modifications in diverse
biological contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Genetic Mechanisms cluster in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division,
and the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.