* 1942084
* CAREER:Understanding ferritin biomineralization by high-resolution cryo-electron microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Brent Nannenga, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2024
* USD 456,198.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Biological molecules are capable of interacting
with inorganic materials, giving rise to highly controlled material synthesis
and the creation of new bio-inorganic materials with unique function and
properties. However, little is known about the molecular interactions between
the biological molecules with inorganic materials. One of the most well studied
proteins that controls the growth of inorganic materials is ferritin, which is a
natural biomineralizing protein and is responsible for controlling the growth of
iron oxide nanoparticles and maintaining proper levels of free iron in the cell.
The focus of this CAREER project is to extend the powerful methods of single-
particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) along with high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy methods (HRTEM) used in materials science to
ferritin macromolecules in the process of nanomaterial growth. This project will
ultimately make significant contributions to both the understanding of how the
important ferritin protein functions and the general molecular interactions of
biomolecules with nanomaterials. The next major advances in the field of
biomolecule driven nanomaterial synthesis will be the ability to rationally
design biomolecules for novel, highly controlled nanostructure synthesis. One of
the biggest roadblocks to achieving these goals is the lack of understanding of
how these biological molecules interface with the inorganic nanomaterials. The
new cryo-EM methods developed in this proposal and the new knowledge gained
about ferritin mediated nanoparticle synthesis will be able to be extended to
many other biological-nanomaterial systems. Additionally, the project will
initiate an interdisciplinary education program that educates the public and
trains the next generation of scientists and engineers at the intersection
between biology and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Despite the fact that ferritin is one of the most well-studied
protein-nanoparticle systems, the fundamental interactions between ferritin and
iron oxide nanoparticles grown inside its hollow core are not well-understood.
The research in this CAREER proposal will produce new knowledge by determining
the high-resolution structures of ferritins in the process of inorganic
nanomaterial formation, from initial iron oxide nucleation to formed
nanoparticles. The goal of correlating ferritin structure with the process of
nanoparticle growth and ultimate material structure will be accomplished through
the following technical objectives: (1) Elucidate the process of ferritin-
controlled nanoparticle growth by high-resolution time-resolved single particle
cryo-EM; (2) Determine the molecular interactions at the protein-nanoparticle
interface by combined protein and nanomaterial structure determination. The
project will make novel use of cryo-electron microscopy along with high-
resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), and the combined use of
both of these techniques on biomineralizing ferritin will require the
development, optimization, and implementation of new methods for both
techniques. The project aims to answer fundamental mechanisms of ferritin-
controlled nanoparticle growth at the bio-inorganic interface, and the
influences this interface has on the resulting iron oxide nanoparticle
structure. Not only will this answer questions related to how ferritin interacts
with inorganic materials, but this project would provide new understandings of
the general interactions biological materials have with inorganic particles and
surfaces. This would represent the first time many of these interactions have
been directly visualized at this level of detail, both in terms of time
resolution and spatial resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.