* 1942770
* CAREER: Supporting Model Based Inference as an Integrated Effort Between Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Ryan Jones, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 01/31/2025
* USD 589,910.00

This project will design opportunities for mathematics and science teachers to
coordinate their instruction to support a more coherent approach to teaching
statistical model-based inference in middle school. It will prepare teachers to
help more students develop a deeper understanding of ideas and practices related
to measurement, data, variability, and inference. Since there is little research
to show how to productively coordinate learning experiences across disciplinary
boundaries of mathematics and science education, this project will address this
gap by: (1) creating design principles for integrating instruction about
statistical model-based inference in middle grades that coordinates data
modeling instruction in mathematics classes with ecology instruction in science
classes; (2) generating longitudinal (2 years) evidence about how mathematical
and scientific ideas co-develop as students make use of increasingly
sophisticated modeling and inferential practices; and (3) designing four
integrated units that coordinate instruction across mathematics and science
classes in 6th and 7th grade to support statistical model-based
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a multi-phase design-based
research approach that will begin by observing teachers' current practices
related to statistical model-based inference. Information from this phase will
help guide researchers, mathematics teachers, and science teachers in co-
designing units that integrate data modeling instruction in mathematics classes
with ecological investigations in science classes. This project will directly
observe studentsâ€™ thinking and learning across 6th and 7th grades through sample
classroom lessons, written assessment items, and interviews. Data from these
aspects of the study will generate evidence about how students make use of
mathematical ideas in science class and how their ecological investigations in
science class provoke a need for new mathematical tools to make inferences. The
resulting model will integrate mathematics and science learning in productive
ways that are sensitive to both specific disciplinary learning goals and the
ways that these ideas and practices can provide a better approximation for
students to knowledge generating practices in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER program is a National Science Foundation
(NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who
exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent
education, and the integration of education and research within the context of
the mission of their organizations. This project is supported by NSF's Discovery
Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. DRK-12 seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.