* 1942929
* CAREER: Developing Evaluation Methods for Network-based Findings
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Reza Zafarani, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 313,853.00

Networks are all around us: transportation networks, power networks,
communication networks, social networks, biological networks, the Internet, and
many others. Networks are studied by various disciplines within science and
engineering to glean the invaluable insights that networks can carry. However,
most studies of networks look at networks that are uncertain, e.g., are noisy.
Generalizing findings derived from such uncertain networks can lead to various
erroneous findings. The goal of this project is to develop methods that can
evaluate findings derived in studies of networks under these uncertainties. The
developed techniques contribute towards a future in network science research,
where findings are validated, reproducible, and comparable. The outcomes of this
project will contribute to the development of a diverse globally-competitive
STEM workforce, full participation of women and underrepresented minorities,
enhanced research and education infrastructure, and increased public scientific
literacy and engagement. The education plan involves four groups: K-12,
undergraduate students, graduate students, and beyond university/public.
Educational objectives are designed for these groups by integrating research
into education, curricular development, presenting tutorials and seminars, and
development of software and public data repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is motivated by the challenges and the research questions that exist
around evaluating findings in studies of networks, e.g., whether the findings
are specific to the network study, or if the data was correctly collected for
the study. Addressing these challenges and answering these questions, the
project will lead to the development of new knowledge on evaluating findings
derived from networks, advancing the state of research on reproducibility in
network science. It will provide a multiangle perspective towards evaluation of
network science findings by developing evaluation methods and metrics to assess
findings in terms of general scientific evaluation metrics, e.g., authenticity
of findings. New network embedding methods will be designed especially for
evaluation purposes. In particular, the project will develop specificity metrics
for network studies to determine how specific are the findings to a network
study. These metrics will be introduced by designing "graph identification"
mechanisms, which rely on network embedding methods and designing an ``identity"
for a graph. The project will further develop methods that can provide
acceptance/rejection likelihoods for network-based findings, as a way to assess
their authenticity. While the problems are in general NP-Complete, alternative
practical solutions with acceptable performances are pursued by designing
"network-based authentication" mechanisms that are inspired by biometrics
research. The methods introduced contribute to the broader research areas of
network representation and embedding, facilitate new applications such as
network identification and authentication, and extend well-known techniques from
statistics to networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.