* 1942176
* CAREER: Frontal cortical ensemble regulation of response execution and inhibition
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* David Moorman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,132,080.00

This project has two main goals. The first goal is to understand how the brain
plans and executes actions as well as how it inhibits actions when they are
inappropriate (for example, resisting the urge to take a cookie when watching
your sugar intake). The second goal is to characterize the function of a brain
region that has been largely neglected in neuroscience research â€“ the frontal
polar cortex. This area has been studied in humans and other primates to some
degree but is still largely mysterious and has received little attention in
rodents, where thorough biological studies can be performed. What is known in
the rodent hints that it may play a key role in the action execution/inhibition
process, thus merging an important research question with a relevant, but
unexplored brain structure. These studies use cutting-edge new techniques to
provide a highly precise and quantitative characterization of how brain networks
regulate action control, and they use a new behavioral framework that permits
close association of behavior with brain function. They also incorporate direct
interaction with the general public and support for diverse research populations
to strengthen ties between this research to the broader community. Understanding
how brain circuits regulate action is relevant for multiple disciplines,
including psychology and neuroscience as well as artificial intelligence and
computation. This understanding may also inform research involving diseases
characterized by disrupted action control such as attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, addictions, eating disorders, diabetes, cancers, and
more. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prefrontal cortex is repeatedly identified as a
critical brain structure regulating action decisions. The frontal polar cortex,
at the rostral end of the prefrontal cortex, has received little research
attention to date, particularly in rodents. Intriguingly, early lesion and
stimulation studies in rats demonstrated a role for frontal polar cortex in
inhibiting behavioral responses. Since then, only a few studies have followed
this line of research. The research of this project characterizes the role of
frontal pole neuron ensembles in decisions to execute or inhibit behavior and
will begin to develop a comprehensive understanding of the role of this brain
area in behavior. An additional goal of this proposal is to study ensembles of
neurons to understand what sculpts ensemble-level response properties in similar
or different behavioral contexts. Some potential defining elements to be
explored include anatomical location of neurons, correlated activity among
member neurons, common neuronal projection targets, and other factors. The
project uses novel behavioral tasks, high-density electrophysiological recording
(Objective 1), new optogenetic tools for manipulating (Objective 2), and
anatomically tracing (Objective 3) neuron ensembles related to action control in
an under-characterized brain system. Activities in Objective 4 are designed to
increase awareness of and participation in science, particularly among members
of underrepresented communities, in part through a focus on decision-making and
its role across fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.