* 1942375
* CAREER: Unity in Diversity? Migration, Culture and National Development
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Samuel Bazzi, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2025
* USD 422,857.00

This CAREER project uses the latest economic research methods to explore how
individuals and nations adapt to the challenges of diversity. The research
brings together migration and its social consequences with a focus on three
interconnected themes: (i) understanding migration choices of low-income
workers, (ii) identifying the origins and consequences of cultural divisions,
and (iii) examining policies that can help diverse groups coexist and thrive.
The findings will directly inform several important policy debates: the
wellbeing of vulnerable migrants, the rise of religious politics, the cultural
origins of gender inequality, and political representation in new communities.
By focusing on one of the largest and most diverse countries in the world---the
United States---this research will offer insights into the difficulties of
building unity amidst diversity and also identify the scope for policy to
influence this process. This work will provide new opportunities for building
bridges between citizens of the U.S. and other parts of the world. The projects
will additionally develop new data and methods that can be used to explore
related issues in other contexts. The results of this research project will lead
to policies that strengthen and stabilize social institutions, hence increase
economic growth. The results will also enhance America’s global leadership in
democratic pluralism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research agenda is based
on five projects that will shed new light on migration and national development
in diverse societies. Project 1 studies the first application of consumer
quality ratings to address information asymmetries in global labor markets.
Project 2 concerns the historical origins of conservative gender norms in the
U.S. and explores how frontier settlement contributed to a persistent legacy of
gender inequality in politics and the labor market. Project 3 investigates
religious divisions and provides a novel explanation for the rise of some
religious beliefs. Project 4 examines how competition between religious and
public schools affects human capital formation and the ideological foundations
of the state. Project 5 develops a new framework for studying how local
political boundaries shape inequality in access to public goods. These projects
rely on a broad toolkit including a randomized experiment (Project 1), novel
historical data collection (Projects 2, 3, and 4), and natural policy
experiments (Projects 3, 4, and 5). The findings from this research will advance
social science knowledge about migration and the political and economic
consequences of diversity. The results of this research project could help
develop policies that help integration, strengthen and stabilize social
institutions, hence increase economic growth. The results will also enhance
America’s global leadership in democratic pluralism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.