* 1942662
* CAREER: Bayesian Inference Networks for Model Ensembles
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Daniele Schiavazzi, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2025
* USD 356,287.00

Integration of cardiovascular models, expert opinion and clinical measurements
in a coherent system for probabilistic reasoning represents the next frontier of
model-aided diagnostics to inform treatment in personalized medicine. However,
several fundamental limitations must be addressed: (1) deterministic models are
inadequate to characterize the effect of uncertainty in various properties of
the cardiovascular system; (2) cardiovascular models are computationally
expensive and therefore a stochastic treatment of these models may be too
computationally expensive; (3) predictive models are needed in complex decision
workflows to directly answer questions of clinical relevance in justifiable,
probabilistic terms. This project proposes key advances in three complementary
areas that are essential to make this next generation of model-aided diagnostics
a reality: (1) highly scalable computational methods able to efficiently handle
multiple instances of cardiovascular models with uncertain parameters; (2) new
Monte Carlo estimators that leverage computationally inexpensive low fidelity
surrogates; (3) new inference systems based on variables organized in networks,
accommodating non-linear hemodynamic models, expert opinion and data. Since
cardiovascular disease is the leading causes of death worldwide, this project
serves the national interest by advancing the national health, prosperity and
welfare, as stated by NSF's mission. The proposed research at the interface of
computational mathematics and physiology offers an ideal framework to educate a
diverse and globally competitive STEM workforce at the high school,
undergraduate and graduate levels. Workshops and mini-symposia will also
facilitate the exchange of ideas on stochastic cardiovascular modeling within
the scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational models are
increasingly being adopted to inform treatment in personalized medicine but
innovation in model-based diagnostics is still hindered by three main problems:
(1) deterministic simulations, i.e., simulations with certain outputs providing
a false sense of confidence; (2) stochastic simulations are typically associated
with a dramatic increase in computational cost; (3) current paradigms in
uncertainty quantification (UQ) need generalization to provide coherent
inference frameworks combining physics-based models, expert opinion,
observational data and experiments. Thus, the main goal of this CAREER proposal
is to develop the next generation of efficient computational tools to accelerate
inference from models and data in computational hemodynamics as well as in a
wide range of applications. This goal is achieved through the following
objectives: (1) development of efficient ensemble solvers for hemodynamics
running on modern CPU/GPU hybrid architectures; (2) research in generalized
approximate control variate Monte Carlo estimators to drastically reduce the
time required to solve direct and inverse problems in uncertainty analysis; (3)
extend Bayesian Networks combining numerical models, expert opinion and data in
a coherent inference framework. This research will provide the scientific basis
to construct the first model-based inference framework including experimental
evidence, expert opinion, and to develop systems directly applicable to the
clinical decision making process. Two prototype systems will be finally
developed, with a focus on applications to pediatric
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.