* 1942437
* CAREER: Harnessing the plant mobileome to predict, design, and deliver long-distance RNAs in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Margaret Frank, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,179,228.00

Grafting is used in many crop plants to boost productivity, confer tolerance to
sub-optimal environments and diseases, and facilitate efficient harvesting
through modified shoot structure. Despite its widespread use, a basic
understanding of the mechanisms that underlie successful graft combinations is
lacking, making it impossible to precisely predict beneficial graft
combinations. Research conducted on this project will help elucidate the
mechanisms that underlie communication between grafted root and shoot systems.
Progress in this area has the potential to transform the practice of grafting
into a more precise science, enabling scientists and farmers to rapidly adapt
crops to combat new diseases, handle environmental fluctuations, and restructure
growth habits for improved crop productivity. In addition to providing research
training for undergraduate students, graduate students, and a postdoctoral
researcher, the project will emphasize science communication, and students will
help design and host public workshops on plant grafting. Related undergraduate
training will be offered through the implementation of a novel visual and
experiential learning pedagogy, based on 3-dimensional X-ray imaging and other
hands-on image capture activities, for Cornell’s introductory undergraduate
botany course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-distance signaling is known to play a
fundamental role in the growth and stress response mechanisms in plants, as well
as related processes including grafting, and thus is critical from an
agricultural point of view. Unfortunately, the processes underlying these
signaling pathways remain poorly understood, even at the most basic level. A
prime example involves the role of mRNAs in long-distance signaling, which until
recently were assumed to function almost exclusively within the cells where they
are produced. However, new studies that rely on polymorphism-based detection of
mobile transcripts between heterografted root and shoot systems demonstrate that
a large number of distinct RNA species move across distant organ systems. The
potential significance of this plant “mobileome” is a heavily debated topic,
with widespread disagreement over whether mobile RNAs represent a collection of
long-distance signals or are simply noise in the vascular system. Much of this
controversy is due to the lack of fundamental knowledge about how the plant
mobileome works. The research objectives of this proposal are: 1) to resolve the
fundamental question of whether mRNAs play a crucial role in long-distance
signaling and grafting; 2) to more generally explore the mobility of mRNA in
plants; and 3) to further our understanding of the mechanisms of transport as a
means to realize the long-term goal of engineering and deploying artificial
mRNAs to confer agriculturally desirable traits. These goals will be achieved
through the production of novel genomic resources, and the use of temporal
sampling, computational genomics, and high-resolution, in vivo RNA imaging,
which will ultimately provide insight into the dynamic behavior of long-distance
RNA movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.