* 1942431
* CAREER: Modification of a Continent: Seismic Tomography and Imaging of the Northern American Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Min Chen, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 401,495.00

Changes in the continental lithosphere, the solid outer shell of the Earth, can
greatly impact the surface environment of our planet, for example by controlling
weather patterns and movement of water. Understanding how changes in the
continents depend on processes at depth relies on detailed seismic images of the
earth’s interior. With great seismic data coverage, North America is a perfect
site for studying continental modification in diverse settings. Although it is
one of the most extensively imaged continents, the details of the underlying
processes of its evolution are still elusive, largely due to the discrepancies
between existing seismic images. The goal of this project is to improve the
seismic image resolution of the lithosphere of the North America from the
surface to its root. The models will be developed using advanced seismic imaging
techniques and complementary seismic data sets that can provide more complete
information about the physical properties and features of the continental
lithosphere. The results of this project will contribute to the understanding of
how the North American continent is built, modified and destroyed. This project
will tightly integrate research, education, and public outreach through an
intensive “Spartan Shake” summer camp and research-based educational plan for
under-represented undergraduate students and high-school science teachers. This
project will also enhance the onsite science experience of the participants
through analyzing, modeling, and visualizing the environmental seismic data
collected by Raspberry Shake 3D seismometers deployed on the Michigan State
University campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at accurately imaging
the lithosphere of North America by mapping 3D variations of both wave speeds
and the internal interfaces, including sediment base, Moho, and the lithosphere
and asthenosphere boundary. With the more robust seismological constraints of
lithospheric structures, the following three key scientific goals can be
achieved: (1) understand how the lateral gradients of lithospheric structure
control the deformation of the plate margins through thinning, rifting,
thickening, and foundering; (2) systematically investigate how asthenosphere
interacts with lithosphere across different tectonic environments; (3)
investigate the seismic signatures within sedimentary basins and the crust
corresponding to underlying lithospheric and asthenospheric processes.
Complementary seismic data sets, including ambient-noise-derived Empirical
Green’s Functions, and regional and teleseismic data recorded by EarthScope
Transportable Array, will be assimilated with different full waveform inversion
techniques. This project will provide the first joint inversion of all these
data sets under the full waveform inversion framework for more quantitative
model comparison, assessment, and interpretation of continental
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.