* 1942430
* CAREER: Maximal and Scalable Unified Debugging for the JVM Ecosystem
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Lingming Zhang, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 190,667.00

The software industry all over the world has contributed to the massive culture
of support around Java, one of the most popular programming languages. The Java
runtime, or Java Virtual Machine (JVM), has become a software ecosystem on its
own. Nowadays, hundreds of popular JVM languages (including Kotlin, Scala, and
Groovy) have been developed/adopted under different platforms (including Oracle
JDK and Android SDK), build systems (including Gradle and Maven), and JVM
implementations (including HotSpot and OpenJ9). For example, Google just
promoted Kotlin to the No.1 preferred language for Android development at Google
I/O 2019. The huge and heterogeneous ecosystem of JVM raises unique challenges
to automated debugging, including both fault localization and repair.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to re-think the role of a
foundational concept of program mutation, that is, systematic program
transformation, in automated debugging. Program mutation has been widely adopted
in traditional mutation testing and program repair, and the investigator
conjectures, based on preliminary work, that it can be used to transform and
advance the state-of-the-art in automated debugging for software written with
technologies from the entire JVM ecosystem and beyond. Specifically, the project
focuses on the following research thrusts: (1) unifying both fault localization
and repair via program mutation to boost each other, (2) automatically inferring
up-to-date advanced mutators from big code corpora for maximal unified
debugging, since existing program mutators are often limited and may easily
become obsolete, (3) developing novel techniques to optimize patch executions
for scalable unified debugging, since patch execution can be extremely time-
consuming, and (4) supporting unified debugging of the entire heterogeneous JVM
ecosystem. The project will unify program mutations across various dimensions
for the first time, e.g., across JVM languages and platforms, across code types
(including source, test, and build code), and even across JVM boundaries.
Ultimately, the project aims for a practical debugging system to benefit JVM
ecosystem developers all over the world. The overarching idea of unified
debugging can also substantially impact the ways that both researchers and
practitioners view, design, and apply automated debugging -- fault localization
always requires manual repair while program repair only works for some bugs; in
contrast, unified debugging can support the most automated debugging possible
for each bug, and broaden the effective range of the entire program repair area
to all possible bugs. The project will integrate the research results into SE
curriculum, K-12 camps, software testing contests, and industrial
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.