* 1942926
* CAREER: Enabling data valuation and deletion in human-centered machine learning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* James Zou, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2025
* USD 409,825.00

As data becomes an essential driver of technological and economic developments,
it is critical to understand the value of data in different applications. This
project develops a computational approach to quantify what type of data is more
or less useful when the data is used to train prediction algorithms. This
characterization of data value is important because it enables users to filter
out poor quality data and to identify data that are important to collect in the
future. In addition to data valuation, the project also develops complementary
methods to facilitate deleting data from prediction algorithms. This would allow
users to quickly remove poor quality data or data that might have privacy
concerns from algorithms. Data valuation and data deletion are core aspects of
recent policies aimed to enable individuals control over how their data is used
and monetized by third-parties. The methods developed in this project can inform
the implementation of such policies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
develops a framework for data valuation based on extending the concept of
Shapley value from economics. Shapley value measures how individual components
contribute to the whole group. This project will build a rigorous statistical
theory of data Shapley value, together with new scalable algorithms for
estimating Shapley values on large datasets. Moreover, modifications to data
Shapley value by relaxing its constraints will be investigated. Computing data
Shapley value involves iteratively deleting certain data points and measuring
the effect of this deletion on the performance of the trained machine learning
model. This formulation closely links data valuation with the data deletion
subproject. The goal of the latter is to efficiently delete subsets of the
training data from a machine learning model without having to retrain from
scratch. The data valuation and deletion methods will be implemented and
validated on large publicly available biomedical
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.