* 1942054
* CAREER: Deciphering how dynamic environments and nutrition affect life history tradeoffs in a highly migratory insect pest
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Arianne Cease, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 709,251.00

When the environment changes rapidly, insect populations can adapt to their
environment, move to a new environment, or perish. Locusts are grasshoppers that
can move as needed, transitioning from a phase where they avoid other locusts to
a massive swarm of locusts moving together from one region to another
(migration). Because locust swarms can destroy crops, a lot of research has been
conducted on locusts to understand the control of migration. These insects are
able to change quickly to develop the ability to migrate when they choose access
to distant resources over other life needs, such as immune function and
reproduction. However, despite the devastating impact locusts can have on
ecosystems (including crops) and human communities (destruction of crops impacts
farmer livelihoods), little is known about how environmental factors trigger
this change in locusts. It is known that in a variety of animals, the
availability of various nutrients affects growth, reproduction, and immunology.
While nutritional variation is expected to be a key factor, no prior research
has evaluated how nutritional variation affects the ability of insects to
migrate. This CAREER project will combine local and international educational
opportunities, as well as lab and field research to test how nutrition,
population density, and historical habitat variability interact to affect
migration, immune function, and reproduction of locusts. The results will be
used to develop sustainable management and policy recommendations and will be
provided to global partners to improve livelihoods, and human and environmental
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will answer fundamental
questions about the mechanisms that determine whether migration occurs: (1) What
are the physiological trade-offs associated with migrating vs. not migrating,
specifically among capacities to migrate, fight disease, and reproduce? (2) How
do population density and nutritional quality (specifically protein:carbohydrate
ratio of the diet) affect these tradeoffs? (3) How does historical environmental
variability affect population-level variation in responses to migration-inducing
stimuli? (Are populations that have evolved with more variable habitats more
likely to migrate?) Answering these questions will broadly advance our
understanding of why and how animals migrate, how to predict migratory responses
to global change, and provide fundamental insights into the ecophysiology of one
of the most economically important insect pests. A combination of the PI's long-
term research partnerships established locust colonies and rearing facilities at
ASU, and education plan engaging university trainees, farmers, and international
scholars will allow for unprecedented integrated lab and field research-
connecting individual biological function with continental-level landscapes. In
addition, the PI and her team will develop a research-intensive undergraduate
course where students will engage in novel research and co-author peer-reviewed
papers from this project. To meet the need to train more biologists and pest
management officials in locust biology, particularly from underrepresented
groups, this project will support a workshop at ASU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant was cofunded by the Integrative Ecological Physiology Program in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and The Population and Community
Ecology Cluster in the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.