* 1942394
* CAREER: Computational strategies for incompleteness and heterogeneity in multi-omic data
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Jingwen Yan, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2025
* USD 549,909.00

Multi-omics refers to the integrative analysis of multiple types of -omics data
(e.g., genotype, gene expression and protein expression). Increasing multi-omic
data provides opportunities for discovery of disease biomarkers from multiple
molecular scales and therefore can further our understanding of underlying
disease mechanisms. Despite this great potential, existing multi-omic data
collections are mostly incomplete and of heterogeneous types (e.g., continuous
and categorical numbers). Integrating these data for joint analysis typically
requires exclusion of many subjects with missing values; as a consequence, a
large chunk of data remains unused. This project provides novel perspectives in
handling the incompleteness and heterogeneity problems in multi-omics data and
hereafter allow biomedical researchers to gain more insights from rapidly
growing yet imperfect biomedical data. In addition, the increasing multi-omics
data has led to a massive transformation in biomedical research and has resulted
in an unprecedented need in information management, decision support, and
advanced analytics. In this project, a series of educational activities will be
conducted to engage students at their early stages of education and to increase
their awareness of educational opportunities and career paths in biomedical
informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new classes of
computational methods to enable the joint mining of incomplete and heterogeneous
multi-omic data by leveraging various biological networks for discovery of
functionally connected biomarkers. Towards this, two tasks will be performed: 1)
identify multi-omic subnetworks as biomarkers via a multi-task joint network
module detection and feature selection model, and 2) select associated features
between heterogeneous -omics layers via a novel multi-task sparse association
model. The first task aims to address the incomplete data problem. This new
model can not only handle the incomplete data collected from one large-scale
project, but also allow the joint analysis of -omics data from multiple small-
scale projects without overlap in subjects. The second task addresses the
heterogeneity problem with a novel two-step strategy in associating different
-omics layers. Built upon these research efforts, three outreach educational
activities will be conducted: 1) develop a project-based curriculum for high
school students, 2) host an annual summer workshop on multi-omics for high
school students, and 3) provide advanced research opportunities to
undergraduates from biomedical informatics and related disciplines. This
research effort will lead to discovery of more reliable biomarkers for further
validation and better understanding of their relationships with disease traits
than currently possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.