* 1942016
* CAREER:  Nonlinear Dynamics of Shear Wave Propagation and Shock Formation in Soft and Biological Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Tal Cohen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 645,440.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will focus on shear shock
formation and propagation in soft materials. The advancement of fabrication
techniques in recent years has spurred a rapid increase in the use of highly
deformable materials in a myriad of engineering applications with examples
ranging from wearable electronics, and soft robotics, to helmets, and seismic
bearings. Dynamic loading of such soft structures can lead to a variety of
material phenomena, which can generate significant damage. Protective gear
should thus be capable of absorbing dynamic loads, such as impacts and blasts,
which are now becoming appreciated as a major threat also to civilian lives in
both mundane settings, such as sports, and as a result of more extreme events,
such as exposure to improvised explosives. In these situations, both the
protective material and the soft biological tissue may be subjected to extreme
pressure gradients and impact. However, the basic mechanisms of damage and
energy absorption are still poorly understood, thus hindering the maturation of
new protective technologies that can mitigate damage in extreme environments.
The integrated research and education plan will resolve deep mechanics questions
regarding the shear shock formation criteria and level of energy dissipation and
work to broaden participation in the engineering field.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Recent experimental observations have suggested that the nonlinear
evolution of ordinary shear waves into shear shocks could play a significant
role in generating damage in soft and biological materials. However, while the
vast amount of existing experimental and theoretical research on shock wave
propagation in solids revolves around longitudinal shock mechanisms, the study
of shear shock formation and propagation, from the point of view of large
deformation solid mechanics is in nascent state, and the fundamental nature of
these shock processes, the conditions required to form them, the resulting
damage, and the level of energy dissipation, remain elusive. Hence, the
interpretation of the reported observations is limited. This CAREER award aims
to fill this void by employing a complementary combination of theoretical
investigation and high-precision experimentation, through which it will
illuminate the constitutive sensitivities of shear shock processes and the
resulting mechanisms of damage. This fundamental understanding will then guide
the design of more resilient material systems and can explain the vulnerability
of specific biological organs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.