* 1942356
* RAPID: New Acceleration in Ordonnansbreen in the Negribreen Glacier System
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ute Herzfeld, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 07/31/2024
* USD 136,120.00

The motivation for this study is detection of a new acceleration in
Ordonannsbreen, a glacier in the Negribreen Glacier System (NGS) in Arctic
Svalbard, observied in May 2019 using satellite data. Glacial acceleration is a
major source of uncertainty in assessments of sea level rise, and observations
of glacial surging are rare and therefore poorly understood. In this RAPID
response project, airborne geophysical data will be collected in this study, and
in combination with satellite images and data leveraged from a separate study of
neighboring Negribreen glacier, will address questions about glacier surge and
the interaction between glacial acceleration and climate warming. The
investigator will also advance use of machine learning to analyze complex
satellite data. For outreach, the investigator will share observations with the
public via a website about glacial surge and present results at local K-12
schools. In addition, this project will support training for graduate and
undergraduate students, engaging them in field work and new methods for
mathematical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has recently
detected a new acceleration in Ordonannsbreen glacier via satellite data, and
this study will leverage prior work on a surge in neighboring Negribreen glacier
to understand changes in the larger glacier system. The motivating question is
whether this event is simply another surge in an Arctic glacier or part of the
larger disintegration of an entire glacier system. To address the research
objective, the investigator will 1) collect airborne laser altimeter, image,
Global Positioning System (GPS), and Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) data in one
field season in summer 2019; 2) derive a 3-dimensional representation of surface
elevation in crevassed terrain and elevation change to estimate mass loss; and
3) address the question of whether the acceleration can be attributed to
physical processes in the glacier system and/or in a warming environment. A
crevasse-centered mathematical approach that integrates physical processes and
machine learning will be applied in observation, analysis, and modeling.
Automated classification of crevasse types and other surface signatures will
lead to a classification of acceleration types and aid in constraining
parameters in thermo-mechanical glacier models, to be developed in future
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.