* 1942805
* CAREER: Human Thermal Exposure in Cities - Novel Sensing and Modeling to Build Heat-Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Ariane Middel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 524,999.00

Human thermal exposure to extreme heat is a growing health concern and pressing
societal problem worldwide that will be exacerbated by climate variability, more
frequent and intense heat waves, continued urbanization, and socio-demographic
changes towards bigger economic disparities and a growing elderly population.
Hazardous heat has wide-ranging adverse effects on people’s performance, health,
and well-being, posing a major challenge to the sustainability and livability of
cities in the future. The bioclimate or how humans experience heat is driven by
complex interactions between urban infrastructure (e.g., streets, buildings,
trees) and micro- to global scale climates. The goal of this Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) grant is to advance understanding of how the built
environment impacts heat and human thermal exposure in cities. Bridging the gap
between localized field-based work and large-scale, generalizable models, this
transformative project will expand beyond the limits of conventional heat
research and fundamentally reframe how heat is assessed in urban areas by using
radiation-based metrics and indices. New academic-practitioner partnerships with
cities will yield co-developed, solutions-oriented research that translates into
actionable best practices for infrastructure management and human-centric heat
hazard mitigation. This work aligns with NSF's mission to advance public health
and well-being. It has the potential to result in broader societal change by
informing public policy to make communities more thermally comfortable and
walkable, increase heat awareness, build adaptive capacity and community
resilience to heat, and potentially reduce the incidence of heat-related illness
and death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this project are to
1) create fundamental knowledge on the complex bioclimatic dynamics in the built
environment across the full parameter space of urban forms and materials through
extensive field work campaigns; 2) assess human thermal exposure and comfort in
cities at unprecedented spatial and temporal scales using an innovative big data
and artificial intelligence approach; 3) perform a vulnerability analysis by
linking urban “hot spots” to populations at risk to high heat; and 4) evaluate
the bioclimatic efficiency of single and combined heat hazard mitigation
strategies such as cool pavements and increased tree canopy cover for current
and future climate conditions. The project will use a novel mobile sensing
platform (MaRTy) to characterize heatscapes in two US cities (Phoenix, AZ and
Los Angeles, CA), understand the non-linear relationship between urban
infrastructure and heat, and build the first comprehensive geodatabase of human
thermal exposure observations during hot weather across the full parameter space
of urban form (configuration and composition), materials, and vegetation. An
open-source, radiation-based human thermal exposure model (OpenMRT) will be
developed using Street View images and deep learning to quantify experienced
heat from a human-centric perspective. OpenMRT will be employed to assess the
impact of various urban infrastructure modifications on city-wide human thermal
exposure and vulnerability in Phoenix and Los Angeles for current and future
climate conditions and urban form scenarios. The education objectives of this
project are to 1) broaden the STEM pipeline by recruiting women into
engineering, 2) foster interdisciplinarity, and 3) build a community of scholars
by implementing a vertically and horizontally integrated education plan.
Dissemination of research findings in informal learning settings and through
social and traditional media will enhance public literacy around heat, health,
and the role of urban infrastructure for cooling. The project also supports the
exchange of new knowledge on the thermal impacts of urban infrastructure through
convergent education, which engages practitioners and decision-makers from
various disciplines to co-create heat mitigation solutions that can be
translated into effective policies for urban infrastructure management that are
grounded in observational data and modeling to increase urban resilience to
heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.