* 1942962
* CAREER: Combining Human Judgment and Data-Driven Approaches for the Development of Interpretable Models of Student Behaviors: Applications to Computer Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Luc Paquette, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 01/31/2025
* USD 597,516.00

Debugging, the process of identifying and resolving defects in computer
programs, is an important skill to acquire while learning to program. However,
many novice programmers, with good understanding of programming, struggle with
the debugging process. Despite this, debugging is rarely explicitly taught. This
project will use data-driven approaches to study the debugging processes of
novice programmers enrolled in a college level introductory computer science
course, identify the meaningful elements of their debugging behaviors and how
those elements combine to form common debugging strategies. This knowledge will
be used to create computer algorithms that are able to identify which debugging
strategies students use when programming. These algorithms will be designed to
be interpretable by students and instructors. These algorithms will be used to
support students in learning efficient debugging strategies, assist instructors
in monitoring their students' debugging practices, and help future K-12 teachers
in learning about the meaningful elements of the debugging process. The results
of this project will positively impact the state of computer science education
in both college level introductory computer science courses and in the K-12
level by supporting future teachers in learning how to foster important
debugging skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the state
of the art in student behavior modeling by formalizing an approach that combines
knowledge engineering and machine learning to create interpretable models of
student behavior. It will provide empirical evidence illustrating how the
interpretability of a student behavior model can provide powerful pedagogical
advantages beyond its accuracy at predicting a student's behavior. The proposed
approach will be applied to study debugging strategies in college level
introductory computer science courses through the log data collected from an
online problem-solving platform named PrairieLearn. The benefits of
interpretable models will be compared to those of traditional machine learning
approaches, using rigorous research to identify the best methods for supporting
students and instructors. Specifically, the project will apply this approach,
leveraging the increased interpretability of the models it creates, to: (1)
better understand students' debugging behaviors; (2) support students in self-
reflecting about their debugging strategies and developing efficient debugging
practices; (3) provide instructors with actionable information about their
students' debugging processes; and (4) support future teachers in acquiring
expertise in formulating hypotheses about students' debugging strategies. By
doing so, the project will contribute to general knowledge about debugging
processes for novice programmers, and establish methods to support college
students and future K-12 teachers in acquiring explicit knowledge about the
debugging process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.