* 1942291
* CAREER: A Role for salivary proteins in diet acceptance
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Ann-Marie Torregrossa, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 756,748.00

This project will reveal physiological mechanisms whereby mammals make diet
choices. Understanding diet choice is essential to solving a wide array of
problems, from habitat conservation to medical compliance and nutrition. Taste
plays an integral role in diet choice because it conveys nutritional and safety
information about the composition of foods. Sweet foods motivate intake, whereas
bitter foods are often avoided. To increase intake of bitter vegetables into
children’s diets, repeated exposure is a common and powerful method. It is
thought that learning about the foods may be sufficient to increase intake.
However, previous research by the principal investigator suggests that there may
be a shift in the taste of these foods, because repeated exposure can alter
production of salivary proteins that change how foods taste. This project will
test whether the suite of salivary proteins produced by rats differs based on
the specific type of bitter chemicals consumed, how the chemicals and proteins
interact with receptors in the mouth versus digestive tract, and how diet-driven
changes in salivary proteins act to alter acceptance of nontoxic, bitter foods.
This work will be conducted, in part, in the context of a new university
research course designed to train underrepresented students in behavioral
neuroscience research techniques and will be used as part of a sensory systems
and nutrition outreach program in local elementary and high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will test the hypothesis that diet-
induced upregulation of salivary proteins (SPs) allows an animal to increase
consumption of a sampled, harmless, bitter food, but does not generalize to
dangerous toxins. Aim 1 will examine whether the dietary acceptance driven by
SPs is specific to the inducing stimulus, by comparing the pattern of SP
expression in groups of rats exposed to different classes of bitter plant
secondary compounds (PSCs). These animals will complete taste tests for each
class of PSC to determine if increased acceptance is generalizable to other,
sometimes similar, but more toxic, bitter compounds. Aim 2 will determine if SPs
act by altering the negative signals from receptors in the digestive tract. To
isolate the effects of SPs on post-oral feedback, licking responses to saccharin
solutions will be measured while rats receive intragastric infusions of bitter
stimuli dissolved in donor saliva with or without SPs. It is hypothesized that
the presence of SPs will block the reduction in licking induced by bitter
chemicals under control conditions, by reducing the aversive post-oral input.
Aim 3 will test whether indirect exposure to bitter compounds (i.e., in amniotic
fluid and milk) is sufficient to alter SP expression in offspring. SP expression
of mothers and offspring will be quantified after maternal diet experience with
PSCs to test for vertical transmission of diet preference. This research will
extend knowledge of taste physiology by identifying a physiological mechanism
for experience-based alterations in diet acceptance. The research findings will
have broader applications to the fields of foraging ecology and human nutrition.
The project integrates education and outreach activities with the research, and
will train two graduate and 15-20 undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.