* 1942229
* CAREER: Accelerating Scientific Data Collection through Human-in-the-Loop Artificial Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Travis Mandel, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 02/28/2025
* USD 439,603.00

Scientists in domains such as psychology, marine science, and ecology spend a
large amount of time, effort, and funding designing experiments and collecting
large datasets. Although recent technological breakthroughs in artificial
intelligence (AI) have dramatically impacted the process of scientific data
analysis, these approaches have not yet had a similar impact on scientific data
collection. This project explores improving efficiency of data collection by
using AI to automatically direct data gathering efforts towards the most useful
regions of the space. This is a big challenge; although AI systems can easily
analyze large amounts of data in real-time, they lack an inherent understanding
of the scientific domain (including objectives, background knowledge, and
experience). On the other hand, human scientists and data collectors understand
the domain but lack the ability to quickly process vast amounts of data. This
project will develop principles and systems for real-time direction of
scientific data collection with humans and AI systems working together,
leveraging each other's strengths. The project will further our understanding of
human-AI collaboration, resulting in new data collection algorithms and
interaction paradigms that will help promote the progress of many scientific
domains. The project will have a major impact on research and educational
activity on Hawaii Island, developing new human-in-the-loop AI techniques that
address problems of great local importance and leveraging this to drive
increased interest in science and technology among community members and local
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project
are divided into two thrusts. In the first, the investigators seek to understand
how to build AI systems for data collection that ensure that their objective
functions are well-aligned with human scientists. The project will explore
better aligning objective functions through: 1) requesting and incorporating
richer feedback in the form of key points and suggestions, and 2) inferring
objective functions based on human behavior during the annotation process
itself. In the second thrust, the investigators seek to understand how to design
AI systems that efficiently direct human effort in real-time to optimize data
collection. The project will study how real-time interaction can be improved
through: 1) ensuring that notifications generated by the AI system are timed for
maximum usefulness, and 2) building AI systems which learn to be a better
teammate by observing in situ human behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.