* 1942182
* CCF: EAGER:  DeepGreen: Modeling and Boosting Accelerated Computing on Liquid Immersion Cooled HPC Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Rong Ge, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 285,777.00

Power and thermal issues have become critical design constraints that limit
performance, scalability, and affordability for high performance computing
systems and datacenters. It is urgent to address this challenge as servers are
increasingly dense and employing accelerators. Liquid immersion cooling is a
potential solution, due to its significantly better thermal conduction and lower
power demand than traditional air cooling. This project explores immersion
cooling to boost energy efficiency, computing capacity, and reliability of dense
servers with multicore and manycore processors and accelerators. It engages both
graduate and undergraduate students in research, and inspires and fosters the
next generation workforce in technology &amp; engineering. This project promotes
green computing, which seeks to reduce energy cost of servers and datacenters.
The project features close collaboration with a liquid immersion cooling vendor
and will help technology innovation and transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project targets dense servers comprising accelerators such as graphics
processing units (GPUs), tensor processing units (TPUs), field programmable gate
arrays (FPGAs), and application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs). It
explores advanced machine learning to automatically learn from multi-physics,
diverse data the impact of immersion cooling on performance, power, and thermal,
and design model-assisted management schemes to meet various optimization
objectives including energy efficiency, performance, and hotspot elimination.
Completion of this project will advance the state-of-the-art accelerated
computing and datacenter cooling in multiple aspects, including quantitative and
comprehensive understanding of the benefits of immersion cooling, more accurate
performance, power, and thermal modeling for accelerated systems, and
intelligent management software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.