* 1942610
* CAREER: Towards Data-Driven Methods to Counter Online Aggression
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Gianluca Stringhini, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 04/30/2025
* USD 433,097.00

The rise of social media has enabled online aggression practices such as
cyberbullying, harassment, and hate speech to reach an unprecedented scale. Some
aggressors select their targets and coordinate on polarized online communities
to organize attacks against their victims, inundating them with hateful or
disturbing messages, videos, and images. These attacks can cause serious harm to
their victims, forcing them to leave social media sites or even to contemplate
self-harm. Despite the threat posed by online aggression, the problem has so far
not received much attention by the computer security research community.
Developing quantitative methods able to identify and mitigate such attacks is
however of paramount importance to provide a safe online experience to all
Internet users. This project aims to develop tools able to identify online
aggression attacks in real time, allowing online services to take the
appropriate countermeasures.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI aims
to achieve four research objectives. First, by leveraging annotation from
crowdsourcing workers, this project aims to develop effective corroborating
evidence of aggression incidents on social media. De-identified datasets will be
released publicly and will help the research community at large to better
understand the problem. Second, the PI will develop techniques based on machine
learning to identify online accounts that partake in online aggression, and to
automatically flag the hateful content that they post, allowing online services
to quickly react to such attacks. Third, the project will develop predictive
models to establish the likelihood for content that is posted online to receive
hate in the future; online services will be able to use these models to
proactively allocate moderation resources towards content that is considered at
risk. Finally, the PI will investigate the advantages and disadvantages of
different mitigation approaches for this problem, from suspending offending
online accounts to disabling comments for particularly risky content. This
project's educational activities will include an interdisciplinary module
targeted at college students from non-technical backgrounds and a tutorial
designed to provide high school students with a better understanding of
cyberbullying attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.