* 1942692
* CAREER: Bringing Models to Native: Open Access Bioinformatics for Protein Structure Refinement
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Debswapna Bhattacharya, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 01/31/2022
* USD 447,827.00

Structural biology has entered an era of computational modeling. Computational
models serve as vehicles for studying the structure and dynamics of complex
biological macromolecules, such as proteins, to better understand the properties
and mechanisms of cells. Computational protein modeling, due to its efficiency
and scalability, can be used on a genome-wide scale to predict atomic-level
three-dimensional protein structures from sequences when experimental structure
determination techniques are not feasible or practical. However, computational
models often do not reach biologically relevant experimental accuracy, the so-
called native states. Computational structure refinement aims at improving these
moderately accurate protein models by driving them towards experimental quality.
However structure refinement methods often fail to bring models close enough to
the native state, and worse, sometimes drive them away from native. This project
will develop novel computational and data-driven methods to substantially
improve protein structure refinement, bringing protein models closer to the
native states. An open access bioinformatics research infrastructure will be
developed and publicly disseminated, advancing basic biological research.
Additionally, this interdisciplinary project has a deep commitment to enriching
knowledge in biomolecular simulation and refinement, benefiting researchers and
students in multiple communities at the interface of computing and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address the dual barriers of
sampling and scoring in structure refinement by exploiting reciprocal coupling
of data-driven sampling and deep learning-based scoring. Specifically, new data-
driven sampling methods guided by residue-specific and inter-residue restraints
with generalized ensemble search will be developed to bias conformational
sampling towards the native state. Additionally, novel side-chain oriented high-
and intermediate-resolution scoring functions powered by deep learning will be
formulated to significantly improve the recognition of native-like
conformations. An open access bioinformatics cyberinfrastructure for structure
refinement will be developed and deployed by integrating the new sampling and
scoring methods, enabling worldwide community of life science researchers to
apply these advanced refinement protocols, thereby multiplying the impact of the
project on basic biological research. The project facilitates simulation-based
learning through the development of PolyFold, a visual simulator for interactive
protein structure manipulation and refinement, with an inclusive commitment to
engage general public in science and technology. Results of this project,
including the open access bioinformatics research and educational resources, can
be found at http://www.eng.auburn.edu/~dzb0050/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.