* 1942223
* CAREER: Palladium or Gold Catalyzed Decarboxylative Functionalization of (Hetero)Arenes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Thomas Hoye, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,925.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Joseph J. Topczewski of the University
of Minnesota-Twin Cities. This research project is focusing on developing more
efficient methods for organic synthesis. In this research, traditional starting
materials are replaced with readily available, lower energy, safer, and less
toxic carboxylic acids. These new synthetic methods are replacing prior
reactions used in the synthesis of medicines, agrochemicals, and organic
electronics. The broader impacts of this work include revitalizing and
transforming undergraduate organic chemistry courses and bring a focus on
advanced manufacturing method for the chemical industry. Furthermore,
undergraduate students, graduate students, and faculty are engaging the citizens
of Minnesota through their Market Science program, which brings science fair-
like demonstrations to local farmersâ€™ markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Topczewski and his students are developing new synthetic methods for the
decarboxylative cross-coupling and functionalization of (hetero)aryl carboxylic
acids. This research focuses on the mechanistic elucidation of the reaction
cycle, optimization of the ligand and metal complexes, expansion of the
substrate scope, and the development of a broader array of functionalization
reactions. Several metal complexes and mechanisms of decarboxylative coupling
are being investigated. The broader impacts of this work include recruiting a
diverse cohort of scientists to be trained as next generation leaders in the
chemical community and promoting outreach through Market
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.