* 1942776
* CAREER: I. The local and global effects on genomic architecture by defects induced in repetitive DNA domains and II. Development of integrative curriculum in physics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Brian Cannon, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2025
* USD 361,452.00

The three-dimensional arrangement of the genome has an integral role in the
regulation of its information content, and disruption of this architecture can
lead to abnormal patterns of gene expression with grave consequences for the
organism. The presence of highly repetitive DNA sequences that can form aberrant
structures has been linked to genetic diseases which are a result of a loss of
normal regulatory controls. The project seeks to understand how these defects
influence the organization of DNA, and thus how these defects might lead to the
deleterious protein expression patterns associated with some genetic diseases.
The educational component of the work addresses the need to enhance the core
scientific competencies of undergraduate science majors and expand access to
research experiences. The project will develop a research-oriented curriculum
for the introductory physics lab sequence at Loyola University Chicago, initiate
research workshops as outreach to Chicago-area community colleges and support a
post-baccalaureate training program for promising researchers. The project seeks
to provide substantive learning experiences that emphasize interdisciplinary
learning, expand opportunities for underrepresented groups in STEM research, and
improve the career readiness of promising students for STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomic misfolding has been increasingly
identified in short tandem repeat (STR) genetic disorders. Disease-related, STR
sequences have a strong propensity to form non-helical structures that arise as
defects in double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). Although significant work has been
devoted to genetic processes that involve these sequences, the topological
challenges that their associated structures present to the three-dimensional
architecture of the genome remain largely unknown. The project will utilize
single-molecule fluorescence and complementary biochemical strategies to
quantify experimentally how different sequences and types of structural defects
alter the mechanical properties of dsDNA and affect the folding principles that
guide its formation into large loops and more complex structures. The first aim
will characterize two types of defects: homologous DNA internal loops and
disease-relevant STR structures consisting of the trinucleotide repeat sequence
(CXG)N. The second aim will focus on the insertion of the characterized defects
into larger DNA domains to examine two aspects of dsDNA folding: i) short-range
loop formation and ii) large-scale, supercoiling dynamics. The findings from the
project will inform how local structural defects at the DNA level can induce
genomic misfolding. This award is supported by the Molecular Biophysics and
Genetic Mechanisms clusters of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.