* 1942049
* CAREER: Regulation of Chromatin by Histone Variants
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Dongyan Tan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 03/31/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Genes in higher organisms (i.e., animals, plants and fungi) are packaged into
chromatin. Chromatin is a complex formed by the winding of DNA around proteins
called histones. It has two important functions: to efficiently package DNA to
fit inside the small volume of the cellâ€™s nucleus and to regulate access to the
genetic information encoded in the DNA. Despite the well-established link
between chromatin remodeling and gene expression, how histones and the structure
of chromatin control access to DNA remains elusive. This project will directly
address some long-standing questions in DNA packaging that are fundamental to
understanding multiple aspects of molecular and cellular biology. In conjunction
with the research activity, the investigator will develop a graduate-level
course to provide students with hands-on training in cryo-electron microscopy
(EM). In additional, the investigator will provide training opportunities for
high-school teachers and students to gain the knowledge and skills needed to
delve into advanced topics in molecular biology. This will be achieved through
two outreach programs focused on using Molecular Graphic Tools to explore the
public protein databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Histone variants are isoforms of
canonical histones, representing one or a few amino acid differences in their
protein sequences. Histone variants have specific expression and localization
patterns in cells. Incorporation of histone variants is known to be a major
mechanism in regulating chromatin structure and function. Nevertheless, the
understanding of histone variant-dependent chromatin regulation is limited by
the knowledge gap in how variant-specific changes in protein sequence are
translated into specific function. In this project, the investigators will use a
combination of cryo-EM, biochemistry, and biophysical methods to investigate the
mechanism-of-action of three histone variants: variant H2A.Z, H3.3 and macroH2A.
The project will reveal the structural basis of how chromatin structure and DNA
accessibility are modulated by these variants alone and by their interplay with
non-histone proteins. This work will also provide valuable insights into the
diverse roles of these variants in transcriptional control in
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.