* 1942955
* CAREER: Dialogue Engagement for Educational Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Heather Pon-Barry, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2025
* USD 522,923.00

The activities in this Faculty Early Career Development project are rooted in a
social educational robot that collaborates with students in STEM learning. The
robot acts as a peer learner who asks students to teach them how to approach
mathematics and computer science problems. The process of explaining one’s
reasoning has the pedagogical benefit of deepening understanding. Educational
robots have the potential to reach a broad population of students, but the
benefits depend on facilitating strong engagement in the learning activity. In
existing research on human-robot collaborative activities, much attention has
been directed towards robots that execute natural language commands or respond
to stand-alone questions; less attention has been given to robots that sustain
longer conversational interactions. This project develops a framework for
improving user engagement---social connection to the robot and involvement in
the task---in conversational human-robot interaction. Improving human-robot
conversational engagement will enable scientific progress from robots that focus
on atomic interactions to socially intelligent robots that sustain interaction
over time. This project integrates substantial computer science education
activities to expand research opportunities for students who are
underrepresented in computing, to broaden perspectives of computing by teaching
a seminar on talking robots, and to extend the impact of a curriculum
established by the investigator for training peer mentors in creating inclusive
learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve
educational robots’ ability to sustain student engagement in STEM learning
activities by characterizing how multiple modalities of perceptual inputs and of
robot actions can be effectively combined in physically-situated interaction. A
significant challenge in combining modalities is defining appropriate temporal
segments that capture meaningful units and align in a way that allows them to
complement one another. The project addresses three interconnected aspects of
engagement for social educational robots. First, it explores machine learning
methods for estimating engagement using speech, vision, and lexical inputs, with
a focus on the temporal dynamics of aligning the perceptual data. Second, the
project develops strategies for adaptive response generation based on perceived
engagement, drawing on corpus analyses of human-human and human-robot peer-
learning dialogues. Third, the project takes a reinforcement learning approach
to fostering engagement by learning dialogue policies that integrate verbal and
non-verbal robot actions such as head movements, spoken backchannels, and gaze
gestures. Taken together, the results provide a foundation for enabling
educational robots to interact with greater social intelligence and maintain
long-term engagement, and ultimately could transfer to social conversations with
robots in other fields of education as well as non-educational
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.