* 1942447
* CAREER:Topological Crystalline Insulators and Semimetals: Beyond the Bulk-Edge Correspondence
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Jennifer Cano, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2025
* USD 372,481.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education on newly discovered topological phases of matter.
Historically, phases of matter have been classified by the presence/absence of a
local property, for example, a magnetic moment or arrangement of atoms in a
solid vs a liquid. Topological phases defy this paradigm because they cannot be
detected by any local probe. Consequently, their properties are robust to local
perturbations, i.e., dirt that is inevitably present in any real device.
Topological insulators, which have surfaces and edges that are metallic covering
an insulating bulk, provide an important example. The surface of a topological
insulator can conduct electricity, but, unlike an ordinary metal, the
conductivity of the metallic surface does not decrease with disorder. This
robust conductivity makes topological insulators promising for technological
applications, including spintronics and quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will examine topological materials with
symmetry. Generically, crystals exhibit many symmetries. Because of symmetry,
the structure of a crystal will look identical under specific rotations or
perhaps, when viewed in a mirror. Recently, it has become clear that some
materials that were not previously regarded as "topological" can also exhibit
robust conducting states as long as the symmetry is preserved in the experiment.
The PI aims to figure out how to detect and utilize the robust conducting states
of these materials with symmetry. Mathematical and numerical modeling will be
used to predict under what conditions robust conducting states will be present.
The impact of the proposed research will be to increase the number of materials
that can be used in devices intended for topological
insulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important aspect of this project is an
education plan for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students that
includes specific outreach to women. For the high school and undergraduate
students, the PI will utilize the existing infrastructure provided by the Women
in Science and Engineering program at Stony Brook University to teach mini
research modules and organize networking and mentoring events. For graduate
students, the PI will develop a class on topological materials that incorporates
professional development and will also rejuvenate the Women in Physics and
Astronomy group. The overarching goal is to educate and diversify the future
workforce in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research on the bulk-
edge and bulk-defect correspondence for topological crystalline insulators and
semimetals together with related education activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
recent developments of symmetry indicators and elementary band representations
have defined a new era in the prediction and classification of topological band
structures. However, the bulk diagnosis of a topological crystalline phase does
not guarantee a gapless surface state, and the surface signatures have lagged
behind the bulk classification. Since, traditionally, topological phases are
detected by their surface states, this presents a problem for the experimental
diagnosis of newly discovered topological materials. The proposed work will
address this problem by developing both symmetry classifications and
experimental signatures of topological crystalline insulators and semimetals.
Specifically, the research will focus on the following two classes of
topological band structures:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Surface states of
topological semimetals: crystal symmetry can protect non-chiral degenerate
points that exhibit bulk topological invariants, but their surface signatures
have never been studied. The proposed work will determine the conditions under
which gapless surface and hinge Fermi arcs are topologically
protected.&lt;br/&gt;2) Defect modes of higher order topological insulators: the
proposed work will establish a defect classification for higher order
topological insulators. Bulk defect modes and surface step edges will provide
more robust experimental signatures than corner states because they do not
require cleaving a crystal in a particular
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results will be crucial for future
measurements of topological materials and device
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates research and education
through an education plan for high schoolers, undergraduates, and graduate
students with outreach to women in science and engineering. The plan will be
accomplished in three parts 1) utilizing the existing infrastructure of the
Women in Science and Engineering program at Stony Brook to design a research
module for high school and undergraduate women and to host a networking panel;
2) designing a graduate course called Topological Insulators and Semimetals that
will have a built-in professional development component; and 3) rejuvenating the
Women in Physics and Astronomy group at Stony Brook University, with the long
term goal of increasing the retention rate of female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.