* 1942646
* Proposal for Workshop on 'Developing skills for advanced careers in biology for NSF postdoctoral fellows in the PRFB Broadening Participation 2019 cohort'; Honolulu, HI
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Eben Lindsey, Society for Advancement of Chicanos & Native Americans in Sci
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2020
* USD 98,779.00

This project funds a workshop for Postdoctoral Research Fellows in Biology,
supported by the Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology
track. The workshop is designed to serve fellows from the 2019 cohort by
providing support for approximately 30 fellows to attend a workshop facilitated
by SACNAS (Society for the Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native
Americans in Science). The purpose of the workshop is to provide a forum for
promoting best practices and assessment of broadening participation activities,
professional and career development, and to catalyze interactions and
collaborations between fellows and with established
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Postdoctoral Fellows conduct research across
all fields of biology supported by the Directorate for Biological Sciences. The
Fellows in this track also work to increase participation of students and others
from groups underrepresented in science by mentoring, educational activities,
and public outreach. The workshop will allow Fellows to exchange ideas and learn
from experts about best practices and assessment of activities to broaden
participation. To promote professional development, scientists will share
effective strategies and information for different career paths. The venue for
the workshop is 2019 SACNAS - The National Diversity in STEM Conference. The
activities will occur in a day-long workshop prior to SACNAS followed by
meetings throughout the three-day conference. Common interests and interactions
during the workshop will make possible the formation of collaborations that
persist as the Fellows disperse to their home research institutions across the
US. Overall the workshop will contribute to the national goal of increasing STEM
diversity by supporting leadership in broadening participation and the career
success of the Fellows, who themselves comprise a diverse
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.