* 1942282
* CAREER: Understanding the Role of Buoyancy Flow for Accurate and Robust Scale Modeling of Upward Flame Spread
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Ya-Ting Liao, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2025
* USD 407,817.00

This project will study how fire behaviors change with scale. Laboratory-scale
tests are often used in fundamental research and in technical standards to
characterize the burning behaviors of materials. However, key fire behaviors
change when moving from small laboratory scale to larger real-world scales found
in structures or forest fires. This scalability problem is a long-standing
challenge in fire science, one that limits generalizability of laboratory
testing. Filling this knowledge gap will improve the relevance of standard
safety tests and lead to safer structures and products. Ultimately this will
save lives, money, and property for society. This project employs experiments,
numerical simulations, and theoretical modeling to control, study, and predict
fire behavior at various scales. The focus will be on a phenomenon called
buoyancy flow, which varies significantly with scale. The developed scaling
models will be validated against real-world testing databases maintained by
industry collaborators. This project will also help cultivate the next
generation of academic and industry leaders. This will be achieved via
interactive public demonstrations of fire dynamics and via promotion of
technical standards in college curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the key
factors influencing fire scalability is buoyancy flow. This project will focus
on the effects of buoyancy flow on upward flame spread over solids. In this fire
scenario, the fuel sample is oriented vertically, along the direction where
buoyancy flow varies significantly. The coupling between solid fuel and gaseous
flame is sensitive to such buoyancy flow variations, making scalability even
more challenging. By nature, buoyancy flow is caused by a density gradient in a
gravity field. By systematically varying these phenomena, buoyancy flow can be
manipulated. First, the effect of density will be studied by varying pressure
and diluents of ambient gas in a combustion chamber. Second, the effect of
hyper-gravity will be studied using a 17.7m-diameter centrifuge. Experiments
will be augmented by calibrated numerical modeling. The small-scale data, where
buoyancy flow is artificially enhanced, will be compared to large-scale data
from collaborators, where buoyancy flow is naturally up-scaled with fire size.
Dimensional analysis will be performed to identify the invariant dimensionless
variable groups. Finally, a new scaling model will be proposed to bridge small
and large fires by incorporating buoyancy flow. This will allow creation of fire
models that make fewer assumptions than ever before. This will also dramatically
increase the applicability of lessons from lab-scale experiments as well as
allowing re-interpretation of past reduced-scale
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.