* 1942563
* CAREER: Dynamic sea-level trends during the past two millennia
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Andrew Kemp, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 741,856.00

Relative sea level (RSL; the height of the sea-surface with respect to the land)
changes across space and through time in response to a wide range of physical
processes that operate on timescales from minutes to millennia and on local to
global spatial scales. Projections of future climate indicate that changes to
the strength and/or position of ocean currents and prevailing winds will cause
RSL rise along much of the U.S. Atlantic coast to exceed the global mean by
pushing existing ocean water toward the coast (termed dynamic sea-level change).
The relationship between coastal RSL and ocean/atmospheric circulation can be
observed on timescales of months to a few years in instrumental datasets, but it
remains unclear if such changes can be sustained on longer timescales. This
project will reconstruct RSL changes during the past ~2000 years from Prince
Edward Island to South Carolina using coastal sediment to explore if and why
dynamic sea-level changes occurred over multiple decades and centuries. These
reconstructions will support coastal management by helping to inform and
constrain projections of 21st century regional-scale RSL rise. Public scientific
literacy will be promoted through an original art exhibition (in collaboration
with the School of the Museum of Fine Arts) that explores the causes and
ramifications of regional sea-level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instrumental
datasets (e.g., tide-gauge measurements) and model projections demonstrate that
dynamic sea-level changes along the Atlantic coast of North America have a
spatial expression that is characteristic of the underlying physical cause(s).
Since these datasets are short and fragmentary, proxy RSL reconstructions are
needed to quantify dynamic sea-level change on multi-decadal to centennial
timescales. This project will produce high resolution and near-continuous RSL
reconstructions spanning the past ~2000 years from two sites in each of Prince
Edward Island, Maine, and South Carolina using foraminifera preserved in dated
sequences of salt-marsh sediment. These locations were chosen because of their
sensitivity to dynamic sea-level change in model simulations and to complement
the distribution of existing RSL reconstructions. The vertical distribution of
salt marshes (and foraminifera that live on them) is fundamentally linked to
tide levels and therefore sea level. Under conditions of RSL rise salt marshes
accumulate sediment to maintain their position in the tidal frame. The resulting
sedimentary sequences contain the identifiable remains of plants and
foraminifera that lived on paleo salt marsh surfaces and are a detailed archive
of RSL change. Along much of the Atlantic coast of North America ongoing glacio-
isostatic adjustment drives long-term RSL rise and the creation of accommodation
space (approximately 1–3 m for the study areas in the past ~2000 years) that is
filled by salt-marsh sediment. Dynamic sea-level changes overprint this
underlying RSL trend and can be identified in sufficiently detailed RSL
reconstructions. An age-depth model will be created for each of the six cores
using radiocarbon dating of plant remains and recognition of pollution trends
and events of known age in downcore profiles of elemental and isotopic
abundance. The height of former RSL will be reconstructed using transfer
functions trained on the observable relationship between assemblages of
foraminifera and tidal elevation on salt marshes in the three study areas. The
resulting RSL reconstructions will have the temporal and vertical resolution
necessary to reliably identify relatively small and short-lived dynamic sea-
level variability. Analysis of these new records alongside existing
reconstructions using a spatio temporal model will identify regional patterns of
coherent sea level variability in the North Atlantic Ocean from which the role
of ocean and/or atmospheric dynamics as a driver of sea-level trends will be
quantified. This long-term perspective on ocean/atmosphere conditions, climate
forcing, and sea-level rise will generate insight into the causes and magnitude
of past, present, and future changes in the coupled climate-sea level
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.