* 1942591
* CAREER: Using Fiction to Improve Real-World Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* David Bamman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2025
* USD 410,540.00

At a high level, this project aims to design computational methods to reason
about the world of fiction, and, in turn, learn from fiction to inform the
design of systems in the real world. While much work in artificial intelligence
learns about the world from relatively short factual sources like news and
Wikipedia, fiction offers a range of affordances for improving existing
information systems and innovating new applications altogether. Unlike factual
sources like news, fiction captures emotion, everyday action and commonsense,
offering a vast source of information to bootstrap knowledge bases that can
power question answering systems, conversational agents, and the next generation
of artificial intelligence. This project will improve the performance of natural
language understanding on fiction as a domain, and use it to explore two case
studies: inferring the structure of everyday events in people's lives, including
the relation between macro-level events (such as eating breakfast) and low-level
micro-events (sitting down at the table, pouring another cup of coffee, putting
the dishes in the sink); and learning the relationship between observed actions
depicted in text and the broad-coverage mental attitude (such as joy, sadness,
and surprise) of their agents. This project aims to draw in students and
researchers in the social sciences and humanities, who have historically been
underrepresented in computing. While the technical research carried out under
this project directly speaks to how expertise in the social sciences and
humanities can inform the computational design of information systems, the
primary educational plan under this award will investigate one fundamental
question: how to enable students outside STEM fields to learn and improve their
skills in natural language processing, machine learning and data science. This
work will engage researchers in the humanities and social sciences in technical
research, teaching skills to students without technical backgrounds, and
translating advances in computational methodology to advances in domain
knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental work in this project aims to
bridge the gap between computation and the humanities and social sciences by
providing two case studies of how learning from a depicted world in fiction can
improve systems that reason about the real world. This is a new frontier that
can not only teach us about the limitations of current systems for textual
entailment and sentiment analysis, but can also open up new areas of research at
this intersection. This work will make progress on two tasks enabled by fiction:
inferring the sequential and hierarchical order of commonplace actions, in which
a single macro-event is comprised of several micro-events, and inferring the
latent attitudes of people mentioned in text given observations of their
actions. Both case studies draw on fiction as a source of knowledge, and require
the development of computational models optimized to bridge the gap between
fiction and reality. Concretely, this work will result in the publication of a
new dataset of contemporary fiction, labeled for entities and coreference
between them (which has the potential to yield a new state of the art for nested
entity recognition and coreference resolution for this domain), a knowledge base
of everyday actions extracted from fiction, open-source software for modeling
hierarchical events and learning mental attitudes from observed actions, and
publications at academic venues detailing the methodologies created under the
scope of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.