* 1942754
* CAREER: Machine Learning Driven Cross-Layer Optimizations for Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Heiner Litz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2025
* USD 419,283.00

Recent advancements in computer science have enabled an exponential data growth
outpacing technology scaling. As an increasing number of mobile devices, sensors
and data acquisition systems is producing exabytes of information, analyzing the
obtained data are becoming unfeasible, requiring novel approaches to store and
compute on this vast amount of data. Improving the performance and efficiency of
storage systems is of paramount importance to enable scientific progress, to
improve the cost and energy consumption of IT systems and to enable analysis of
large amounts of data. To achieve this goal, as part of this grant, novel
approaches on the hardware, operating systems, data-center and application level
will be developed. Enabling such new techniques will provide significant benefit
for society. First, the new approaches developed in this project will improve
efficiency and utilization of storage systems reducing the carbon footprint on
our world. Secondly, improving the performance of storage devices enables novel
applications such as new treatments leveraging storage and compute intensive
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, cross layer
optimizations will be developed to improve the hardware and software stack of
storage systems using machine learning techniques. One main challenge of
existing block storage devices is their transparency of internal state to
software. This work addresses this shortcoming by extending storage devices with
comprehensive data monitoring capabilities as well as with control knobs to
optimize devices in an application specific way. The telemetry data obtained
from these smart storage devices will be utilized to train machine learning
models to optimize for application specific behavior as well as for determining
optimal configurations of heterogeneous storage and compute
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.