* 1942742
* CAREER: Structural Communication Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Thomas Watson, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2025
* USD 343,640.00

The field of communication complexity is about situations where
two&lt;br/&gt;parties, call them Alice and Bob, each hold a separate piece of
data,&lt;br/&gt;and they wish to collaboratively solve some computational
problem that&lt;br/&gt;depends on both their inputs. How much will they need to
communicate&lt;br/&gt;back-and-forth to achieve their goal? The field
encompasses both upper&lt;br/&gt;bounds---i.e., the design of protocols that
allow Alice and Bob to&lt;br/&gt;succeed using only a small amount of
communication---as well as lower&lt;br/&gt;bounds---which show that no such
efficient protocol exists for certain&lt;br/&gt;problems (i.e., Alice and Bob
will need to communicate many bits to&lt;br/&gt;succeed). This serves as a
natural model of distributed computing,&lt;br/&gt;motivated by big data and
cloud computing concerns. More generally, it&lt;br/&gt;can be used to model any
situation where flow of information between&lt;br/&gt;different components of a
system forms a bottleneck; for this reason,&lt;br/&gt;communication complexity
has applications to many other areas of&lt;br/&gt;computer science. This project
will develop deep technical tools to make&lt;br/&gt;progress on several
longstanding problems and central issues in&lt;br/&gt;communication complexity
and its various application areas. The unifying&lt;br/&gt;theme of this project
is the importation of insights and techniques from&lt;br/&gt;structural
complexity, which is the area of theoretical computer science&lt;br/&gt;devoted
to classifying problems according to their inherent&lt;br/&gt;computational
difficulty. The education component will address the&lt;br/&gt;challenges of
facilitating flow of ideas between theory and&lt;br/&gt;applications, and
transitioning students from coding to problem solving&lt;br/&gt;to
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One specific type of tool relevant to this
project is "lifting&lt;br/&gt;theorems", which relate communication complexity
to the simpler model of&lt;br/&gt;query complexity. The investigator will
continue to develop and apply&lt;br/&gt;such lifting theorems to address
structural questions in communication&lt;br/&gt;complexity and beyond. This
project will: develop fundamentally new&lt;br/&gt;lower bound techniques for
powerful communication models, strengthen and&lt;br/&gt;unify classic and
widely-used results, clarify the delicate relationship&lt;br/&gt;between
communication and the amount of information Alice and Bob reveal&lt;br/&gt;about
their inputs, advance the understanding of computational
problems&lt;br/&gt;concerning communication complexity itself, and use
structural insights&lt;br/&gt;to deepen the connections with circuit complexity,
proof complexity, and&lt;br/&gt;data structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.