* 1942868
* CAREER:Bionic Eye: Heterogeneous Integration of Hemispherical Image Sensor with Artificial Neural Network
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Kyusang Lee, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Vision is one of the most crucial senses for humans
when evaluating a scene. Natural imaging systems such as the eye provide an
aberration-free image with a wide field of view. Artificial imaging systems can
be made lighter, smaller, and with minimal optical aberrations by curving the
focal plane array to match the curvature of the lens. Such a conformal
architecture is analogous to the shape of the human eye. Furthermore,
integration of an artificial synapse in image sensors will enable to processing
of the high volumes of data acquired from a scene at low power. This approach is
inspired by the interaction between the eye and visual cortex. In this project,
the PI will design integrated hemispherical image sensors with an embedded
neuromorphic chip that allows edge computing at hardware level with low-power
operation. The system will provide wide-angle, aberration free images for
various applications such as vehicle navigation, threat detection, and object
identification. This will greatly facilitate further development of broad smart
sensor applications combined with simplified AI technology. The PI will create
introductory lab modules that connect basic material science and device physics
to system level integration, allowing students to connect basic science with
real-life applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;In this
program, the PI will demonstrate an artificial retina integrated with
neuromorphic circuits that consumes extremely low power. The PI will focus on
designing and fabricating a thin-film InGaAs based hemispherical focal plane
array and memrisror based artificial synapses that provides a wide field of
view, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), data reduction, ranging
capability adaptable to variable and near infrared light levels while providing
object recognition capabilities. This will be enabled by a combination of
various unique technologies; from materials growth and lift-off, flexible device
fabrication to heterogeneous and system level integration. The fabricated thin-
film compound semiconductor based hemispherical image sensor array using remote
epitaxy technique will be integrated with novel computing architecture based on
emerging non-volatile resistive switching devices, providing an ideal
implementation of a synaptic weight in artificial neural networks. This
integrated image sensor will enable edge extraction by applying hexagonal kernel
to the honeycomb image sensor array, and object recognition via a single layer
of fully connected convolution neural network (CNN) similar to the human retina
and visual cortex. Eventually, this proposed project will provide imagers that
would enhance situational awareness and recognition with minimal power
consumption in a power-constrained environment that is of central importance to
robotics, autonomous driving, and military applications
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.