* 1942085
* CAREER: Understanding and Enabling Human-Robot Collaboration with Groups of People
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Malte Jung, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 02/28/2025
* USD 435,006.00

How well a team performs depends on its internal dynamics. As robots become more
and more integrated into teamwork in areas that span surgery, space exploration
missions, search and rescue, or manufacturing, it is important to understand how
robots impact team dynamics and a team's ability to perform. The goal of this
project is to investigate the impact that a robot has on a team's dynamics and
then to use this understanding to develop novel ways for robots to directly
shape those dynamics to improve a team's likelihood to succeed. Findings from
this work will advance our understanding of robot assisted teamwork. Further the
project will develop educational activities that allow children and students to
develop the skills necessary to succeed in a work environment that includes
robots. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While most work is performed by groups and teams,
research on human-robot collaboration has focused predominantly on dyadic
interactions, i.e. a single human collaborating with a single robot. The
effectiveness of teams depends on the quality of its interpersonal interactions.
Transforming human-robot collaboration from a dyadic towards a group focus
raises novel questions about such teaming. In particular: 1) how a robot's
behavior influences both human-robot interactions and human-human interpersonal
interactions in a group of people, 2) how robots can deliberately shape human-
human interpersonal interactions, and 3) what the consequences of such influence
are for a team's overall effectiveness. This project investigates how a robot's
resource allocation behavior impacts people's interactions with each other and
their ability to perform as a team. Allocation behavior refers to behavior
associated with a robot's allocation of resources and tasks between several
people (e.g. handing over a tool or building block to a team member, allocating
social attention and gaze, or providing assistance). This project will: 1) use
lab and field studies to develop basic understanding about allocation behavior
exhibited by people and robots and how such behavior affects a group's
interaction, 2) use an iterative design approach combined with an online and
laboratory based task to develop and evaluate allocation behaviors for robots to
shape a group's interaction in desirable ways, and 3) examine how a robot's
resource allocation behavior during collaborative tasks affects all dimensions
of team effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.