* 1942151
* CAREER: Learning at the Edge: an Extreme Value Theory for Visual Recognition
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Walter Scheirer, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 05/31/2025
* USD 420,459.00

The brain has the remarkable ability to rapidly and accurately extract meaning
from a flood of complex and ever-changing sensory information. A key question is
how neuronal systems encode relevant information about the external world,
especially with respect to perceptual tasks such as object recognition and
categorization. Unlocking this secret would likely change the typical way in
which we approach machine learning for computer vision --- a key area of
artificial intelligence. This project seeks to answer this question using
methods and procedures from psychology and statistics, leading to new AI
capabilities that can be transitioned to commercial and government applications
where the processing of visual information is a concern. The recognition model
produced could have tremendous impact across a number of fields including
computer vision, machine learning, neuroscience, psychology, and cognitive
science. In addition, the PI will train students at the undergraduate and
graduate levels, and organize new workshops relating computer science to human
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s first technical objective is to work
towards a potentially transformative Extreme Value Theory (EVT) for visual
recognition. This new theoretical framework will provide solid grounding for
vision scientists and AI engineers working on experiments that model the human
visual system. It will facilitate both new theoretical analyses of decision
making in a visual context, as well as new classification algorithms that are
more biologically-consistent in operation. The second technical objective is an
experimental assessment of the EVT recognition model. The significant difference
in predictions made by EVT and more conventional modeling strategies that rely
on central tendency assumptions allows us to formulate testable hypotheses that
support psychophysical studies to understand the role of extrema in recognition.
The high-level design is three experiments in two different regimes, with humans
as the focus of study. This study aims to uncover the principles of decision
making that underpin object recognition. The third technical objective is to use
the developed theory and the experimental results to create a new class of
biologically-consistent machine learning algorithms for decision making that are
a measurable advance beyond the state-of-the-art. This includes generative
learning algorithms to model the distributions for specific class
representations, and discriminative learning algorithms to find the boundaries
between classes. This effort will develop probabilistic generative EVT mixture
models, as well as probabilistic discriminative one-class, binary, and multi-
class EVT classifiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.