* 1942185
* CAREER: Modeling the Roll-to-Roll Soft Lithography Printing Process Through Deep Learning and Real-time Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Xian Du, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2025
* USD 626,627.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant focuses on advances in
roll-to-roll soft lithography by establishing a learning-based modeling method
that guides the design and control of continuous microcontact printing processes
and investigates continuous pattern formation mechanisms. Microcontact soft
lithography is an attractive cost-effective method of patterning meter square
areas of micro- and nano-scale features via selective mechanical contact on
flexible substrates using stamps. Adapting microcontact printing to continuous,
roll-to-roll platforms facilitates applications such as flexible electronics and
wearables. The fidelity of the transferred pattern in soft lithography is
dependent on successful mechanical contact and control of material transfer at
the stamp-substrate interface. However, the underlying microfeature evolution in
commonly fabricated structures in roll-to-roll microcontact printing is not yet
fully understood to guide the successful design and control of the printing
process. This project studies a novel modeling approach for microcontact print
pattern formation with real-time learning from the patterning processes while
linking the pattern formation mechanisms with print process variations and
defects for quality control. The research is complemented by the development of
a multi-disciplinary curriculum combined with research in roll-to-roll printing
and the creation of self-contained hands-on educational kits to encourage young
students at various educational levels to pursue careers in
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand
the fundamental mechanics of microcontact printing through deep learning and
establishing a scientific basis for roll-to-roll soft lithography. Towards this
goal, the research objectives are: (1) Investigate a physical mechanics model of
contact regions for the design and control of roll-to-roll microcontact
printing; (2) Establish an in-line vision-force-deformation sensing network for
assessing print geometry; and (3) Model real time stamp microfeature pattern-
pressure-deformation behavior through deep learning. The printed pattern images
are systematically segmented and converted to a single geometric variable which
is synchronized and integrated with the force and displacement data for
describing the state of print. A deep learning architecture models the fidelity
of a print pattern geometry by measurement of the print variables and contact
geometries. The project seeks answers to the following questions: (i) What is
the precise interpretable relationship between print variables and contact
geometry; and (ii) What are the roles of contact geometries, material
properties, and roll-to-roll printing parameters in the formation of pattern
geometry. The overarching focus is to achieve a deep understanding of the
deformation behavior of microcontact stamp and the formation mechanisms of print
geometry. The project enriches the knowledge base for soft lithography modeling,
real-time sensing, deep learning, and design and control of roll-to-roll print
process and contributes to the advancements in intelligent
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.