* 1942003
* CAREER: Light-sheet Brillouin microscopy for mechanical analysis of tissue morphogenesis
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* giuliano scarcelli, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2025
* USD 537,623.00

An award is made to the University of Maryland to develop a novel imaging
technology, light-sheet Brillouin microscopy, to measure how biological cells
grow into complex tissues during embryonic development. While previous
technologies have mostly focused on probing genetic and biochemical control of
tissue growth, this research will improve the understanding the biomechanical
aspect of embryonic development. The project will generate a new instrument
whose performance and design will be disseminated via conferences, peer-reviewed
journal papers as well as hosting interested biological researchers. The
project, at the interface of photonics, biomechanics and developmental biology,
will provide opportunities to educate and train graduate and undergraduate
students with a diverse set of skills. The project will also be used to attract
middle-school students to STEM fields with activities relying on hands-on
exercises that create quick connections between photonic technology and real-
life familiar applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While our understanding of
genetic, biochemical and molecular controls of tissue growth can rely on several
established methods, the biomechanics of tissue morphogenesis remains poorly
understood mostly due to the lack of suitable measurement techniques. This
project addresses this need by developing light-sheet Brillouin microscopy
capable of mapping elastic modulus in a developing embryo without contact at
high 3D resolution. Brillouin microscopy has already proven impactful in tissue
and cell biomechanics, but currently relies on point-scanning to build an image
and thus is not suited for embryo studies due to speed and damage limitations.
This project will develop massively multiplexed Brillouin spectral analysis and
integrate it in widely used light-sheet microscopy platforms, which already
provide structural and functional imaging, thus enabling mechanobiology studies
of morphogenesis with co-localization of elasticity information, cell/tissue
size, shape and organization as well as signaling activation and expression
patterns. Co-Funding for this award is also being provided by the BIO/IOS-
Developmental Systems Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.