* 1942561
* CAREER: Biomechanics of Collective Cell Migration
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Denis Tsygankov, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 02/28/2025
* USD 504,599.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will enable the
comprehensive study of coordinated cell behavior. Coordinated cell behavior is a
hallmark of both organism development and organism functioning. Collective cell
migration is one example of such cellular coordination. It plays a central role
in embryonic development, wound healing, and cancer invasion. Despite its
importance, collective cell migration is poorly understood. Studying coordinated
cell movement is challenging because the processes that regulate cellular
machinery, the interaction of cells with each other, and their interaction with
their local environment all affect each other. The research community lacks
tools that can grasp such complexity at the systems level. This work will
overcome this challenge by integrating state-of-the-art imaging technologies
with comprehensive simulation models of cellular dynamics that bridge different
length and time scales. This will reveal how the complex interplay of cell
responses defines the emergent collective behavior. Beyond the research
laboratory, the results of the work and enthusiasm for research will be
broadcast widely through outreach efforts, launching the career of the Principal
Investigator. Specifically, the project will benefit the society by introducing
project-related, inclusion-focused undergraduate and graduate courses and a STEM
Diversity Internship for underrepresented students from Spelman College and K-12
teachers participating in the Georgia Tech GIFT Program.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the project is to decipher complex cross-talk
mechanisms between the environment-dependent cell signaling and the cytoskeletal
machinery via the implementation of a novel, hybrid (agent-based/systems-
dynamics) method. This method explicitly accounts for the spatiotemporal
regulation of actin and adhesion complexes, changes in cell shape, and the
formation of mechanical stresses. To inform the models and validate their
predictions, quantitative experimental characterization of individual and
collective cell migration will be carried out using micro-patterned adhesive
assays. These assays provide well-controlled extracellular conditions and
visualization of different modes of cell migration with high spatial and
temporal resolution. This integrative approach will test the projectâ€™s central
hypothesis that the bidirectional feedback between cell shape, localization of
actin regulators, adhesion turnover, and arrangement of stress fibers,
predictably determine the mode of migration a cell adopts, ultimately impacting
the efficiency of the collective cell migration. Although this project is driven
by specific biological hypotheses, the outcome of the effort will be a general,
broadly applicable computational methodology for addressing many fundamental
questions of cell function in different biological
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.