* 1942096
* CAREER: Quantifying Local Rearrangements and Their Effects in 3D Granular Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Ryan Hurley, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2025
* USD 434,654.00

The goal of this CAREER project is to understand how local particle
rearrangements give rise to the macroscopic properties of granular materials.
Granular materials are found throughout nature and industry as sand, soil,
powders, and pills. The mechanical and dynamical properties of these materials
are central to engineering design, geological events, and industrial processes.
Theories and numerical models have provided links between microscopic processes
like particle rearrangements and mechanical and dynamical behavior in these
materials. However, much of this prior work has been performed for two-
dimensional systems, and the details of the hypothesized links have not been
experimentally tested. This project will employ novel X-ray measurements to
quantify particle-scale motion and stresses in three-dimensional granular
materials. These measurements will be employed to test and improve the existing
particle-scale hypotheses that underly theories linking local particle
rearrangements to macroscopic behavior. Along with these measurements and tests,
new tools will be developed to predict the location, details, and effects of
particle-scale rearrangement events. The data and knowledge generated by this
research will be integrated into a new graduate-level course on the mechanics of
granular materials. The project will involve high-school or undergraduate
researchers and engage local artists to develop and disseminate captivating
interpretations of the research and research process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use in-situ X-ray tomography and 3D X-ray diffraction measurements
of shear-loaded and point-force-loaded 3D granular materials to understand the
causes, details, and effects of local particle rearrangements. These
measurements will be used to quantitatively test hypotheses underlying theories
linking particle rearrangements to macroscopic behavior (e.g., shear
transformation zone (STZ) and non-local fluidity (NLF) theories). In particular,
the X-ray measurements will allow quantitative assessment of the kinematics of
local rearrangements, the associated particle-level strains and stresses, and
the length scale of influence of rearrangements within 3D frictional granular
materials. In addition, the project will develop new metrics for predicting the
locations and effects of particle-scale processes that affect macroscopic
behavior that leverage the ability to resolve particle rotations and inter-
particle slip. The outcome of the project will be a fundamental understanding of
how particle-scale processes give rise to continuum-scale mechanical and
dynamical behavior in 3D, frictional behavior, and novel data for validating and
extending existing theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.