* 1942251
* CAREER: Examining the Stimulation of Animal Metamorphosis by Bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Nicholas Shikuma, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/28/2025
* USD 777,412.00

Bacteria-animal symbioses are fundamental to animal life and often dictate
survival for both microbe and host. One such symbiosis is the induction of
animal metamorphosis by bacteria, where the presence of specific bacteria
stimulates the swimming larvae of animals like corals and tubeworms to settle on
the sea floor and undergo metamorphosis. Although this microbe-animal
interaction is critical for seeding new animals for entire ecosystems like coral
reefs, very little is known about the bacterial factors that stimulate
metamorphosis. Identification and characterization of these bacterial factors
could lead to insights about microbe-animal symbioses that evolved long ago and
are found in diverse animals alive today. By studying a model microbe-animal
interaction, this project will provide the first technical roadmap for
determining how bacteria stimulate the metamorphosis of many animals. This
research has the potential to uncover novel means of restoring fragile marine
ecosystems like coral reefs and promote the husbandry of economically important
animals like oysters, with the use of bacterial factors. The degradation of
natural ecosystems disproportionately impacts ethnic minorities and thus
achieving diversity in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields
is critical. This project will establish a new lab-based summer workshop to
engage first-year undergraduate students from underrepresented minoritized
groups in discovery-based research. This experience will foster engagement in
science and providing a pipeline throughout their undergraduate education to
promote their retention in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since bacteria
were first discovered to stimulate animal metamorphosis over 80 years ago,
animal larvae were thought to undergo metamorphosis in response to factors that
bacteria release into their surroundings. Recently, the principal investigator
discovered the first syringe-like structure produced by bacteria called MACs
(Metamorphosis Associated Contractile structures) that injects a single
stimulatory protein (Mif1) triggering metamorphosis of the marine tubeworm,
Hydroides elegans..Although Mif1 is the first protein factor from bacteria
identified that stimulates metamorphosis, there are likely many more factors
that remain to be discovered. The main hypothesis that underlies the research is
that MACs inject Mif1 into tubeworm larvae, which stimulates metamorphosis by
cleaving membrane lipids and activating the lipid-sensing Protein Kinase C
system. To test this hypothesis, the principal investigator will (1) genetically
and biochemically determine how Mif1 stimulates animal metamorphosis using
tubeworms and corals as model animals, (2) determine how Protein Kinase C
initiates metamorphosis using metabolomics to identify key lipid signaling
molecules and pathways, and (3) create a new lab-based summer workshop that
engages first-year undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented
minoritized groups in the research, promoting early-stage recruitment and
retention in STEM fields. This research has far reaching implications for
understanding mechanisms mediating microbe-host interactions, as induction of
metamorphosis by bacteria is ubiquitous among diverse animals and related
syringe-like structures are common in diverse bacteria including human
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.