* 1942015
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Consequences of Co-Adsorbed Chlorine on Surface Dynamics and Selectivity in Ethylene Epoxidation on Silver Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2019,05/31/2022
* David Flaherty, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2022
* USD 118,917.00

Ethylene oxide (EO) is a major commodity chemical used in the production of
materials, industrial solutions, surfactants and consumer goods. EO is
manufactured via a catalytic reaction between ethylene and oxygen gas utilizing
highly complex catalysts that have evolved over the years primarily through
industrial research involving experimental screening of a large array of
catalytic, promoter, and stabilizing materials. While those efforts have led to
high-performing catalysts containing five or more promoting materials, there
remains significant opportunity to improve the catalyst technology. State-of-the
art theory, machine learning, spectroscopic and reaction analysis methods will
be combined to better understand the role of chlorine, one of the key promoting
elements, and identify opportunities for increasing its effectiveness. Higher-
performing EO catalysts would improve process energy efficiency, reduce
emissions, and promote U.S. competitiveness in a chemical market sector that
accounted for $45B in 2016.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Among the many different
combinations of promoters reported in commercial EO catalysts, chlorine (Cl) is
the most ubiquitous promoter, and its addition to an otherwise unmodified silver
(Ag) catalyst leads to the greatest increase in selectivity to EO. Reactant and
promoter-induced surface dynamics and reconstruction have long been known to
play a critical role in many catalytic reactions. The study combines catalyst
synthesis, spectroscopic characterization, reactivity testing, and machine-
learning enhanced molecular simulations, to explore the dynamic nature of the
Cl-promoted Ag surface under reaction conditions. The bottom-up approach to
synthesis and characterization yields itself to several opportunities for
reconciling conflicting spectroscopic assignments in the literature, mechanistic
proposals for this system, and hypotheses for the mode of action of Cl through
the combination of cutting-edge computational and experimental methods.
Specifically, the study will utilize efficient computational approaches for
modeling dynamic evolution of systems with high configurational complexity.
Time-averaged simulated Raman spectra derived from molecular dynamics
simulations will be used in conjunction with multi-variate curve resolution of
experimental Raman spectra to make molecularly precise assignments for different
surface oxygen species and the influence of Cl on their structure. The transient
behavior of these systems will also be tied to observations at steady-state
operation at conditions relevant for industrial systems. The collaborative
nature of the project will provide opportunities for cross-exposure of graduate
students from the two research groups to theoretical and experimental methods,
thereby teaching skills for effective research collaboration. The methodologies
developed in the research and their application will be integrated into graduate
courses taught by the co-investigators to demonstrate the importance of
embracing complexity of catalytic systems, even within fundamental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.