* 1942722
* CAREER: Understanding the role of sugar transporters in plant growth
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Lily Cheung, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 11/30/2024
* USD 992,174.00

It has been estimated that the world population will increase by 2.2 billion
over the next three decades and a significant improvement in crop yields would
help meet the need for more food. Engineering plants such that more sugar is
allocated towards edible organs such as fruits is one way to improve crop
yields. Many of the genes that are being targeted in these plant engineering
efforts are sugar transporters. This project focuses on the SWEET family of
plant transporters, which are important for the distribution of sugar to various
plant tissues. The overall goal of this project is to characterize SWEET sugar
transporters and ultimately to use the information to engineer plants with
better yields. At the educational level, this project will develop activities to
bridge the gap between plant biology and engineering for students at the K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate levels. This project will also enhance the
participation of underrepresented minorities in engineering through direct
involvement in the proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of
sugars in leaves and their mobilization to roots and reproductive organs is a
significant determinant of crop yields. Some of the most critical genes in this
process are sugar transporters, the proteins embedded in membranes that enable
the uptake or release of sugar from cells or subcellular compartments. Despite
their recognized importance, transporters in general, and sugar transporters in
particular, remain notoriously difficult to study. Conventional approaches to
characterize transporters are too laborious and time-consuming for widespread
adoption. The research objectives of this proposal are to use biomolecular
sensors to determine the substrate specificity of members of the SWEET family of
sugar transporters, and to formulate mechanistic models of substrate competition
for SWEETs. These models will quantitatively represent biological molecules and
their mechanisms of interaction at a physicochemical levelâ€”key missing wirings
between the metabolome and the proteome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.