* 1942235
* CAREER: Towards a Secure and Reliable Internet of Things through Automated Model Extraction and Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Tuba Yavuz, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 271,416.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) is expected to transform the quality of our lives
in various domains. &lt;br/&gt;However, the Mirai botnet and other cyber attacks
that exploited vulnerabilities in IoT devices have revealed major security and
privacy issues in the current deployments of IoT. These incidents indicate the
importance of securing the IoT ecosystem as a precursor to achieving the
transformative power of IoT. The IoT ecosystem involves a variety of components
including constrained devices, edge devices, mobile devices, and the cloud.
Securing an IoT deployment requires a deep understanding of the attack surface
of each component and the attack surfaces that are formed as a result of the
interactions between various components. However, the complexity of software
that powers these components poses a big challenge. The goal of this project is
to achieve a holistic view of security engineering using automated model
extraction and model guided analysis. The project will yield methodologies,
tools, and educational material that will empower the IoT industry in terms of
secure software development and deployment practices. Additionally, the project
will help broaden participation of women and other underrepresented groups in
IoT security, formal methods, and software engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate scalable analysis
of system software to reason about system-level behavior. The key insight is
that software is often developed according to a programming model, which imposes
certain structural and semantic associations for data and code. This knowledge
provides a great opportunity to deal with the complexity of code as it provides
guidance on how to analyze components in isolation and how to effectively
explore the state space during analysis. Specifically, the project builds on
three research thrusts: 1) Formalization of programming models that are used in
system software, 2) Automated model extraction and model guided analysis that
leverage formally defined programming models and the integration of a variety of
program analysis techniques, and 3) System-level analysis of IoT systems through
integration of automatically extracted component models with run-time data. The
automatically constructed system-level model will be subjected to rigorous
analysis and will support effective run-time monitoring of IoT deployments for
improved usability, reliability, privacy, and security. A novel, incremental,
and model checking based regression analysis will enable safe and secure
evolution of IoT systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.