* 1942206
* CAREER: Deciphering Large-Scale Real Outage Data for Cascading Failure Analysis, Prevention, and Intervention
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Junjian Qi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2021
* USD 394,319.00

Cascading failure is a common phenomenon in complex engineered systems, such as
electric power grids, natural gas systems, transportation networks, Internet,
and interdependent critical infrastructure systems. For example, previous major
cascading blackouts such as the U.S.-Canadian blackout in 2003 and the Indian
blackout in 2012 have caused many component failures, significant economic
losses, and severe social impacts. Therefore, greatly enhancing the complex
system resilience and keeping the lights on are thus very critical for
minimizing the service disruptions and maintaining the economic growth and
prosperity. However, the existing cascading failure study heavily relies on
simulation models, which are either too general to be able to provide
implementable prevention/intervention strategies or too difficult to benchmark
or validate for drawing reliable conclusions. In this CAREER project, the
significant limitations of the existing approaches will be addressed by
developing a fresh-new real outage data driven research framework in order to
better analyze, prevent, and intervene cascading failures. The research on
cascading failure analysis, prevention, and intervention to be conducted in this
project will help greatly reduce the risk of catastrophic blackouts and enhance
the resilience of power systems, bringing tremendous economic and social
benefits to U.S. and other countries around the world. Several educational
activities including curriculum development at undergraduate and graduate level,
engaging undergraduate students in research, and involving Hispanic and women
students in the project are proposed. For K-12 and community education, a
demonstration based on a cascading blackout scenario will be built. Academic
community will be engaged with webinars, seminars, and panel sessions at
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to initiate
a new data-driven research direction for studying cascading failure and power
system resilience and develop systematic, transformative theoretical foundations
and algorithmic techniques for data-driven cascading failure analysis,
prevention, and intervention, addressing the inherent limitations of existing
approaches, refreshing the understanding of real-world cascading failure, and
providing tools to analyze, prevent, and finally intervene cascading failures.
Network science, statistical inference, data science, and deep learning will be
seamlessly integrated with power system domain knowledge in order to obtain a
unique solution to the very challenging problem. Specifically, the following
three inter-related projects will be highlighted to significantly advance the
research agenda: 1) A solid foundation of the data-driven cascading failure
approach will be built through an efficient and accurate estimation of failure
interactions to convert utility outage data to information, addressing the
challenges of propagation pattern evolution over cascading stages, high
heterogeneity among cascades, and data scarcity. Deep learning approaches will
be developed to reveal the structural features of the interactions and recover
the missing component interactions. 2) Utilizing real utility outage data, the
complex and universal temporal-spatial properties of cascading failure
propagation will be investigated based on the estimated failure interactions to
convert information to knowledge, revealing the temporal evolution of cascading
behaviors, spatial propagation patterns, and criticality in both temporal
evolution and spatial propagation. 3) The very challenging cascading failure
prevention and intervention study will be advanced by converting knowledge to
actionable wisdom. Cascading failure prevention is to be developed based on the
identified critical components using the expected number of outages. Structural
or operational signatures of critical components will be identified using both
the failure interaction network and the original system topology. Further, a
novel cascading failure intervention problem will be formulated and solved by a
deep, safe reinforcement learning approach that utilizes both the learned
information/knowledge from real outage data and the power system domain
knowledge. By interpreting the high-level abstraction of the learned optimal
policies, useful insights about cascading failure intervention will be
provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.