* 1942014
* CAREER: Presentation and Mitigation of Privacy Risks for Online Users
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Kassem Fawaz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2025
* USD 431,598.00

It is a long-standing challenge to make the users of online systems "privacy-
aware" where one understands the privacy practices and controls of the online
service being used. For decades, the "Notice and Choice" framework has been the
governing practice for the disclosure and control of online privacy practices.
Privacy notices, manifesting in lengthy privacy policies, inform users about how
websites, devices, apps, or service providers handle their data. Notices pave
the way for choices to be made by users. Through online settings and menus,
users can opt-in for data collection, authorize the transfer of their data to
third-party ad networks, or control the extent to which their data is shared.
However, in their current forms, policies are hard for users to comprehend, and
control settings are not user-friendly. While some providers have improved the
readability of their privacy policies, these notices remain long and hard to
follow. Further, unreachable privacy settings make it very hard for users to
control their privacy effectively. Thus, users are far more likely to rely on
default options rather than fine-tuning their settings for each service they
use. When the service provider's behavior does not match the user's privacy
preferences, privacy risks arise. Providing users with the means to understand
and control how their data is handled remains an open problem. This project
explores and addresses the challenges associated with developing interfaces to
present and mitigate online privacy risks for users. The main impact of this
research is to educate users more effectively about privacy risks and to offer
them user-friendly tools to reduce these risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research in this project has three thrusts: (i) Technology probes-based
methodology for designing better privacy-enhancing interfaces: Using basic
privacy-interfaces to probe users about what they perceive as missing and
inconvenient design elements, this thrust aims to develop a set of user-driven
guidelines for designing privacy interfaces that are easier to adopt and use;
(ii) A comprehensive framework to make the privacy practices and controls of
service providers machine-readable: Through contributions in the natural-
language processing of privacy text and the automated analysis of online privacy
menus, this framework overcomes challenges due to heterogeneity, vagueness, or
complexity in an online platform's presentation of its privacy practices and
controls. It automatically conceptualizes the privacy practices and controls of
a service provider as a graph by associating the user's data with the provider's
fine-grained privacy practices and controls. The framework will also enable
designing new interfaces through querying its automatically generated graph
without collaboration from the service provider, thus addressing scalability;
(iii) A set of usable interfaces for understanding and controlling privacy risk
without requiring providers to adopt changes: Combining the identified design
guidelines with the framework's querying capabilities, the focus here is a
dialog interface that allows users to inquire about privacy practices and
control privacy settings using natural-language queries, even on UI-limited
devices. It also introduces privacy nudges to add privacy as a factor when users
are shopping for services. The methodologies will be tested in real systems
through collaboration with DuckDuckGo and other companies. The developed
products will be made available to public as browser plugins, apps, and APIs, as
appropriate. A set of education initiatives, including privacy modules for the
public, privacy as a design dimension for capstone undergraduate classes, and an
advanced privacy course at the graduate level, complement the research
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.