* 1942547
* CAREER: Advancing Pediatric Patient-Provider Communication through Collaborative Tracking and Data Sharing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Sun Young Park, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2025
* USD 309,099.00

This research will work to directly involve children in their own healthcare,
with their parents and medical providers as collaborating stakeholders. The
study is situated among children suffering from cancer and diabetes. This brings
focus to the acute difficulties of and need for information sharing and
communication among stakeholders in children's healthcare. In treating chronic
childhood illness, information, understanding, and open communication with a
child patient are vital to decreasing patient distress and anxiety, and
achieving better health outcomes. A gap in prior knowledge is how to determine
and support the appropriate degree of children’s involvement in their own care.
This is difficult because children lack the ability to fully express their
needs, manage their treatment, and make care decisions. To address this
challenge, this research investigates the roles that technologies can play in
supporting child patients’ expression of needs, feelings, and emotions around
illness and health, and helping clinicians and parents better understand and
communicate about children’s health and psychosocial conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates how mobile, ubiquitous, and
cloud-based computing and informatics can support collaborative communication
among children, parents, and healthcare providers. Research aims are to
investigate (1) the challenges, needs, and viewpoints of key stakeholders in the
communication of pediatric care; (2) co-design, through a participatory workshop
process, understanding of how to prescribe the role and level of children in
tracking and communicating their health-related data, and matching requirements
for associated technologies; and (3) a prototype tool for (a) collection of
appropriate health data, (b) data sharing among stakeholders, to review health-
related data collected, and (c) visualizations of this data, to support analysis
and reflection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.