* 1942202
* CAREER: Impact of stress coping style on cognitive processes and the underlying neuromolecular mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Ryan Wong, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/28/2025
* USD 850,267.00

Continued survival often depends upon the ability of organisms to learn from
previous social and environmental challenges. Personality type, learning
environment, stress, and genetics are some of the variables that can influence
cognitive capabilities (e.g. learning and memory). How these factors interact to
contribute to differences in learning and memory between individuals, is poorly
understood. Personality type can consistently bias cognitive, behavioral, and
physiological responses to disparate challenges. Organisms with proactive (i.e.
“bold”) personality type, are more likely more risk-prone, routine oriented, and
show a low stress response. In contrast, reactive (i.e. “shy”) animals, are more
risk-averse, sensitive to environmental change, and have a higher stress
response. This project will examine how an personality type constrains learning
and memory capabilities and elucidate the underlying neurobiological and genetic
mechanisms. Investigation of how learning context, brain dynamics, and genetics
modulate learning and memory, will provides targets for understanding what could
drive biased cognitive responses and serve as important factors in constraining
behavioral variation. This project will also opportunities for University of
Nebraska at Omaha and K-12 students of the Omaha Public Schools district to
perform behavioral neurogenetics experiments and enhance scientific literacy and
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exposure to stress often results in
learning, and the memory of past experience can inform future behavioral
response. Differences in learning and memory performance are attributable, in
part, to environmental conditions (e.g. context, reinforcement type) and
personality type. Key differences in synaptic plasticity and neurotransmission
that distinguish alternative personality types (e.g. proactive and reactive
stress coping styles) may also inform differences in learning and memory.
Variations in learning and memory performance may be driven by specific neural
activity patterns across brain regions. Activity of and in neural network in
turn, may be arranged and influenced by the expression of genes related to
synaptic plasticity. The experiments will identify how context and reinforcement
type interact with personality type to produce variation in associative and
spatial learning and memory performance. Further, these studies will elucidate
how neural and gene transcriptional activities can account for variation in
learning and memory between and within reinforcement types. Specifically, the
necessity of candidate genes in learning will be assessed via the manipulation
of gene expression. The experiments in this project will lead to advancements in
understanding how (1) learning environment and personality type (i.e stress
coping style) intersect and (2) gene expression and neural activity integrate to
mediate variation of learning and memory that may explain constraints on
behavioral plasticity. It will also set a foundation for comparative approaches
to assess if the identified neuromolecular mechanisms similarly explain
behavioral variation in other taxa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.