* 1942434
* CAREER: Exploring Cherenkov Radiation for the In Situ Excitation of Discrete Luminescent Lanthanide Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Eszter Boros, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2025
* USD 675,000.00

Developing more sensitive and accurate diagnostic agents is an important step
towards the faster and more accurate diagnosis of cancer. Agents that can be
introduced to the body to produce a visual readout of the tissues of interest
are called imaging probes. Certain imaging probes can specifically bind to tumor
cells and emit light at specific wavelengths that can be detected by specialized
imaging equipment. These probes are called targeted optical imaging probes. An
ideal optical imaging probe can detect even a small population of cancer cells
with high accuracy, deep under the surface of the skin. Currently, most current
imaging probes require the presence of large amounts of superficially located
tumor cells and therefore are not ideal optical imaging probes. Recently, Dr.
Eszter Boros from Stony Brook University has developed a new approach to
sensitive optical imaging probes that is based on the use of rare earth
elements. In this project, Dr. Boros is working to optimize the properties of
these radioactive imaging probes. The long-term goal of this research is to use
these new optical imaging probes to visualize small amounts of tumor tissue deep
under the skin. As an expert in work with radioactive agents, Dr. Boros is
dedicated to educating the public about radioactivity and is actively engaged in
developing outreach activities that educate high school students in a one-day
laboratory course with the Institute for STEM Education about the significance
of radioactivity in safety, energy, and medicine
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Eszter Boros from Stony Brook University is developing new discrete luminescent
lanthanide complexes that can be efficiently excited with Cherenkov radiation
emitted by radioactive isotopes utilized in nuclear medicine. This in situ
excitation method paves the way for lanthanide-based optical imaging probes with
enhanced depth penetration and improved biocompatibility. To maximize the
excitation efficiency of the lanthanide-sensitizing antenna, density functional
theory (DFT)-supported molecular designs of discrete terbium and europium
complexes are synthesized that enable the incorporation of intramolecular,
Cherenkov-emissive radiolabels. In addition to improving the excitation
efficiency of terbium(III) complexes, the synthesis of new bifunctional
chelators is pursued to incorporate sensitizing antennas with a more ideal
energy match for europium(III) excited states. The ability of these optimized
probes to visualize specific cell surface-receptors in vitro is used as a proof-
of-concept for the feasibility of Cherenkov-radiation mediated excitation of
lanthanide based optical probes. As a radiochemist dedicated to educating the
public about radioactivity, Dr. Boros is developing an outreach activity in the
form of a full day, hands-on Nuclear and Radiochemistry science module for high
school students with the Institute for STEM Education at Stony Brook
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.