* 1942793
* CAREER: Toward Securing Emerging Computing Platforms via Large-Scale Dynamic Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Manuel Egele, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 328,995.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) is poised to permeate all aspects of our daily
lives, from already existing smart home assistants, over increasingly popular
industrial applications, to yet to be developed personal health devices.
Clearly, these technologies offer exciting and new opportunities, yet the
software and devices that comprise the IoT encompass serious security threats.
While analysis tools for commodity systems, such as Windows or Android, allow
developers to scan their products for potential security vulnerabilities, the
landscape of the IoT poses additional, unique challenges for bringing such
security tools to bear. These challenges include the heterogeneity of the
architectures, operating systems, and software stacks employed by the IoT, the
rapidly changing capabilities and deployments of IoT systems, and the sheer
number of different IoT gadgets. Hence, any analysis aiming to improve the
security of the IoT must be able to accommodate this
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's prior work demonstrated that
security-focused analysis for Linux-powered IoT devices can greatly improve the
security of the supported devices and their users. However, prior research also
revealed that there is a substantive body of IoT devices and software that
either relies on operating systems other than Linux, or no operating system at
all. Thus, this project will research and develop novel scalable dynamic
analysis techniques that help developers and security analysts to proactively
identify potential security issues in contemporary IoT systems. The resulting
analysis will support reasoning about various layers of abstraction in the
computing stack, including user space, kernel space, and, importantly, so-called
bare metal code that executes directly on an IoT device's CPU without the help
of an operating system. These analysis will be brought to bear on a large
collection of software powering the IoT, resulting from the investigator's prior
research augmented with IoT software to be collected during the project. By
covering this broad spectrum of the IoT, this project holds the promise to
significantly improve the security of current and future IoT
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.