* 1942471
* CAREER: Non-additive control of gene expression by long-range interactions between multiple regulatory elements
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Manu Manu, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2025
* USD 903,578.00

Cells are specialized into different types such as neurons or muscle cells by
reading instructions embedded in DNA. These instructions determine which
proteins are required for the particular cell type and lead to the production of
only those proteins. This project aims to determine the rules by which cells
read and execute these instructions. Success of this project advances basic
understanding of developmental biology and produces computational tools that are
applied to problems ranging from agriculture to human health. In addition to its
scientific activities, this project addresses an important challenge in biology
education. Specifically, the project is designed to meet future demand for
biologists excelling in computational modeling and data analysis in three ways.
First, the modeling of biological phenomena is introduced to a broad audience of
students that major in biology. Learning modules are developed and deployed in
several, hitherto non-quantitative, courses in the biology curriculum. Second,
undergraduate students are mentored in research conducted as part of this
project. The project also increases the participation of tribal and rural
college students in STEM disciplines by hosting the students in the lab during a
week-long summer camp as well as during a 6-week long research experience for
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specification of cell fate
during development requires the precise modulation of gene expression mediated
by DNA sequences called enhancers. In metazoans, most well-studied cell-fate
genes are known to be regulated by multiple co-active enhancers, but the rules
governing the expression of multi-enhancer loci are not known. This project
tests the hypothesis that enhancers interfere with each other over long
distances by looping in 3D or modifying the accessibility of chromatin to
produce nonlinear or non-additive responses. The studies culminate in the
development of a new class of "whole locus" computational models that
incorporate 3D chromatin conformation to simulate gene regulation in multi-
enhancer loci. The studies utilize the enhancers of Cebpa, a gene necessary for
neutrophil development, as models for enhancer interference. The first project
aim takes a synthetic biology approach to measure the response of a gene
regulated by two enhancers as a function of their strengths. The second project
aim profiles 3D contacts between enhancers and promoters and chromatin
accessibility to determine whether enhancers interfere with the function of
other enhancers by modifying the 3D chromatin conformation or accessibility of
the locus. The third project aim integrates looping interactions into sequence-
based models of gene regulation to develop a new class of models capable of
predicting the gene expression of complex multi-enhancer
loci.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.