* 1942497
* CAREER: Towards a Predictive Theory of Algorithmic Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Seth Weinberg, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 12/31/2024
* USD 473,918.00

Traditional algorithms are designed to take a given input and produce the best
achievable output. However, as modern algorithms increasingly influence ads we
see, people we date, and many other aspects of our lives, their input is no
longer directly given but instead is solicited from strategic agents.
Importantly, these same agents care deeply about the output produced, and they
will manipulate their input to achieve more desirable outcomes. These
manipulations are not hypothetical, but well-documented in multi-billion-dollar
industries like healthcare, cloud computing, and online dating. Modern
algorithms can however benefit from utilizing tools from Game Theory to
successfully interact with strategic agents. The field of Algorithmic Mechanism
Design emerged at the intersection of Economics and Computer Science precisely
to tackle this pressing challenge. This project will advance this rapidly-
growing research agenda. The project also contains an educational plan to
develop a graduate course to train future researchers and an undergraduate
course to train future engineers who will deploy these
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the overarching focus of
this proposal is to extend the vast existing theory from descriptive to
prescriptive. For example, extensive prior work successfully describes why
simple mechanisms are ubiquitous in daily interactions with unsophisticated
designers, but does not yet prescribe novel mechanisms for a sophisticated
designer with the data and means to finely optimize. The project will implement
this agenda in three key directions: (a) the analysis of simple revenue-
maximizing auctions beyond traditional approximation guarantees, (b) the design
of novel revenue-maximizing auctions for buyers who learn how to bid
strategically over time, and (c) the development of fundamental building blocks
for incentive compatible cryptocurrencies. The research in all three directions
will draw on broad toolkits from both Computer Science and Economics and
continue forging new connections between these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.