* 1942810
* CAREER: Understanding Intelligent Morphology and Enhancing Bio-Inspired Design through System-Level Modeling of the Insect Flight Mechanism
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Mark Jankauski, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 619,416.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will focus on cultivating a
deep understanding of the intelligent morphology of flying insects to guide
better engineering designs for flying robots. Intelligent morphology is the
concept that natural structures have evolved to reduce the energetic and
neurological inputs required to control them. Insects are masterful at
exploiting intelligent morphology, utilizing their body's flexibility to
interact effortlessly with their environments. This enables them to perform
complex tasks using a small fraction of the energy and cognitive power available
to other animals. By contrast, many engineered systems continue to employ rigid
components which relegate little function to passive mechanisms. This limits
their energy efficiency, increases controller complexity and reduces their
capacity to adapt to dynamic environments. Using the insect model, this project
will generate methodologies that incorporate intelligent morphology design
principles into engineered systems, which in turn can enhance their performance
and durability. Concurrently, this award will support the training of future
engineers in the fields of dynamics and vibrations through a state-of-the-art
Applied Dynamics educational laboratory. The Applied Dynamics educational
laboratory will also host annual week-long workshops focused on teaching the
fundamentals of vibrations to rural middle school students who currently have
limited access to science programs, as well as other students from
underrepresented groups. Current research topics will be integrated into these
educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program aims to
develop a data driven system-level model of the insect flight mechanism that is
comprised of the following components: the insect wing, abdomen, thorax, wing
hinge and wing costal break. The project focuses on the latter three. Data
collected from dynamical experiments on actual insects will drive component
model formulation, and benchtop experimental systems representative of each
component will be constructed in order to study biological phenomena in a
controlled environment. Through this integrative approach of analytical
modeling, biological testing and benchtop experimentation, this research will
demonstrate how (1) the flexible insect thorax minimizes the energetic costs of
locomotion, (2) the wing hinge simplifies flight control, and (3) wing buckling
enhances insect collision robustness. Derived models will be reduced order to
facilitate parametric studies and will account for complex phenomena associated
with viscoelasticity and nonlinearity. Such models can easily be extended to
inform bio-inspired technologies such as flapping wing micro air vehicles and
flapping airfoil energy harvesters. This project contributes to the Principle
Investigator’s long-term goal of elucidating the fundamental nature of
intelligent morphology in complex biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.