* 1942280
* CAREER: Harnessing the data revolution for predicting and managing ecosystem regime shifts
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Carl Boettiger, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 06/30/2025
* USD 504,335.00

Abrupt ecosystem shifts represent not only some of the most complex and
impactful changes in our environment, but also the most difficult to predict and
manage. Forest devastation by beetles and fire, the collapse of the Atlantic cod
fishery, or the outbreak of a disease may all be examples of such sudden
changes. Effective management of oceans and forests is impaired by abrupt shifts
between productivity and crisis. A revolution in how we collect data, from
satellites and micro-sensors to large-scale observatories will make new data-
hungry machine learning approaches to forecasting and management across these
scales feasible yet the net gain in clarity remains unknown. This research seeks
to evaluate how the tools of machine learning and artificial intelligence can
improve the ability to predict and manage sudden ecosystem change, and
understand the limits where it cannot. Empowering the next generation of
ecologists and environmental scientists to understand these tools sufficiently
to make informed decisions is key to realizing this vision. An integrated
research and education program will tackle these questions through an innovative
pedagogical approach that seeks to promote diversity at this interface between
data science and ecological and environmental issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research seeks to advance current knowledge in ecological forecasting and
decision-making by adapting and combining machine-learning algorithms with
mechanistically motivated models and emerging ecological data sources. The first
phase of the project assesses the effectiveness of recurrent neural network
architectures to predict dynamics in ecological systems that are capable of
sudden regime shifts – a setting where theory suggests existing machine learning
approaches are likely to fail. This research then seeks more robust forecast
design by combining machine learning approaches with mechanistic models guided
by ecological theory. The second phase of the project seeks to draw on emerging
methods in reinforcement learning to address common optimization problems in
conservation, such as determining sustainable harvest levels or the location of
protected areas. Here, research will blend recent developments in “deep”
reinforcement learning with process-based approaches to ecological management.
Both phases of this research will be supported by the development of open source
software tools for implementing these approaches in a wide variety of contexts.
Results of the project, including updates and links to resulting scientific
publications and software products can be found at
https://carlboettiger.info.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.