* 1942712
* CAREER: Leveraging Electroencephalography (EEG) Artifacts for Multimodal Neuromechanics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Helen Huang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2025
* USD 527,453.00

Electroencephalography (EEG) is widely used for studying the brain and
increasingly during walking and dynamic movements. While the intended use of EEG
is to non-invasively measure brain electrical activity, EEG actually records a
mixture of electrical signals from the brain, muscles, eyes, heart, and motion.
To study the brain, these artifact (non-brain) signals need to be removed and
are often then discarded, even though the artifact signals contain information
about other on-going processes occurring in the body. The goal of this CAREER
project is to develop new electrodes and methods for separating and then
leveraging EEG artifact (muscle, eye, heart, and motion) signals to predict
metrics such as gait symmetry, eye gaze, and metabolic cost during walking. This
project will establish that EEG alone can provide metrics from multiple
modalities for studying neuromechanics (i.e., interaction between neural
processes and biomechanics) of human locomotion. These efforts will help
increase understanding of the interplay between brain processes and the
biomechanics of walking, which may provide greater insight regarding the
underlying deficits in mobility and cognition that occur with aging and disease.
Throughout this project, educational and outreach activities will use EEG and
neuromechanics to provide girls and members of their support network (parents,
grandparents, older siblings, teachers, university students, etc.) shared STEM
experiences to learn about the brain, biomechanics, engineering, and human
movement. A key focus of this project is to help build and strengthen an
infrastructure of advocates to encourage, guide, and support girls and women to
succeed in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Investigatorâ€™s overarching research
goal is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the brain dynamics and
neuromechanics of human locomotion. The only way to form a comprehensive
understanding of brain dynamics during walking and locomotor adaptation is to
use multiple modalities that can measure brain activity and biomechanics during
actual walking within a single experiment, which is currently impractical or
infeasible. This CAREER project will develop new electroencephalography (EEG)
sensors and methods to leverage the multitude of source signals that are
recorded in EEG and then apply these technologies in a split-belt walking
experiment to study locomotor adaptation with a multimodal neuromechanics
perspective. The central hypothesis is that EEG artifact (muscle, eye, heart,
and motion) source signals obtained from blind source separation (independent
component analysis, ICA) will predict biomechanical metrics (gait symmetry, eye
gaze, and metabolic cost) better than raw EEG. The research plan has three
objectives. The FIRST Objective is to develop and evaluate multiple dual-sided
electrodes using benchtop experiments to identify the type of dual-sided
electrode that improves the quality of EEG source signals the most. Dual-sided
electrodes record traditional EEG signals on the scalp while simultaneously
measuring isolated motion artifact signals that can likely be removed from scalp
EEG, improving separation of brain and artifact source signals in EEG. The
SECOND Objective is to evaluate multiple machine learning techniques to predict
biomechanical metrics (gait symmetry, eye gaze fixation, and metabolic cost)
from EEG artifact source signals. Dual-layer EEG will be recorded as human
participants walk in different conditions that produce fixed values of gait
symmetry, eye gaze fixation, and metabolic cost in three separate experiments to
obtain training and testing data for the machine learning classifiers. The THIRD
Objective is to use the developed technologies to determine how electrocortical
dynamics, gait symmetry, eye gaze fixation, and metabolic cost correlate with
locomotor adaptation. An extended split-belt walking experiment will be
conducted where dual-layer EEG will be recorded as human participants walk on a
split-belt treadmill with one belt moving faster than the other belt for 45
minutes. The technologies developed in this project will establish that EEG
alone can provide new insights about neuromechanics from a comprehensive
perspective that integrates brain, kinematic, visual, and metabolic measures in
a single experiment. This project will also highlight that EEG has the potential
to be used for understanding more than just brain dynamics and will lay the
foundation for the field to develop additional technologies for multimodal
neuromechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.