* 1942916
* CAREER: Linking phloem anatomy and physiology with whole plant changes in resource allocation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Jessica Savage, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2025
* USD 643,810.00

Every year many trees produce new leaves in the spring, lose leaves in the fall,
and produce flowers and fruit. These changes involve the movement of resources
into and out of organs through the plant vascular system, often at a rapid pace
over a short period of time. Despite the importance of these changes to
horticulture, agriculture and forest regeneration, relatively little is known
about what happens in the vascular system during these time periods. This
project uses two new methods for studying carbon transport and vascular anatomy
that will address fundamental questions about sugar transport, its stability and
how it influences plant growth throughout the plant life cycle. This work is
critical to understanding the role of seasonality in determining plant growth
and reproduction and will advance the understanding of processes that influence
tree growth, crop production, and plant ecology. Being based at a primary
undergraduate institution, where research and education are strongly
intertwined, this project will train young scientists and mentor students in the
laboratory and classroom. Students will help organize a citizen science project
focused on plant seasonality and connecting the broader community with science
and the local environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
better define the role of the phloem in controlling resource allocation. There
are three central research aims. (1) Characterize how phloem sap flux and
anatomy relate to floral size and habitat affinity. This research will focus on
measuring carbon transport and characterizing the relationships between phloem
anatomy, floral development and floral size in at least thirty closely related
species. (2) Investigate whether phloem transport is coupled with nutrient re-
mobilization and pigment production during leaf senescence. This research will
examine the relationship between phloem transport velocity, leaf chemistry and
nutrient flux in senescing leaves. One part of this project will test whether
decreased phloem transport could trigger leaf color change. (3) Determine how
phloem anatomy influences seedling allocation and tree growth. This study will
investigate whether changes in phloem transport velocity can be predicted during
seedling development based on vascular architecture. It will also determine how
phloem anatomy scales with height using new immunolocalization protocols
developed by the principal investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.