* 1942755
* CAREER: Computational Model of Perceived Color and Appearance in Augmented Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Michael Murdoch, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2025
* USD 343,006.00

Augmented reality (AR) allows a viewer to visualize digital, virtual objects
mixed into their real-world environment. Different from virtual reality, which
displays virtual content but blocks out the view of the real world, AR enables
mixtures such as a virtual representation of a remote person sitting in a real
conference room with other people. Other examples of AR applications include:
(i) science students visualizing the invisible flow of electricity moving
through wires in their circuits or visualize unseen forces such as magnetism or
atmospheric currents in their real-world environment; (ii) doctors overlaying an
X-ray-like view of internal organs during exams or laparoscopic surgery. This
project aims to answer a complex and important question: how does human visual
system perceive the mix of virtual AR content and the real world? The
researchers will build a model of perception of the visual characteristics of AR
systems, including color, brightness, depth, and graphics quality, with data
from experiments that test visual responses. The model will mimic visual
adaptation to different lighting environments, such as indoors versus outdoors,
as well as compensations for reflections and other interactions with the
environment. The project will result in improved AR system designs, including
responsive algorithms that react to changes in the environment and anticipate
the visual perception of the user. It will also result in a better scientific
understanding of the human visual system, which has the potential to improve
many other visual interfaces in addition to AR. Integrating the project with
education, the researchers will develop and test AR learning modules for
university courses in science, math, and art, leading to improved learning. By
improving the understanding of visual perception in AR, this project will help
enable visually accurate, more comfortable, and more responsive AR display
systems. These have the potential to enhance the visual sense in applications
such as education, medicine, and transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to build a robust computational model of visual appearance in AR
systems that takes into account visual adaptation, cognitive interpretations,
and the optical interaction between virtually displayed content and real objects
and illumination in the environment. Visual experiments will employ
psychophysical scaling, color matching via adjustment, and constant stimuli
tasks to understand the influence of the luminance, color, contrast, complexity,
and depth of both the AR virtual foreground and the real-world background. A
model of color and material appearance in transparent AR environments will build
on the working hypothesis that the perceived color is a non-physical addition of
foreground and background whose weightings depend on cognitive discounting of
the layers. Additional experiments will measure visual luminance and chromatic
adaptation in temporally changing AR viewing environments, for instance, asking
observers to adjust displayed AR and real-world stimuli to be achromatic in
different lighting situations and at different adaptation times. The physical
lighting environment, including the location, intensity, and color of light
sources and bright objects, will be sensed with cameras and color sensors as
input to responsive display algorithms utilizing the developed model of visual
adaptation and appearance in AR. The responsive algorithms will ensure robust,
predictable color appearance and display. During the project, several AR
education applications incorporating the research results will be developed for
validation and testing. Classroom assessments by students and faculty will
evaluate these applications for validating the research results. AR will be
adopted in the research group’s graduate color science courses as a tool for
demonstrating adaptation and surround effects and as an environment for
practicing psychophysical methods with experiments related to the ongoing
research. The researchers will share their computational model and experimental
findings via publication and professional organizations, with the goal of
meaningful implementation both in AR system design and AR applications. Further,
the impact of AR and the fascinating topic of color science will be shared with
the community through the University’s open houses and the recruiting of
students and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.