* 1942305
* CAREER: Design, Analysis and Applications of mmWave Full-Duplex Wireless
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Ehsan Aryafar, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 01/31/2025
* USD 407,169.00

Wireless data traffic is expected to increase exponentially over the next
decade. This is because of the dramatic growth in the number of wirelessly
connected devices as well as emerging applications that rely on wireless
communication such as wirelessly connected vehicles, aerial drones, and virtual
or augmented reality headsets. In order to meet this massive demand in wireless
capacity, the wireless industry is moving to next generation technology that
will use millimeter-wave (mmWave) frequencies to communicate with mobile
clients. However, mmWave systems cannot quickly adapt the links to user
mobility. MmWave signals are also susceptible to blockages, e.g., the human body
alone can significantly weaken the wireless signal. MmWave networks finally
raise additional cost challenges as network operators need to deploy a high
number of mmWave cells to ensure sufficient coverage. The objective of this
project is to design full-duplex mmWave radios and develop new communication
algorithms and network architectures to address mmWave’s mobility, blockages,
and cost challenges. The findings from this project will be integrated into an
education plan that emphasizes the role of wireless communication and networking
in emerging Internet based technologies. This plan includes new courses for
undergraduate and graduate students as well as internship opportunities and
educational workshops for high school students and underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in developing and
prototyping new radios, communication algorithms, and network architectures that
enable and support full-duplex in mmWave bands. The first thrust will develop
new beamforming architectures to enable mmWave full-duplex radios. The second
thrust will result in new control channel designs and feedback mechanisms to
quickly adapt the links to mobility. The third research thrust will result in
new network deployment architectures and multi-connectivity solutions that
increase robustness of mmWave networks to blockages and reduce the cost of
network deployment. Each of these research thrusts will be evaluated through
theoretical analysis, simulations with standardized models, and implementation
on programmable hardware with mmWave radios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.