* 1942856
* CAREER: Generalizable and Reliable Behavior Synthesis in Uncertain Open-World Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Siddharth Srivastava, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2025
* USD 562,705.00

There is broad consensus on the need for AI systems that are reliable and useful
in situations going beyond carefully controlled environments. The focus of this
project is on developing autonomous agents that can plan and act safely in
“open-world” settings, where the agent has limited information about the
environment where it will be used. Such agents may be uncertain about the
numbers, types and identities of objects that they may encounter, as well as
about the relationships between them. Furthermore, the nature of uncertainty
about these properties may be “non-stationary”, meaning the environment may
change during the agent’s deployment. The outcomes of this project will help
increase the scope and applicability of AI systems by developing new methods for
computing safe and reliable AI behavior in realistic non-stationary, open-world
settings. In order to make AI systems more broadly accessible, this project will
also develop an autonomous interactive tutorial system for teaching students
about different types of AI planning problems and their solution
representations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will develop new
principles and analytical methods for understanding the computational nature of
open-world planning problems. It will engender broad convergence of principles
and algorithms from logic-based and probabilistic approaches to AI, as well as
from theoretical computer science. In particular, it will develop new
representations for efficiently expressing qualitative and decision-theoretic
formulations of open-world planning problems along with efficient algorithms and
implementations for solving them while using abstractions for efficiency and
generalizability. New methods will be developed to utilize statistical learning
techniques for enhancing computational efficiency while ensuring that the
computed agent behavior meets desired requirements on safety and reliability in
open-world settings. The results and progress made during the project will be
evaluated on physical and simulated testbeds featuring contemporary robotics
platforms. Problem generators and simulated testbeds will be made publicly
available as benchmarks to aid reproducibility and spur progress in this area of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.