* 1942668
* CAREER: Correlated Motions in Protein Allostery
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Nozomi Ando, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 12/31/2024
* USD 938,217.00

Enzymatic activity is tightly regulated so that cellular resources are not
wasted by the production of unnecessary components. Allostery is a common
mechanism of enzyme regulation that involves sensing whether a modulator is
bound at a site distinct from the site of catalysis. The information that the
modulator is present must be transmitted through correlated motions to the
active site, where depending on the function of the modulator, catalytic
activity is either stimulated or inhibited. The goal of this project is to
understand the correlated motions that give rise to protein allostery and relate
them to protein sequence. To do this, the project will take an unprecedented
approach that interfaces advanced X-ray scattering methods with complementary
techniques, such as single-particle cryo-electron microscopy, and computational
bioinformatics. An integral part of this project is to develop a modern
structural biology course that incorporates active learning techniques to equip
students with the technical knowledge needed to tackle compelling,
interdisciplinary problems of the future. A career-focused seminar series will
also be developed to educate STEM undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdocs to navigate their career paths and develop creative uses of their
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An ideal family of enzymes for this study is the
ribonucleotide reductase family, which performs a key reaction for all DNA-based
life. Because of its importance in central metabolism, these enzymes have
evolved multiple levels of complex allostery. To understand how enzyme activity
is regulated, single-particle methods will be used to probe correlated motions
within equilibrium states defined by small-angle X-ray scattering. Evolutionary
correlations of the protein sequences will be determined by statistical methods
and tested for significance by diffuse X-ray scattering. Finally, ancestral
sequence reconstruction methods will be applied to understand how such
allosteric mechanisms emerge and evolve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.