* 1942912
* CAREER: Developing Elementary Preservice Teachers' Understandings and Abilities to Support Emerging Bilingual Students Scientific Sensemaking
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* María González-Howard, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 12/31/2024
* USD 893,192.00

This project will study ways to improve classroom instruction grounded in
science practices to address inequities in science education for emerging
bilingual students. Currently, many elementary school teachers are unfamiliar
with science practices and are unprepared to teach emerging bilingual students
since they never received training in either area. This project will address
this lack of training and create research-based resources for teacher educators
that focus on developing preservice elementary teachers’ understanding and
abilities to support emerging bilingual students’ engagement in science
practices. The study will be guided by the following objectives, which are to
research: (1) the understandings of exemplary elementary teachers around
science, language, and emerging bilingual students, and the relationship between
these understandings and their instructional practices for supporting student
sensemaking; (2) preservice teachers’ understandings and practices related to
supporting emerging bilingual students’ sensemaking; (3) the development of an
elementary science methods course, and educator resources, that support teacher
learning about the role of language in science practices and approaches for
supporting emerging bilingual students’ sensemaking; and (4) the impact of this
course, and its teacher educator resources, on preservice teachers’
understandings and instructional practices. With little prior research having
looked at the intersection of science and language learning, this project will
advance knowledge in this regard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a mixed-methods
design, this project will investigate interrelated aspects of teacher
understandings, teacher practice, and teacher learning around supporting
emerging bilingual students’ scientific sensemaking. Phase 1 of the project
includes examining the instructional approaches around science practices of
exemplary elementary school teachers that work in different types of school
contexts with emerging bilingual students. Such strategies will go beyond
traditional subject-matter knowledge and skills to include teacher encouragement
of students using linguistic and nonlinguistic modes for communicating ideas;
development of a deeper understanding of natural scientific phenomena; and
engagement with and valuing of students’ families, communities, and lived
experiences. These combined efforts will capture and illustrate compelling
examples of possible instantiations of engagement in science practices while
being mindful of and responsive to emerging bilingual students’ language assets,
needs, and English development. Findings from Phase 1 will be used for Phase 2
of this project, which focuses on iteratively designing and analyzing a science
methods course and resources for preservice teachers’ pedagogical development
across science and language learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER program is
a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support
of junior faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding
research, excellent education, and the integration of education and research
within the context of the mission of their organizations. This project is
supported by NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. DRK-12 seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.