* 1942019
* CAREER: Understanding spatiotemporal construction of vertebrate enteric nervous system
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Rosa Uribe, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 03/31/2025
* USD 741,354.00

How cells self-assemble into complex tissues is a fundamental question in
biology. The complex tissue system studied here, the Enteric Nervous System
(ENS), functions autonomously within the walls of the gut, regulating intestinal
movements and homeostatic functions. While it is generally understood how the
ENS functions, currently very little is known about the processes ENS progenitor
cells use to self-assemble into nervous tissue and form circuits during
embryological development. Greater knowledge about how the ENS is generated will
facilitate advances in tissue engineering strategies, as well as helping us to
better understand how cells get sculpted into specialized tissues. The research
addresses two fundamental issues: 1) the cellular behaviors that orchestrate the
very first steps in vertebrate ENS formation, and 2) the genetic and molecular
mechanisms that underlie these initial steps of ENS construction. Experiments
capitalize on the ease of manipulation and optical transparency of zebrafish
embryos to quantitatively and mechanistically analyze ENS formation starting
from its earliest progenitor cell populations. In addition to supporting
graduate student training in quantitative biology and neuroscience, this award
will support both the academic-year and summer training of economically-
disadvantaged undergraduate students, concomitant with the arrival of the first
class of undergraduate students admitted to attend Rice University tuition-free.
Additionally, a novel course module will be implemented for students to learn
effective scientific communication via the development of critical writing and
visual/oral presentation skills; and hands-on zebrafish experimental workshops
for local community-college students will be developed and delivered in an
outreach capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How and when neural progenitor cells
transform into vertebrate enteric nervous system (ENS) neurons has been
difficult to study in vivo in mammals, due to the relative inaccessibility of
in-utero embryos at the necessary stages of development, and the internal
position of the gut within those embryos. The research uses optically-clear,
externally-developing zebrafish embryos to overcome these barriers, and identify
how enteric neural progenitor cells (ENPs) migrate and embed within their native
gut microenvironment. ENP cells can be directly tracking and experimentally
manipulated to a degree that is infeasible in other systems. Experiments will
quantitatively and functionally analyze ENP cell transformations into ENS using
cutting-edge single-cell genomics, high-resolution time-lapse confocal
microscopy, computational analyses and quantitative dissection of cellular
behaviors over the full course of ENS development. The results from these
studies will be used to create mechanistic models to describe the molecular and
cellular emergence of ENS from ENPs along the gut microenvironment. Taken
together, these results will provide a novel mechanistic framework for
understanding how ENS emergence gets orchestrated, and will help transform our
scientific understanding of how progenitor cells are sculpted to form
specialized cell networks and tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.