* 1942620
* CAREER: Evolution and Genetic Control of Variation in Meiotic Recombination
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Bethany Dumont, Jackson Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,234,987.00

Meiosis gives rise to sperm and egg cells with precisely half the amount of DNA
as other cells of the body. During meiosis, chromosomes with similar DNA
sequence become physically joined and swap pieces of their DNA. This process is
called recombination, and it produces new DNA combinations and can drive
evolutionary change. Recombination also assures that the DNA is correctly
partitioned into sperm and egg cells. Defects in recombination can result in
sperm or eggs with too little or too much DNA. Such genetic errors can cause
infertility, lead to miscarriage, and contribute to developmental disability in
humans Both the frequency and the placement of recombination events along
chromosomes are surprisingly variable between males and females, between
individuals, and between species. This research program aims to identify the
causes of natural variation in recombination. The discovered mechanisms of
recombination variation may have general effects on fertility. Consequently,
findings from this work could lead to the discovery of new targets for improving
species of agricultural and economic importance as well as clinical tests for
identifying patients with genetic mechanisms of infertility. This project will
also benefit society by supporting a coordinated series of educational
activities that will create new evolutionary genomics education and research
opportunities in Maine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine
evolutionary quantitative genomic methods and cytogenetic approaches to dissect
the root causes of recombination rate variation in male and female individuals,
and at the population and subspecies levels. The planned research will take
advantage of established tools and resources in house mice (Mus musculus) to map
genes that contribute to variation in recombination at multiple levels. The
proposed experiments will test new hypotheses about the evolutionary forces that
shape variation in recombination and will explore the relationship between
recombination and fertility. These research activities will provide a platform
for postdoctoral training and will synergize with substantial teaching,
mentoring, and outreach efforts. Specifically, the proposed project will (1)
develop new course content and materials to advance the state of genomics
education in Maine high schools; (2) create mentored research opportunities for
undergraduate students; and (3) support the PI’s development of a new graduate-
level course in evolutionary and population genomics. Overall, this career
development program will prepare an early-stage female investigator to make
substantial life-long contributions to science through original research,
mentoring, and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.