* 1942250
* CAREER: The Developmental Regulation of Amniote Skull Diversity
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Thomas Sanger, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 01/31/2025
* USD 964,589.00

As vertebrates moved into new ecological spaces the skull diversified in size,
shape, and became adorned with ornaments and weapons. It is no surprise,
therefore, that the skull has fascinated researchers across the entirety of
Biology over the past century. In more recent decades, understanding the
developmental bases of craniofacial diversity has been a major goal of
Evolutionary-developmental biology. However, a paucity of experimental systems
among amniotes – reptiles, birds, and mammals – has made it difficult to create
a synthetic understanding of how developmental patterning has changed during the
remarkable diversification in skull form. In this research Dr. Sanger will
dissect skull development in an emerging model lizard, Anolis sagrei. Sanger and
his team will investigate the expression and function of three core signaling
pathways known to be involved in skull development in other amniote species.
Through this research they will discover whether the diversity in skull form is
due to minor or major changes in craniofacial patterning. Capitalizing on the
inherent interest in the vertebrate skull, Sanger will also team with a group of
professional educators to develop "Getting Ahead in Life: Investigations into
the Vertebrate Skull", cutting-edge, transdisciplinary learning modules targeted
to upper level high school and undergraduate biology. Embedded within these
modules will be interviews and real-world data from leaders in the field of
craniofacial biology, especially people from groups underrepresented in STEM.
Together, Sanger’s efforts will significantly advance the field of craniofacial
development and help motivate the next generation of students to pursue
education in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most morphologically
and developmentally complex anatomical systems is the vertebrate skull. Although
there is coarse similarity in cranial embryology among these groups, there is
growing, yet disparate, evidence to suggest that cranial patterning has evolved
over both small and large evolutionary scales. To date, however, our
understanding of facial development has primarily arisen from only a few
experimentally accessible avian and mammalian species, making it difficult to
make broad generalizations about the evolution of cranial development.
Uncovering the function of key patterning genes in previously undescribed clades
is a critical step towards polarizing the evolution of cranial patterning
mechanisms and to help elucidate the ancestral character state of amniotes. In
this research Sanger and his team will investigate the expression and function
of three core signalizing pathways involved in craniofacial development:
Hedgehog, Fibroblast growth Factor, and Bone morphogenetic protein. This team
will use new tools to manipulate the expression of these pathways in embryos of
Anolis sagrei, an emerging model system in Developmental Biology, but a
historically important species in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. With this
baseline information in hand, Sanger will turn towards evolutionary patterns of
skull diversity on a smaller scale, among Anolis lizards. Anolis lizards vary
extensively in their facial length. Multiple lineages have independently
converged on short-faced and long-faced morphologies. Sanger and his team will
also determine the developmental bases of these convergent phenotypes. Combined,
this research will determine how the processes regulating craniofacial
development evolve over different evolutionary time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.