* 1942822
* CAREER: Understanding regenerative signaling using planarian flatworms
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Rachel Roberts-Galbraith, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2025
* USD 422,760.00

Nontechnical paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on understanding
regeneration, the process by which organisms regrow missing parts after injury.
Planarians, which are freshwater flatworms, can regenerate all of their body
parts after nearly any injury. Because of their extraordinary regenerative
ability, planarians serve as a useful animal for studying how successful
regeneration occurs. The research proposed here will uncover chemical signals
that allow cells to communicate with one another during regeneration.
Experiments will also test the hypothesis that specific types of cells,
including neurons and cells of the connective tissue, promote planarian
regeneration. A better understanding of regeneration in simple organisms could
one day lead to new ideas for treatment of human injuries or diseases that
involve cell damage. Finally, because planarian regeneration is accessible to
students early in their research careers, the education components of this award
will introduce first-year undergraduate students to research and provide local
K-12 teachers with opportunities to learn about planarians and to bring these
fascinating animals into their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;Regeneration involves the regrowth of tissue after injury
through an intricate and finely tuned set of molecular and cellular events. The
research component of this CAREER award investigates how cells in highly
regenerative animals detect injury and trigger the appropriate regenerative
response. In this proposal, planarian flatworms—animals with extraordinary
regenerative capacity—are used as a model system. Though planarian flatworms
have been established as a valuable model system for the study of regeneration,
the identity and source(s) of signals that initiate and modulate regeneration
remain unclear. This proposal takes a multi-pronged approach to discover novel
signaling mechanisms that regulate regeneration and to identify tissues that
serve as critical, underappreciated sources of regenerative signals. The
research aims in this project are: (1) to uncover roles for the nervous system
in regeneration and stem cell biology; (2) to explore a novel population of
cells in the parenchyma (the connective tissue of the planarian) and test the
hypothesis that these cells influence stem cells; and (3) to identify
potentially novel regenerative signaling mechanisms by characterizing the
nuclear hormone receptor complement of planarians. These efforts are integrated
with efforts to train undergraduate researchers early in their college careers
and outreach projects aimed at introducing K-12 students to planarians and
regeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.