* 1942590
* CAREER: MemMax: Maximizing Cyberinfrastructure Memory Utilization via Hardware Acceleration for OS-level Memory Utilization Management
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Xun Jian, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 04/30/2025
* USD 424,705.00

The performance growth of cyberinfrastructure systems, such as supercomputers
and computing data centers, is important to US economy and well-being; it helps
boost scientific and engineering productivity, which is vital for US global
competitiveness and helps grow the US digital economy, which is an important
part of overall US economy. Until recently, Moore’s Law guided the exponential
growth of hardware resources under the same cost and has been a key driving
factor behind cyberinfrastructure performance growth. As the growth predicted by
Moore’s Law slows down, sustaining performance gains requires
cyberinfrastructure to maximize the utilization of its available hardware
resources, especially computing memory. Currently, cyberinfrastructure systems
often only utilize up to a small fraction of their memory compared to what is
physically and/or theoretically possible. As memory primarily serves as a
performance enhancer, memory under-utilization causes under-performance and
unnecessary investment in additional computing resources. This project seems to
address this problem by identifying ways to better use memory resources in
supercomputers and cloud computing systems, thereby increasing the efficiency
and performance of these systems. The project, MemMax, actively involves both
graduate and undergraduate students, along with outreach to K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MemMaX explores how to co-design CPU and OS to
maximize memory utilization in cyberinfrastructure systems to boost their
performance both user-transparently and substantially by a factor of up to 4.
MemMax consists of two research thrusts, one targeting HPC systems and targeting
cloud systems, as these two types of systems have different causes for their
memory underutilization. The research methodology consists of real-system
measurements to characterize the behavior of existing systems, hardware
prototyping to valid the functional correctness of MemMax, and architectural
simulations to quantify the performance improvement MemMax
achieves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.