* 1942878
* CAREER: Practical Coded Computation Mechanisms for Distributed Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Hulya Seferoglu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2025
* USD 396,907.00

A massive amount of data is generated with the emerging Internet of Things (IoT)
including self-driving cars, drones, robots, smartphones, wireless sensors,
smart meters, health monitoring devices. These data are expected to be processed
in real-time in many time sensitive IoT applications, which is extremely
challenging if not impossible with existing centralized cloud. For example,
self-driving cars generate around 10GB of data per mile. Transmitting such
massive data from end devices (such as self-driving cars) to the centralized
cloud and expecting timely processing are not realistic with limited bandwidth
between the end users and the centralized cloud. A distributed computing system,
where computationally intensive aspects are distributively and securely
processed at the end devices with possible help from edge servers (close to end-
devices) and the cloud, might be a better approach to solving this problem. In
this context, this award investigates practical distributed computing mechanisms
that securely harvest heterogeneous resources including computing power,
storage, battery, networking resources, etc., scattered across end devices, edge
servers, and cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a unique
attempt to explore the opportunities, as well as the limitations, of the new
theory of coded computation, which studies the design of erasure and error-
correcting codes through data redundancy, from a practical perspective in future
distributed computing systems. In a time of active discussion about the future
of distributed computing systems and edge computing, this project sets out to
understand how coded computation fits into this picture. The focus of the
project is on (i) characterizing the cost-benefit trade-offs of coded
computation for practical edge computing systems, and developing networking
algorithms and protocols to make the coded computation framework adaptive to
heterogeneous and dynamic nature of edge computing systems and resources, (ii)
exploring coded computation for distributed learning at the edge to reduce
communication cost and provide resilience, privacy and security, and (iii)
developing delay-sensitive coded computation by exploiting the multiple trade-
offs among latency, amount of redundancy, privacy and security for coded
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.