* 1942865
* CAREER: Biomineralized architected metamaterials: structural design and formation mechanisms
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Ling Li, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2025
* USD 415,906.00

Abstract (non-technical)&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to geological minerals,
biominerals are mineral-based structures formed by organisms. Seashells, our
teeth and bone are good examples of biominerals. While we are often amazed by
geological minerals’ various specific crystal geometries, biominerals are
usually characterized by their arbitrary yet often complex three-dimensional
(3D) morphologies. Moreover, the internal microscopic structures of many
biomineral-based structures are also extremely intricate and carefully organized
in 3D. This hierarchical structural complexity leads to biomineralized
structures’ remarkable mechanical strength and durability, despite the fact that
the minerals themselves are intrinsically brittle. Currently we have limited
knowledge in explaining how biominerals’ complex 3D microstructures and
morphologies are emerged and regulated. This award, by using the biomineralized
skeleton in a starfish as a model system, aims to characterize its complex 3D
microstructure as well as the underlying formation mechanisms. The skeleton of
starfish consists of hundreds of millimeter-sized biomineralized elements, known
as ossicles, which are embedded within its soft body. This unique skeletal
design allows the starfish to be flexible during locomotion but also to become
stiff when required. The ossicles are characterized by their lattice-like porous
microstructure based on the single-crystalline calcite, which makes them
lightweight, strong, and damage tolerant. The new knowledge gained from this
study on the biomineralization mechanisms in starfish will provide us a better
understanding of the 3D structural evolution processes for echinoderms, or
possibly, even other invertebrate and vertebrate biomineralized tissues. The
insights on the multiscale structure, formation mechanisms and mechanical
properties obtained in this study for starfish’ biomineralized skeletons will
provide important lessons for the design and fabrication of synthetic low-
density materials and thus benefit the U.S. economy and society. Aligned with
the research goal in generating new knowledge of biomineralized materials, the
proposed education and outreach programs will improve the quality of STEM
education both locally and national-wide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
(technical)&lt;br/&gt;Starfish form biomineralized millimeter-sized skeletal
elements, known as ossicles, for protection, locomotion and other purposes. Like
other echinoderms’ skeletons, these ossicles consist of magnesium-bearing
calcite with a small amount of organic materials embedded in the mineral matrix.
Intriguingly, despite their single-crystal nature, ossicles are characterized by
their complex bicontinuous network-like microstructure, known as stereom. The
goal of this proposed CAREER program is to understand how these biominerals’
complex morphology is formed and controlled in 3D and how such structural
control impacts their mechanical performance. We carefully select the periodic,
lattice-like stereom structure, termed as biomineralized architected
metamaterial (BAM), from a model starfish system. The PI will first quantify the
multiscale 3D morphology of the fully formed BAM structure in terms of its 3D
lattice network, surface curvature, and spatial distribution of organic
materials within minerals and then investigate the 3D structural evolution,
mineral crystallography, and distribution of mineral precursors at the growth
front of forming ossicles through novel tomography imaging techniques. Finally,
the mechanical effects of multiscale 3D structural control will be established
via combined experimental testing and computational modeling. The subject of
this study is an attractive topic for students and the broader public, and the
proposed education and outreach programs will integrate material science,
biology, and engineering to align with the research goal in better understanding
biological materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.