* 1942957
* CAREER:Experimental Studies of Protein Thermodynamics Facilitated by NMR with Reverse Micelles
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Nathaniel Nucci, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 12/31/2024
* USD 749,406.00

Though all cells are composed primarily of water, the environment inside the
cell is quite heterogeneous, containing nanoscale spaces created by membrane-
bound compartments and by high concentrations of large molecules including
nucleic acids (DNA/RNA) and proteins. Generally, studies of proteins have been
performed in dilute solutions because the cellular environment is too complex
for most experimental approaches, thus the effects of this environment on
protein structure and function remains poorly understood. This project uses
nanobubbles, called reverse micelles, to mimic the cellular environment so that
the influence of spatial restriction and interfacial interactions on proteins
can be experimentally dissected. These experimental measurements are being
compared to computer simulations of proteins inside these nanobubbles to produce
a unified view of environmental effects on proteins. This approach is expected
to provide a foundation for developing improved predictive models for protein
function inside cells, particularly when the function of the protein is related
to its structural stability. These studies are integrated with experiential
education and mentorship of undergraduate students in the laboratory and the
classroom including the development of a new research-based laboratory for an
upper-level biophysics course aimed at helping students learn science by doing
science. The project is designed to offer research experience to these students
in a fashion that scales the complexity of the experiments and modeling as the
students advance through their undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, the relevance of the
complex intracellular milieu in modulating protein structural stability and
function has become clear. As a result, the paucity of predictive models for
these effects represents an important biophysical knowledge gap. This research
program combines nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) with reverse micelle (RM)
encapsulation of proteins to measure previously challenging thermodynamic
environmental influences on protein structure and function. RMs are surfactant-
stabilized complexes that spontaneously organize to encapsulate a nanoscale
bubble of water in a nonpolar solvent. RMs have been shown to facilitate study
of proteins by NMR including the ability to directly modulate their structural
stability by varying the size of the bubble or the nature of the water-
surfactant interface. This program pursues three specific avenues of inquiry to
provide novel insight on 1. Weak electrostatic and hydrophobic forces between
proteins and interfaces, 2. The magnitude of the hydrophobic effect, and 3. The
effect of excluded volume on protein dynamics and disorder. Using a suite of
model proteins and the tumor suppressor protein p53, which contains both highly
stable folded domains and intrinsically disordered regions, these studies
harness the tunability of reverse micelle systems to dissect the environmental
thermodynamic driving forces of protein structure and quantify their
differential contributions in unprecedented detail. These studies are integrated
with an upper-division molecular biophysics undergraduate course via a research-
based learning experience in which students design, execute, and report a novel
study on the impact of crowding molecules on protein structural stability. The
practical experience gained is reinforced through a mentorship program that
matches students from underrepresented groups with STEM professionals (mentors)
in their field of interest, thereby aiming to increase the percentage of
underrepresented STEM graduates that successfully pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.