* 1942228
* CAREER: Leveraging Objective Measures for Developers' Cognitive Load to Identify and Quantify the Impact of Design, Coding, and Review Practices.
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Venera Arnaoudova, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 393,266.00

Software engineers spend the majority of their time reading and understanding
software that they or someone else has written. Several catalogs have emerged
from academia and industry documenting good and poor practices to make software
more flexible, modular, reusable, and understandable. However, those practices
are based on experts' opinions, i.e., researchers and software engineers, and
not on empirical evidence. Thus, very little is known about the effect of those
practices on developers when they read and understand software. With the recent
adoption of high-resolution medical imaging technologies in software
engineering, the investigator proposes to bring the science behind "best and
worst practices" by empirically validating the impact of existing software
practices on program comprehension. Moreover, the investigator will identify new
practices using scientific methods as opposed to experts' opinions. The proposed
work is expected to facilitate new research in the field of software engineering
and beyond as it provides a general methodology to objectively measure program
comprehension and to empirically evaluate and identify existing and new
practices. The outcomes of this research will result in guidelines for students
and software engineers on how to write software that minimizes their effort
during program comprehension. Once the results have been disseminated and
adopted by software engineers, they will be more productive, thus improving
their well-being at the workplace. With support from this award, the
investigator will integrate the results from this research in her undergraduate
and graduate courses where she would teach student how to write software that is
easier to understand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to
bring science behind "best" and "worst" software practices by 1) using direct
and objective measures to empirically evaluate the impact of existing practices
on developers' cognitive load and 2) using those direct and objective measures
to empirically identify new practices. In particular, the award targets good and
poor software practices (i.e., patterns and antipatterns, respectively)
pertaining to the design, code, and reviews of software in the context of bug
localization and code review tasks. The central hypothesis is that software
development practices impact the cognitive load that developers experience while
understanding source code. To test the central hypothesis, mainly a series of
controlled experiments will be conducted using a functional near-infrared
spectroscopy (fNIRS) and an eyetracking devices. Once the impact of software
development practices on program comprehension has been determined, the
investigator will recommend guidelines for how to develop and maintain software
in a way that 1) it will require less mental effort to be understood by the
original developers and by software maintainers; and 2) it will be easier to
maintain. The results of the proposed research are also expected to be
integrated into automatic recommender tools to improve their recommendations
based on empirically validated practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.