* 1942901
* CAREER: Scalable Active Metamaterials for Extreme Sound Manipulation in Arbitrary Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Bogdan-Ioan Popa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/28/2025
* USD 620,251.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will enable new generations
of large-scale synthetic materials with embedded active elements (i.e., active
metamaterials) which will provide unparalleled control over the propagation of
sound. This research has the potential to advance key sectors in healthcare,
automotive, and aerospace industries. For example, the sought materials will
enable noise mitigation through sound guiding that will surpass the performance
of acoustic absorption, which will lead to quieter living spaces. Similarly,
these materials will enable aberration-free reconfigurable acoustic lenses for
improved medical ultrasound diagnostic and treatment methods. Recent studies
suggest that active metamaterials may be the feasible way to obtain the acoustic
properties necessary in these applications; however, fundamental research is
required to realize the benefits of active metamaterials. This project will
derive the knowledge necessary to create metamaterials with currently
unattainable acoustic parameters needed for extreme sound manipulation. The
educational objective of this project is to strengthen wave dynamics education
and highlight the societal benefits realized by wave engineering through
internships for underrepresented students, K-12 outreach, curriculum
development, and involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in research
and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will systematically explore a
comprehensive metamaterial synthesis method that translates desired material
properties into spatial distributions of polarized inclusions realized by active
unit cells. The method will leverage a model that describes matter in terms of
arrays of point-like polarized sources and will help answer fundamental
scientific questions in metamaterial research including: 1) Is a desired
distribution of acoustic properties realizable and, if so, what structures
provide these properties? 2) What is the trade-off between the dynamic
performance and stability of metamaterials made of large numbers of cells
strongly interacting with each other and with the arbitrary, dynamically
changing surrounding environment? 3) How robust is the dynamic performance and
stability to perturbations from the ideal metamaterial properties? 4) How
accurately can one realize desired acoustic parameters in metamaterials composed
of large numbers of active cells? 5) How are large metamaterials efficiently
tuned at the unit cell level? This project will provide the PI with the path
towards a research and teaching career devoted to exploring fundamental wave
engineering principles for improved human habitats and living
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.