* 1942960
* CAREER: Detection and localization of communication signals during motion in the electrosensory system.
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Gary Marsat, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2025
* USD 575,000.00

Localizing the source of a signal is difficult, particularly when the signal is
faint and moving. The ability of the sensory system to extract spatial
information has been explored in various systems but scientists still do not
understand well the mechanisms that allow this localization process to remain
accurate in challenging conditions, particularly when movements occur. In order
to identify generic mechanisms that enhance the localization process across
sensory systems, a unique organism will be examined. Weakly electric fish must
detect and localize other individuals based on the electric signal they emit.
The localization process has similarities with both the visual system, where a
map is created at the first level of the sensory system, and the auditory system
where location is computed by comparing inputs at the two ears. Since these fish
localize each other while moving, they are well suited to address the question:
are there generic mechanisms, similar across modalities, that enhance the
localization process in difficult and changing conditions. Experiments
characterizing spatial interactions of these fish, physiological recordings that
identify neural mechanisms and modelling studies recapitulating the proposed
neural dynamic will allow a deeper understanding of this localization process. A
robotic interface will allow a precise interaction with the experimental fish
and will also permit to get high school students involved in the project by
having them contribute to the design of the robotic component and then
participate in its operation during experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to determine how motion influences the coding of weak
electrosensory signals and how network dynamic is adapted to realistic movement
patterns. Social interactions among these fish rely on the detection and
localization of the electric field each fish generates. Although temporal coding
of conspecific signals is thoroughly understood, nothing is known about how the
location of a conspecific is extracted and how motion affects the detection and
localization process. The experiments will provide new insight into sensory
processing by showing how realistic signals -that include movement- are encoded
and how network dynamic is adapted to typical movements in order to support the
efficient extraction of weak cues. &lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis is that the
encoding of both the presence and location of a conspecific will be enhanced
when sender and receiver move in a realistic manner. It is further hypothesized
that feedback inputs will sharpen the spatial representation and enhance the
detectability of moving signals. To test the hypotheses, the project is divided
in 3 aspects: the signal, the coding accuracy and the influence of feedback. The
sensory flow experienced by the animal will be characterized via behavioral
recordings and 3D modelling of the sensory environment. Neural recordings in the
primary sensory area will allow clarifying how signal coding is affected by
motion. Finally, the network mechanisms involved in shaping sensory processing
will be identified by pharmacological manipulation of feedback pathways and
large-scale modelling of the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.