* 1942806
* CAREER: Heterogeneous Non-orthogonal Wireless Communications Enhanced by Unified SDR - Deep Learning Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Hun-Seok Kim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Enabling energy-efficient, ubiquitous connectivity is a critical task for the
highly anticipated concept of pervasive Internet-of-Things, where massively
deployed heterogeneous Internet-of-Things devices are seamlessly interconnected
without the need of manual network management. The outcomes of this research can
expedite the vision of trillions of Internet-of-Things devices and enable
heterogeneous classes of new applications such as energy-harvesting and
wirelessly-connected smart-dust devices, autonomous aerial and ground vehicles
with ultra-reliable low latency communications, and intelligent automated
factories with deep learning-assisted collaborative networks in highly congested
channels. The proposed research targets orders-of-magnitude reduction in power
consumption and complexity for wireless connectivity to realize ultra-low cost,
ultra-small, disposable, and ubiquitous wireless Internet-of-Things devices.
Leading into the realistic world of energy-autonomous Internet-of-Things
platforms, this program investigates new ultra-low power wireless connectivity
solutions assisted by novel digital signal processor architectures optimized for
software-defined radio processing and machine learning. The proposed
interdisciplinary research spans a wide range of topics including digital
communication, low power integrated circuits, machine learning, and processor
architectures to explore cross-layer approaches that are indispensable to tackle
challenges in heterogenous classes of energy-efficient and versatile
communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless communication is often the
dominant source of latency and power consumption for the majority of mission-
critical and energy-constrained Internet-of-Things applications. One main
objective of the proposed research is to deliver a truly energy-autonomous,
fully self-contained wireless communication system that optimally utilizes the
scarce harvested energy and dramatically enhances ultra-low power analog
circuits performance via novel digital signal processing. A new non-orthogonal
modulation and multiple access scheme that exploits sparsity of novel hyper-
dimensional modulation is proposed to efficiently eliminate significant power
and complexity overhead imposed on orthogonal modulation and multiple access
schemes that require explicit synchronization. The research scope includes 1)
new non-orthogonal modulation and multiple access schemes for energy-autonomous,
disposable IoT sensor nodes without a power-hungry phase-lock-loop circuit and
its frequency reference crystal, 2) novel hyper-dimensional modulation to
replace or complement conventional orthogonal modulation and error correction
codes for ultra-reliable low latency communication, and 3) unified software-
defined radio and deep learning processor architectures to enable dynamic
communication-computation tradeoffs, energy-efficient execution of baseband
modem processing, systolic array based belief propagation algorithm
acceleration, and deep neural network assisted signal processing. This program
includes experimental researches to fabricate transceiver integrated circuits
and design real-time prototype systems to demonstrate the proposed concept of
non-orthogonal modulation and multiple access wireless communication throughout
extensive field trials rendering realistic scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.