* 1942681
* CAREER: Searching for the Fungal Domestication Syndrome
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* John Gibbons, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 729,981.00

Domestication was one of the most influential technological innovations of the
last 13,000 years. This project will study the domestication of fungi. Because
of underlying differences in population biology, ecology, and artificial
selection by humans for desired traits, the researchers hypothesize that the
effect of domestication on fungi is distinct from plant and animal
domestication. The researchers have recently developed Aspergillus oryzae as a
model of fungal domestication. This species is a filamentous mold used for
millennia in the production of traditional fermented Asian foods and beverages.
In using these fungi as part of food processing and production, humans have
changed the traits and DNA blueprint of these fungal species. This project will
explore those changes. This research has the potential to improve the safety of
food fermentation and to shed light on the health benefits of fermented foods.
Importantly, this project will involve the public in scientific discovery
through a citizen-science project. Members of the public will be encouraged to
contribute samples of homemade or commercial fermented foods. Undergraduates,
through direct research experiences or through hands-on coursework, will isolate
and identify microorganisms from food samples. Students will gain practical
experience in microbiology, molecular biology, genomics and bioinformatics. The
results of this project will be adapted into a film in partnership with faculty
and undergraduate students in the arts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In parallel with
the domestication of plants and animals, fungi (e.g. yeasts and molds) were also
domesticated for their utility in food preservation, flavoring, aroma, and
texture. However, it remains largely unexplored whether the generalizations
formed through the study of domesticated plants and animals can be extended to
domesticated fungi. To address whether the patterns and effects of domestication
are similar between fungi and across plants, animals, and fungi, the researchers
will analyze patterns of genomic and phenotypic variation across hundreds of
isolates of A. oryzae and its progenitor A. flavus, and compare these results to
two existing models of fungal domestication (Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Penicillium roqueforti). It will identify the genomic regions that were targeted
by artificial selection and determine the phenotypic effect of domestication on
A. oyzae. The project will measure growth rate, inhibitory effects on community
food microbes, volatile compound profiles, and gene expression profiles of A.
oryzae and A. flavus strains under diverse conditions. The outcomes of this
research will shed light on the process of domestication and its effect on fungi
and will increase our knowledge of the genomic and evolutionary processes
underlying adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.