* 1942127
* CAREER: Sterility inducing mechanisms in social insects
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Etya Amsalem, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2025
* USD 893,241.00

Reproduction in social insect societies is dominated by one or a few females and
exhibits one of the most fascinating phenomena in social behavior; some
individuals forego reproduction and only raise their siblings. Such an extreme
reproductive skew is maintained by sophisticated behavioral and chemical
mechanisms and requires the transfer of genetic traits which encode behaviors
that seemingly sabotage their own inheritance. This project seeks to understand
how social insect reproduction is regulated by examining the behavioral,
chemical and genetic regulators of worker sterility at different scales within a
single species of bumblebee. Bumblebee life cycles span several levels of social
organization, allowing the unique opportunity to study changes in regulatory
patterns of reproduction as the colony develops. These discoveries will lay the
groundwork for future studies of the mechanisms underlying worker sterility, the
evolution of sociality and social communication. The integrative nature of this
research creates a unique platform to increase diversity by targeting
underrepresented groups at different stages of development. This will be
accomplished by (1) developing a novel, yearly program to increase networking
and exposure to science in underserved populations of undergraduate students in
Pennsylvania; (2) developing an insect communication module for the Upward Bound
Program that exposes promising low income and first-generation high school
students to college experiences; and (3) using the qualities of bumblebees as
key worldwide pollinators to increase awareness of the importance of pollinators
in K-8 students. Funds will support an interdisciplinary training in behavior,
chemical ecology, and genomics to students and scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanistic basis of pheromones regulating
reproduction in the sterile worker caste of social insects is one of the
greatest puzzles in social evolution since helper females refrain from
reproduction (seemingly against their interests), and the signaling systems
maintaining reproductive division of labor are susceptible for cheating. This
CAREER project examines the behavioral, chemical and genetic mechanisms
regulating reproduction in insects and the role the social context plays in
shaping these interactions. The team will: (1) Characterize the synergetic
effects of behavioral and chemical signaling regulating reproduction; (2)
Examine the importance of social context to the regulatory mechanisms; (3)
Unveil the genetic regulation of workersâ€™ brain gene expression responses to
cues regulating reproduction. The project focuses on the reproductive mechanisms
used by a sole queen, nestmate workers and the brood in the bumble bee Bombus
impatiens. These efforts will uncover the interplay between dominance behavior
and chemical signaling in regulating reproduction and the genetic basis of
sterility-inducing pheromones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.