* 1942230
* CAREER: Information-Theoretic and Statistical Foundations of Generative Models
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Soheil Feizi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2025
* USD 464,637.00

Generative machine learning models provide a statistical understanding of data
and play an important role in the success of modern machine learning in various
application domains including vision, speech, natural languages, and
computational biology, among others. Building on the success of deep learning,
recent advances in modern generative models hold great promise in
revolutionizing various learning methods. Despite this progress, the
understanding of some fundamental aspects of these models, required for
characterizing their performance guarantees, is still in its infancy. This
project aims to elucidate statistical and computational properties of modern
generative models by leveraging tools and concepts from information theory,
statistics and optimization. This project also includes a comprehensive plan to
integrate the research results into an inclusive, diverse and cross-disciplinary
educational program at the high school, undergraduate and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the research program is to
develop a comprehensive and fundamental understanding of the intertwined
statistical and computational aspects of modern generative models such as
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs). This
project aims to make critical advances in proper formulations of generative
models for high dimensional distributions, characterizing statistical limits of
these models, and developing efficient computational approaches for solving
optimization problems involved during their training. This cross-disciplinary
project broadens the scope of the prior knowledge on the interplay between
information theory and machine learning and creates a tightly connected loop
between theory, algorithms and applications in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.