* 1942364
* CAREER: Multi-functional interlayer-RF resonators as a platform for passive and wireless biosensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Peter Tseng, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Non-invasive, wireless-enabled medical devices or biosensors have been emerging
as powerful tools to track human performance, biomarkers, and wellness. Within
this class of devices, conformal, point-of-care interfaces in the form of
flexible devices have become popular due to their low form factor, reduced user
burden, and ability to monitor physiological parameters (i.e., heartbeat,
acceleration, glucose etc.) on complex surfaces/environments. Existing
biosensors within such devices often suffer from large physical size, need for
power, short lifetime, and low sensitivity. The objective of this CAREER project
is to study, design, and develop wireless-enabled passive radio frequency
identification device (RFID) type biosensors. These could be attached, embedded,
or potentially implanted to new areas and wirelessly monitor their host
environments. These sensors, along with their sensing metal patterns developed
on different layers, contain an intermediate layer of nanoporous materials that
will absorb, swell or deform in the presence of specific chemical stimuli
causing their resonant frequencies to change. This change in the sensor property
as function of the change in the stimuli of host environment will be used as a
detection mechanism. The proposed new interlayer materials could be membranes,
separators, deformable materials, temperature/pH/metal-responsive polymers, and
more. Many of these materials have long-lifetimes and possess no degradative
mechanism. Significantly improved, conformal, versatile sensors with
programmable sensitivity and selectivity are the project goals. Such devices
could potentially integrate with living systems in new ways and enable new
applications in wireless health. The unique education and outreach program
proposed in this project is focused on powering the creativity and imagination
of younger (and often underrepresented) students. Potential technical skills to
be learned by undergraduate students include: fabrication experience (metrology,
photolithography, 3-D printing), scanning-electron microscopy, experimental
methodology, numerical/analytical modelling, data analysis, and computer aided
design (CAD). Creating a long-term interest in STEM by teaching fun,
biocompatible/safe fabrication procedures that can be performed by students of
all ages and skill levels is proposed. Research efforts of this project will be
taught in various summer tech camps run by the University of California Irvine
(UCI), a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), through programs like BuildCamp and
FABcamp. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop next-generation,
passive wireless biosensors with tunable sensitivity and selectivity. The focus
is on utilizing a sensing modality that can support native wireless read-out and
robust, long-term operation. The core sensor is composed of stacked and
resonant-coupled split ring coils (or multi-turn antennas) that contain
interlayer materials that absorb, swell, or deform in response to physical
stimuli. The development of new fabrication techniques to fuse soft or
nanoporous materials with metals into multi-functional constructs will be
investigated. This will enable RF analytical biosensors with programmable
sensitivity and selectivity. The approach will be to utilize membranes that are
able to either selectively absorb analytes from complex biofluids, or heavily
swell in response to a specific analyte. Four types of membranes: ion-selective,
polymer-aerogel, glucose-responsive, and modified biopolymer will be studied as
potential interlayer materials. Theoretical and computational studies on how the
unique electromagnetic and bio-interactive physics of respective materials
combine to impact sensor performance will be studied and analyzed. The
experimental studies on sensor behavior include sensor measurement in mixtures
of analyte, the synthesis of sensor-circuits that enable facile and accessible
read-out, as well as the studying of arraying as a means of enhancing
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.