* 1942601
* CAREER: Novel Water Quality Monitors and Indicators of Salinization to Define SALTSCAPES
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Nathaniel Warner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2025
* USD 452,917.00

Salt levels in our lakes and rivers are increasing in a process called
salinization. If salt levels rise too much we cannot use the water for drinking
or growing crops without costly treatment. There are many sources of salt to
lakes and rivers which makes it difficult to find and control the sources. The
goal of this project is to find new ways to identify the source of salt
pollution using sensors, as well as the shells of freshwater mussels and
sediment cores in lakes and rivers to reconstruct the past history of salt
deposition. Members of the public will be engaged in this research by placing
sensors in their backyard stream or favorite fishing hole to help make maps of
salt in the watershed (SALTSCAPES). Advanced chemical analysis using natural
isotope ratios will be used to fingerprint the source of the salt. Communities
will be empowered to use these results to plan the best solutions to reduce the
salt entering the watershed. Successful implementation of this project will help
save money for water treatment, provide cleaner drinking water to our
communities, and protect the ecosystem from the impacts of excessive
salinization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salinization of freshwater resources is a
global environmental problem that degrades water quality and ecosystem services
to aquatic habitats. The long-term trends of increasing chloride concentrations
observed in both freshwater lakes and rivers can have deleterious effects on
corrosion control of public water infrastructure and toxicity to freshwater
biota. There are multiple sources of salinization of freshwater such as
migration from underlying geologic formations, dissolution of evaporites, road
salt runoff and other transportation sources, as well as industrial emissions
and hydraulic fracturing. Many of these sources generate unique isotopic ratios
that can be used to identify their sources. Currently, sampling is too sparse
both spatially and temporally to assess salinization impacts or identify point
sources. In addition, these data are not adequate to capture important long-term
trends in locations relevant for assessment. The goal of the proposed research
is to utilize novel methods to record water quality in sediment cores,
freshwater mussel shells, and a network of open source water quality meters to
characterize the long-term impacts of salinization. The specific objectives to
achieve this goal are to 1) quantify sources of salinization through the
development of novel indicators of water quality, 2) demonstrate the utility of
these tools for long-term assessments of water quality, 3) identify potential
mitigation strategies, and 4) enhance water-quality education for students,
teachers, and the public. Sediment cores and mussel shells will be age-dated and
used to measure major and trace elements (e.g., Cl, Br, Sr, Ba), and isotopic
ratios (e.g., 87Sr/86Sr, 11B/10B, and 226Ra/228Ra). Combined, these measurements
provide unique chemical signatures of individual sources of salinity and can be
used to create maps of salinity across watersheds (SALTSCAPES). This
quantification will enable greater insight to the risks associated with
salinization as well as the potential for mitigation through engineering,
management, and policy-based solutions that protect both human and environmental
health. The approach will lead to greater understanding of salinization sources
within individual watersheds. These results will allow characterization of the
spatial and temporal resolution of salinization, the biological impacts, and
long-term salinization trends. Combined, this project will transform both the
way we collect water quality data and identify sources, fate, and
bioaccumulation of contaminants discharged to
watersheds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.