* 1942354
* CAREER: Defining structural principles for the engineering and evolution of allostery
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Kimberly Reynolds, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,152,845.00

Proteins are nanometer-scale molecules whose composition and shape are specified
by genes. Inside the cell, they catalyze chemical reactions, perform mechanical
work, and assemble into larger structures. The collective action of very many
proteins drives cell growth, division, and movement. Proteins are often
controlled by external signals – for example, adding a nutrient to the cellular
environment might turn a protein “on” or “off” by binding to the protein and
altering its shape or dynamics. Such allosteric control provides a basic
mechanism for cells to sense and respond to the environment and is a building
block for intracellular communication. A complete understanding of how
allosteric control works, and how it is encoded in the genetic sequence of
proteins, would allow biologists to engineer proteins that respond to artificial
cues. In this project, the PI’s research team will use computation and
experiment to understand how allosteric regulation in a protein is optimized,
define physical properties distinguishing allosteric surfaces, and construct a
set of synthetic allosteric switches that enable control of cell growth rate
with light. This work will establish a practical, general toolkit for
engineering allosteric regulation, and provide fundamental insights into how
natural allosteric regulation might evolve. This proposal will train graduate,
undergraduate, and bio-oriented high school students to improve their skills in
basic programming and research experimentation to contribute STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though allostery is a fundamental and common
feature of proteins, how it is encoded by protein sequence and structure remains
unclear. For example, it is unknown if the pattern and number of mutations
influencing allostery is sparse or abundant, or if the mutations with the
biggest effect on regulation are localized to the allosteric site or distributed
throughout the structure. This project will address these fundamental questions
by using deep mutational scanning to characterize the complete set of mutations
than can influence allosteric regulation in a synthetic allosteric switch. This
research will also use new approaches in NMR spectroscopy to better understand
how protein interactions with water might determine (and identify) allosteric
surfaces. The hypothesis is that allosteric surfaces are marked by slowed
hydration dynamics. If so, this would suggest that allosteric sites are
entropically preferred sites for the evolution of new protein and ligand binding
interactions. Moreover, this would open new avenues for the discovery of
allosterically acting pharmaceuticals. Finally, the knowledge gained through
these mutational and structural studies will be applied to generate a series of
broad dynamic range allosteric switches for the light-based control of cell
growth. These switches will provide a practical toolkit for dynamically
modulating cell growth, with potential applications in the study of bacterial
community dynamics, eukaryotic cell proliferation, and engineering live
biotherapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.