* 1942318
* CAREER: Characterizing the Development of Metacognitive Skills in Life Science Undergraduates and How They Use Metacognition to Learn Independently and Collaboratively
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Julie Stanton, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2025
* USD 748,769.00

&lt;p&gt;Metacognition refers to awareness and control of one's own thinking.
Previous research shows that supporting students' development and use of their
metacognitive skills can enhance their success in STEM courses. For example, by
using their metacognitive skills as they learn about new ideas, students can
better identify concepts they do not understand. This knowledge allows them to
select, implement, reflect upon, and adjust their learning strategies to build
better understanding over time. While collaborating in small groups, students
can also ask questions and make statements to stimulate metacognition in one
another. STEM students who develop strong metacognitive skills are positioned to
learn more effectively and persist in their majors. Thus, we need to better
understand the changes that occur as life science students acquire metacognitive
skills across their college careers, how small group work can be designed to
enhance social metacognition, and the effects of students' metacognitive
abilities on learning, reasoning, and problem-solving in the life sciences. This
knowledge will inform how life sciences learning environments can be designed to
support undergraduate students' development and use of metacognition in and out
of the classroom.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This project will advance knowledge by
characterizing: (1) the development of metacognition in undergraduate life
science students throughout their college careers (without intervention); (2)
how students prompt metacognitive thinking in one another (social metacognition)
and how this prompting influences their reasoning during small group problem
solving; and (3) the relationships between individual and social metacognition.
Metacognitive development will be characterized via development of longitudinal
case studies of life sciences majors at University of Georgia (a doctoral
university), University of North Georgia (a master's university), and South
Georgia State College (an associate's/baccalaureate college). The investigations
will focus on when and how students use their metacognitive skills, and how
students' personal epistemologies and self-efficacy may affect metacognition.
Yearly profiles of each student will be constructed based on analyses of semi-
structured interviews, think-aloud protocols while problem-solving, as well as
responses to published inventories. Social metacognition will be investigated
through analysis of video recordings of small-group work in an upper-level Cell
Biology classroom. Later cohorts of students will then be guided in the use of
effective types of social metacognition while working in small groups.
Ultimately, the project will apply the research findings to create and evaluate
a Metacognition in Biology seminar course for first-year life science students
taking the Introductory Biology course at the University of Georgia. This course
will be integrated with university programs that support talented rural and
first-generation college students. The project will also impact science faculty
development more broadly via an online workshop series of a national education
network.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program is a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that supports
early-career faculty who have the potential to serve as academic role models in
research and education. This CAREER project is supported by NSF's Education
&amp; Human Resources Directorate Core Research (ECR) Program and its Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) Program.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;/p&gt;