* 1942239
* CAREER: Robust Causal And Statistical Inference In High Dimensional Structured Systems With Hidden Variables
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Ilya Shpitser, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 06/30/2025
* USD 550,000.00

Understanding causes and effects is crucial in empirical science, however
observed associations do not always have clear causal explanations. For
instance, hospital patients who were prescribed antibiotics also tend to suffer
from opportunistic infections, though we donâ€™t expect antibiotics to cause
infections. The likely explanation in this case is that an early presence of an
infectious agent caused the latter infection, and the doctor prescribing
antibiotics. A key obstacle to finding valid cause-effect relationships from
data is the presence of hidden but causally relevant variables, like the
infectious agent above. This project aims to develop new methods for drawing
valid causal inferences in datasets with hidden variables while avoiding known
pitfalls of existing approaches. Aside from its role in data analysis, causal
literacy is an important skill for making informed choices as citizens and
consumers. The investigator aims to promote this skill by incorporating causal
methods into existing data science courses at Johns Hopkins University,
developing a new course that will teach methods for detecting misunderstandings
of causal claims, and developing a tutorial aimed at bridging the gap between
machine learning and statistics in discussing and working on causal
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) are an elegant
method for reasoning about fully observed causal systems. The proposed research
aims to provide a new formalism for causal systems with hidden variables that
retains the advantages of DAGs, while dispensing with the disadvantages of
representing hidden variables directly. This formalism captures all equality
constraints in the observed marginal distribution via a regular model of a mixed
graph. Success in the proposed research will significantly advance understanding
of all major tasks in causal systems with hidden variables: identification,
estimation, and computationally efficient probabilistic calculations. As a test
bed for methodological developments, the investigator will use a dataset of
electronic health records obtained in partnership with the Malone Center for
Engineering in Healthcare and the Johns Hopkins Department of
Surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.