* 1942606
* CAREER: Maternal age effects in an ecologically-important aquatic invertebrate: Genetic and epigenetic controls and fitness outcomes in variable environments
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Kristin Gribble, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 976,177.00

A mother’s environment or physical condition can affect her offspring’s health
and lifespan, a phenomenon known as a “maternal effect.” Maternal age effects,
in which advanced maternal age causes decreased offspring lifespan and
reproduction, are common among diverse species, including humans. Thus, maternal
age effects have important implications for everything from determining an
individual’s disease risk and aging rate to determining population growth rates
and community structure. This research aims to identify the molecular mechanisms
by which information about a mother’s age is transmitted to her developing
offspring, and how that leads to changes in offspring health. Additionally, this
project will explore how maternal age effects change population growth rates and
structure in different environments. The results may reveal the importance of
maternal age in determining a population’s fitness in stable versus changing
environments and could inform the search for therapies to improve health during
aging and to extend reproductive longevity. This project will benefit society by
broadening participation in research by under-represented groups at many
educational levels. The goal of the project’s education plan is to increase
diversity of those involved in biology research and to promote public
understanding of the research process by integrating the research program with
hands-on educational and research opportunities for undergraduates and
underserved high school and community college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers hypothesize that maternal age effects are
mediated by epigenetic changes in histone post-translational modifications that
alter chromatin structure, causing gene expression changes that impact cellular
function in offspring. Using the rotifer Brachionus manjavacas as a study
system, this project will (1) characterize the genetic and epigenetic mechanisms
driving maternal age effects using comparative RNA-Seq, ATAC-Seq, mass
spectrometry, and RNAi; and (2) quantify the impact of maternal age effects on
offspring adaptation and fitness in variable environments using life table and
population growth assays. Results will advance the understanding of the role of
transgenerational inheritance in structuring populations and provide insights to
how maternal age effects on fitness change depending on environmental context.
Research aims will be integrated with the project’s education objectives, to (1)
create a research internship program for community college students, to provide
research opportunities for non-traditional students and increase diversity in
STEM; (2) develop education modules for high school students in the Marine
Biological Laboratory’s secondary education initiative, to expose students to
the research process, aquatic ecology, and evolutionary biology; and (3) create
courses for undergraduates, to provide interdisciplinary ecological and
molecular biology research training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.