* 1942902
* CAREER: Pushing the Limits of Low-Power Wide-Area Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Swarun Kumar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 01/31/2025
* USD 320,022.00

Future smart cities will have to provide Internet connectivity to millions of
energy-starved Internet-of-&lt;br/&gt;Things devices - even those several miles
away from the nearest wireless base station. To this end, recent&lt;br/&gt;years
have seen novel Low-Power Wide Area Networks (LP-WANs) deployed, such as LoRa
and NB-IoT.&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, today’s LP-WAN technologies require a
battery to power these devices, which impacts&lt;br/&gt;their maintenance cost
and reliability. This proposal aims to develop a city-scale LP-WAN
architecture&lt;br/&gt;that offloads connectivity, sensing and even the source
of energy to the more capable base stations and&lt;br/&gt;cloud infrastructure.
We develop an architecture where base stations actively collaborate to enable
faster&lt;br/&gt;and more reliable connectivity to low-power devices, sense
their location and surroundings and provide&lt;br/&gt;energy they require to
operate in the first place. The proposed work has a detailed integrated
education and&lt;br/&gt;outreach program including course projects that leverage
a live testbed and summer labs for K-12 students&lt;br/&gt;in Greater
Pittsburgh. The proposed work will be deployed initially to network existing
smart sensors at&lt;br/&gt;CMU and later scale to surrounding city
infrastructure, through extensive collaborations with the City
of&lt;br/&gt;Pittsburgh, forming a first-of-its-kind university-led programmable
LP-WAN deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work enables Low-Power
Wide-Area Networking in dense smart-city deployments along&lt;br/&gt;three axes:
(1) Long-Range Wireless Charging: First, the proposal investigates a system at
the base stations&lt;br/&gt;that beams power to battery-free clients at unknown
locations. We explore base station and client designs to&lt;br/&gt;perform
wireless charging over large distances, orders-of-magnitude higher than prior
work. (2) Pushing&lt;br/&gt;LP-WAN Speed and Scaling Limits: Next, the proposed
work explores a solution to decode collisions from&lt;br/&gt;even the weakest of
LP-WAN signals that cannot be detected at any single base station. The proposal
argues&lt;br/&gt;why power starved LP-WAN clients motivate the need for even
mundane PHY-layer functions at the client:&lt;br/&gt;radio configuration,
decoding and rate adaptation - to be offloaded to the more capable
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal then explores intelligent ways for base
stations to collaborate at the cloud, despite limited&lt;br/&gt;backhaul
bandwidth. (3) City-Scale Wireless Sensing: Finally, the proposed work
investigates novel sensing&lt;br/&gt;solutions that use RF signal measurements
received both from city-wide low-power radios as well as&lt;br/&gt;CubeSats in
Low-Earth Orbit, collated at the edge and cloud. We evaluate how such a system
can sense&lt;br/&gt;properties such as structural health and atmospheric
moisture at city-scale, without requiring dedicated&lt;br/&gt;sensors on low-
power devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.