* 1942861
* CAREER: Understanding the Influence of Thermal Radiation on the Ignition and Propagation of Dust Explosions
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Ryan Houim, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 01/31/2025
* USD 417,864.00

Dust explosions have been significant hazards for centuries, likely since
humankind began storing grain. Explosions in coal mines, food processing
facilities, metal working factories, and even everyday life occur with alarming
regularity. Despite a long history of research, the physical mechanisms that
govern dust explosions and their structure remain relatively unknown. Even
today, there is vigorous scientific debate on what are the controlling processes
that produce self-sustaining dust explosions. Basic questions, such as the
influence of radiative heat transfer on dust explosions, remain unanswered. This
research project will use cutting edge numerical simulations to gain a
fundamental understanding of dust explosions and, in particular, the role of
thermal radiation on their initiation and propagation. The fundamental
understanding gained from this project will provide safety engineers with
improved knowledge that ultimately can be used to develop improved explosion
mitigation strategies, safety devices, and regulations to protect society from
hazardous dust explosions. This research project will leverage the public
fascination with explosions in movies to do STEM outreach to a diverse pool of
youths from underrepresented groups. The project researchers will partner with
the University of Florida Center for Precollegiate Education and Training to
work with high-school students each summer. The high-school summer students will
be exposed to critical skills needed for the STEM workforce, including high-
performance computing, numerical simulation, and mathematics. Public awareness
on the hazards of combustible dust will be raised by giving lectures to summer
students every year on dust explosions and related
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will study the influence
of thermal radiation on dust explosions using state-of-the-art granular
multiphase models, radiation approximations, and numerical simulation
techniques. Thermal radiation will be directly coupled to the granular reactive
multiphase flow equations by solving the radiation transfer equation. The
simulations will systematically explore how thermal radiation influences the
propagation of laminar dust flames, the ignition of laminar dust flames, and the
initiation and propagation of dust explosions and turbulent dust flames in
realistic multidimensional scenarios. The scenarios for the initiation and
propagation of dust explosions include the propagation of dust flames in closed
tubes, shock and reactive particle cloud interactions, and layered dust
explosions. The numerical simulations include both organic and metallic dust
particles to compare and contrast their explosion characteristics. In addition,
the sensitivity of the simulation results to the level of detail in the chemical
and radiation models will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.