* 1942259
* CAREER: Recasting Algorithmic Management in the Gig-Economy
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Benjamin Hanrahan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2022
* USD 56,839.00

This project studies the ways that algorithmic management, using digital tools
to automate and remotely manage workers, may negatively impact workers and their
rights. Ride-hailing platforms, which are rapidly replacing traditional taxi
services, are a canonical example of algorithmic management, where the software
platform uses a variety of opaque means to automatically assign and evaluate
work. The research community has had difficulty studying and improving these
platforms, due to the platforms' proprietary and closed nature. This has exposed
both drivers and passengers to biased or unfair outcomes, such as passengers
poorly rating minority drivers or drivers declining rides from certain
categories of customer. At the root of these problems are the opaque mechanisms
for algorithmic management, and the several research and community efforts to
make algorithmic management more palatable have largely impacted isolated
functionality. These isolated cases point to a larger and urgent need to re-
imagine these platforms as equitable workplaces, where we hold our algorithmic
managers (and the people that develop them) to the same standard that we hold
human managers. This work has the potential to extensively inform and redefine
the standards and policies around how platforms that algorithmically manage work
should be designed to form more equitable work environments.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this goal it is necessary to build a more open
platform, so that we can directly investigate these mechanisms. This project
will develop an experimental ride-hailing platform that gives drivers and
passengers control over parameters that impact algorithmic outcomes, as a means
to understand and interact with the platform. It will serve as a testbed to
conduct a series of mixed-methods studies that progressively increase in size
and scope. These studies will be focused on three major themes: (1)
understandable individual interactions with algorithmic managers, (2) equitable
group interactions through algorithmic managers, and (3) self-governance for
organizations with algorithmic management. In partnership with independent
drivers and experts in labor relations, evaluation studies will use the platform
to generate foundational knowledge about giving workers more control over the
algorithms that manage them. Due to the open source nature of this work, any
group that wants to begin their own cooperative platform will be able to utilize
the application, tools, and resources developed in this research. These
contributions will have a wide impact on how work is managed by algorithms and
how to create human-centered algorithms and platforms for
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.