* 1942099
* CAREER: Exact Actuation of Magnetic Field Forces Across All DOF in Electric Motors
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Eric Severson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Title: CAREER: Exact Actuation of Magnetic Field Forces Across All Degrees of
Freedom in Electric Motors
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description:
Electric motors are responsible for transporting the world's supply of fresh
water, heating and cooling homes and offices, driving critical medical and
surgical equipment, and, increasingly, operating transportation systems. The
efficiency of this technology is vital in enabling energy sustainability and
reducing humanity's carbon footprint. Conventional electric motors rely on
bearings to support their shafts. Unfortunately, these bearings have critical
lifetime, reliability, and efficiency shortcomings that limit the
electrification of transportation systems, the utilization of renewable
generation technologies, and the efficiency of fluid handling infrastructure.
This project will investigate a new type of motor that does not use bearings.
The new bearingless motors will utilize electric current to create controllable
magnetic forces that function as set of bearings. The new motors will look and
behave in fundamentally different ways that will enable new, extremely
efficient, and ultra-reliable systems. This project targets a 9% reduction in US
electric energy consumption by enabling new concepts in compressor systems,
electrified transportation, renewable energy generation, and energy storage. To
translate these research outcomes into the real world, the project incorporates
engagement of both the technical community and general public. Beyond the
research outcomes, the team's outreach activities will facilitate development of
the diverse STEM workforce needed to maintain US leadership in electromechanical
power conversion. The team will develop interactive public exhibits of motor and
levitation technology and host STEM-enriched experiences aimed at increasing
interest and participation in STEM opportunities for middle and high school
females and youth from rural, economically disadvantaged
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The objective of this
research is to overcome fundamental challenges of both conventional motor
bearings and magnetic bearings. While today's electric motors utilize and
control only one degree of freedom (rotation) this project will develop a new
generation of electric motors that are precisely actuated in all six degrees of
freedom. These new motors will utilize magnetic field forces that are already
present within the motor to create a completely bearingless motor that levitates
its own shaft. Modelling, control, and design techniques will be developed to
unify the science of electric motors and magnetic levitation. The project will
use analytic and numeric modeling approaches to create a framework that models
the normal and tangential magnetic stresses on the rotor's surface. This
framework will be used to determine the required stator currents needed to
produce exact force and torque vectors on the motor's shaft. The project will
research optimal design of these new motors and test prototypes to validate this
new science. The team will develop the science of bearingless motors for both
high speed motor systems (industrial compressors and power grid flywheel energy
storage) and low speed motor systems (large diameter, rim-driven motors for
flight electrification). The outcomes of the research will be disseminated
through the standard channels of academic research (presentations and papers) as
well as through the construction of a portable bearingless motor prototype that
will be exhibited in public demonstrations, conferences, and visits to research
institutes. The team will also develop open source, interactive laboratory
electronics kits to demonstrate the principles of magnetic levitation and
electromechanical power conversion that will be promoted to allow youth to
develop county fair exhibits, lifelong learners to explore electromechanical
principles, and teachers to adapt the material for their
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.