* 1942596
* CAREER: Proteins under Confinement: Revealing the Impact of Spatial Restrictions on Enzyme Structure, Dynamics and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Zhongyu Yang, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2024
* USD 527,623.00

Proteins are essential macromolecules for many cellular and life processes. In
cells, proteins experience a highly crowded and confined environment.
Understanding protein structure, dynamics, and function under crowding and
confinement is, therefore, critical for understanding the function of these
essential macromolecules in nature. This project will a recently developed
platform that creates confined space at sizes similar to typical proteins, and
use modern spectroscopic methods to examine protein structure and dynamics.
These studies will be used to generate a systematic understanding on how spatial
confinement impacts the protein structure-function relationship. This project
will improve the communication and collaboration of next generation scientists
in North Dakota by through a summer student research exchange program between
North Dakota State University and the United Tribes Technical College. Local
undergraduate and high school researchers will also be recruited to participate
in the project. Lastly, the project will stimulate the interest in science for
local elementary school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
determine the influence of the size, shape, and boundary properties of spatial
confinement on protein structure, dynamics, and function. This project will
employ the recently developed MOFs/COFs to create systematically confined spaces
that differ in size, shape, and boundary properties, respectively. The loading
conditions of two model proteins, lysozyme and the human Cu/Zn superoxide
dismutase (SOD1), will be optimized separately in order to optimize their
loading capacity. The activities of lysozyme and SOD1 will be determined using
standard assays with minor modifications. Site-directed spin labeling will then
be utilized to implant spin probes into each model protein. EPR dynamics and
long-range distance distribution measurements will then be carried out to
determine global and local (the active site and/or substrate pathway)
conformational flexibility changes of the two model proteins confined in
different MOFs/COFs. SDSL-EPR is ideal for these experiments because it can
overcome the complexities caused by MOF/COF backgrounds and protein-MOF/COF
interactions and reveal the needed structural information. Correlating the
function with the structural details under varied confined conditions will
establish the correlation between confinement factors and protein structure-
function relationship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Molecular Biophysics cluster of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences (MCB) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.