* 1942330
* CAREER: Towards Optimized Operation of Cost-Constrained Complex Cyber-Physical-Human Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Daphney-Stavrou Zois, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 05/31/2025
* USD 411,977.00

Self-driving cars and home assistants provide just a small glimpse of the future
cost-costrainted complex cyber-physical-human systems (CPHS) that will integrate
engineering systems with the natural word and humans. This project will devise
new mathematical tools and methods to systematically describe CPHS and optimize
their operation. The application focus is on wireless body area networks, a
natural CPHS representative with humans in the loop, heavily resource-
constrained operation, and heterogeneous components that are intertwined with
and altered by human behavior. The end will result will help understand
important factors related to the operation of CPHS and how to optimize their
operation. It will advance stochastic modeling, estimation and control theories
to collectively address the challenges associated with this problem. It will
also expose underrepresented K-12 students in Albany city to STEM fields from
the lens of CPHS through project-based school visits and hands-on workshops on
simple sensor systems, and prepare UAlbany students to become CPHS innovators by
introducing CPHS concepts and activities in existing courses. Women and
underrepresented groups will be encouraged to participate in this project by
leveraging existing minority and underrepresented groups programs at the
University at Albany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CPHS have the potential to adaptively
optimize their operation towards continuous real-time monitoring of an
individual's state, environment and related behaviors, while providing real-time
recommendations. To unleash the potential of CPHS, unique challenges related to
sensing, communication, computation and control need to be jointly addressed in
the presence of heterogeneous data, resource constraints and humans-in-the-loop.
This fundamental research will advance cyber-physical systems science by
devising new mathematical tools and methods, and a theoretical framework that
can be used as a building block for various CPHS applications. Specifically, the
project will (i) devise a new theoretical stochastic model to describe key CPHS
variables and their interactions, (ii) design novel accurate and scalable
estimators for CPHS and derive relevant theoretical performance bounds to
quantify the fundamental limits of the estimation process in this context, and
(iii) devise new controlled sensing, commmunication, and recommendations
strategies to optimize the operation of systems with complex dynamics and
heterogeneous capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.