* 1942836
* CAREER: Formal Methods for Human-Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Lu Feng, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 05/31/2025
* USD 442,568.00

There is a growing trend toward human-cyber-physical systems (h-CPS), where
systems collaborate or interact with human operators to harness complementary
strengths of humans and autonomy. Examples include self-driving cars that need
the occasional driver intervention, and industrial robots that work beside or
cooperatively with people. The societal impact of h-CPS, however, is contingent
on ensuring safety and reliability. Several high-profile incidents have shown
that unsafe h-CPS can lead to catastrophic outcomes. Formal methods enable the
model-based design of safety-critical systems with mathematically rigorous
guarantees. However, the research area of formal methods for h-CPS is still in
its infancy. The goal of this research is to expand formal methods toward the
joint modeling and formal analysis of CPS and human-autonomy interactions,
accounting for the uncertainty and variability of human behaviors, intentions,
and preferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key innovations include new methods
to build probabilistic models that can represent unobservable human cognitive
states estimated from multi-modal sensing data, and to learn probabilistic
specifications for h-CPS; as well as novel probabilistic verification and
synthesis techniques to provide correctness guarantees for h-CPS and explainable
results that help humans understand counterexamples and synthesized control
strategies. If successful, this research will enable the rigorous model-based
design of h-CPS such as self-driving cars, thereby contributing to improving
safety and cutting development costs. The research outcomes of this project will
be integrated into education activities in every phase from graduate courses, to
undergraduate capstone research, to outreach efforts for women, underrepresented
minorities, and K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.