* 1942125
* CAREER: Toward Equitable Social Media Content Moderation for Marginalized Individuals and Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Oliver Haimson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2025
* USD 476,542.00

This research examines the causes and consequences of online platforms banning
users and content that do not actually violate site policies, or fall into gray
areas with respect to site policies and community norms. It will achieve: (1) A
characterization of the types and prevalence of reasons people are banned or
have content removed from social media sites, how these relate to systemic
biases, and the implications of these practices. (2) An in-depth description of
processes and support structures marginalized online communities enact to
address inequities resulting from moderation. (3) A combined qualitative and
computational technical approach that more accurately delineates between social
media content that should and should not have been banned, according to
community norms and shifting site policies. (4) Design recommendations for a
context-aware content moderation system that balances community needs, norms,
and values with platform requirements and can be applied across social media
sites. (5) Theoretical insights around current inequities in online content
moderation and how moderation goals can be achieved more equitably by
recognizing and respecting marginalized online communities’ needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following studies will be conducted: 1) Interviews
with marginalized people whose content or account was removed from a social
media site even though in line with site policies or falling into a gray area;
2) A virtual ethnography in three marginalized online communities who are
frequent targets of user bans and content takedowns. 3) Use of participatory
design and focus group methods to determine how to build a context-aware content
moderation system that can be applied across social media sites. 4)
Implementation of this sociotechnical system online, and evaluation to
understand the extent to which users consider it equitable and how well it meets
their needs. In addition, a digital literacy online resource will help educate
people about content and account removals and how to regain site access, and the
results of the research will educate social media platforms about challenges
marginalized populations face around content
moderation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.