* 1942252
* CAREER: Integrating genetic and ecological drivers of a social phenotype: dynamics of a social polymorphism and supergene
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Jessica Purcell, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2025
* USD 761,763.00

Mendel discovered the genetic basis of simple traits of peas, such as flower
color and seed shape, more than 150 years ago, but researchers still have much
to learn about how genes control complex traits such as social behavior or
mating strategy. These complex traits include multiple components, so they are
unlikely to be shaped by a single gene. Recent evidence from insects, birds,
plants, and fungi suggests that many different complex traits may be controlled
by common genetic structures called supergenes, which lock together two or more
genes with coordinated actions so that beneficial combinations are transmitted
together to offspring. In this study, the researchers will investigate
characteristics of a supergene that controls social organization in a group of
ants. The project will specifically ask about how an ancient supergene changes
in form and function in a group of related species. In addition to expanding the
current knowledge of how complex traits emerge and persist, this study will also
provide new insights into the causes and consequences of alternative social
strategies in ants. Students will participate in every aspect of this study, and
the research team will participate in outreach events to raise community
awareness about entomology. Undergraduate students will gain hands-on experience
in contemporary genomics techniques, both in the classroom and as research
assistants. Graduate students will compile existing knowledge about the causes
and consequences of alternative social strategies across all social organisms,
which will broaden the scope of the discoveries from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social organization involving cooperation among
non-relatives has originated repeatedly in social insects, yet the proximate and
ultimate drivers of this transition remain enigmatic. The proposed research will
build upon the recent discovery of an ancestral supergene composed of about 500
linked genes that underlies social structure in multiple socially polymorphic
Formica ant species. Emerging evidence suggests that supergenes commonly control
complex traits, from mimetic coloration in butterflies to mating strategies in
birds, but scientists are only beginning to understand the characteristics and
dynamics of these genomic structures. This project will address in parallel two
major questions: how do autosomal supergenes evolve and persist, and how and why
do societies composed of non-relatives repeatedly evolve. Aim 1 will investigate
whether alternative supergene variants undergo changes in gene content, gene
order, and protein coding sequence as they persist in speciating lineages.
Undergraduate researchers will be trained in genomics and bioinformatics
techniques and will lead intraspecific analyses of their own Formica species. In
complement, aim 2 will examine how supergene genotype influences individual- and
colony-level traits. Students in introductory biology classes will participate
in data collection for this aim. Finally, aim 3 will determine whether the
distribution of social organization and genetic control varies along
biogeographic axes. A graduate student seminar will broaden discoveries from
this aim by conducting a meta-analysis of ecological drivers of social
polymorphism across social insects. This project will provide excellent learning
opportunities for students at all levels and is poised to expand the
understanding of social evolution and the genetics of complex
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is being funded jointly by the Behavioral
Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and the
Evolutionary Processes Cluster in the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.