* 1942370
* CAREER: Balancing Local and Systemic Resilience in the Western Water Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Margaret Garcia, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 509,394.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will model a large
component of the western regional water system to help facilitate planning for
resilient water supply and usage at both local and regional levels. The
construction of reservoirs, aqueducts, and pump systems has transformed the
hydrological landscape of the American west. These feats of engineering have
facilitated growth by moving water in space (via interbasin transfers and
distribution infrastructure) and in time (by storing water during wet periods
for later use). Consequentially, once separate river basins are now networked
via water transfers and shared demand centers, here termed the Western Water
Network. The creation of a regional water supply network generated benefits as
water can be moved across basins to meet demands and water users can mitigate
drought impacts with a portfolio of supplies. However, this connectivity also
introduces new risks. Just as links in financial systems can reduce the risks of
local shocks while raising the risk the system instability, interconnected water
supply systems have tradeoffs between local and systemic risks. These tradeoffs
are primed to shift as climatic change, demand shifts, and a renegotiation of
operating rules play out in the coming years. This project will use a set of
models to assess the tradeoffs between local (e.g. municipal or state level) and
systemic (e.g. basin wide) resilience under recent and current rule structures
and explore modifications to reduce the risk of failure under plausible future
conditions. New knowledge of these tradeoffs will allow the deliberate choice of
benefits and risks when re-designing operating rules and infrastructure. As
interconnected river basins are not unique to the America West, lessons from
study of the Western Water Network may be applicable globally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a gap in understanding the
tradeoffs between local and system resilience in networked water systems, and
the role of infrastructure and institutional design. New knowledge of these
tradeoffs is particularly relevant now as water supply systems are highly
optimized to tolerate observed historic variability but both social and climatic
changes are pushing many water supply systems globally beyond these historic
conditions. As such robust systems are often fragile beyond their range of
previously experienced vulnerability, we need to prepare our infrastructure and
institutional systems now for projected changes. Specifically, this project
will: 1) develop statistical models of regional streamflow that account for both
the spatial and temporal patterns critical to evaluating regional water systems
under historic and projected conditions; 2) build and test a model of the test
case Western Water Network that merges water systems modeling with an agent-
based model capable of simulating routine operations and adaptive changes; 3)
evaluate the system as currently operated under paleo-historic and projected
streamflow conditions; and 4) assess the tradeoffs between local and systemic
resilience under recent and current rule structures and explore modifications to
reduce the fragility space under plausible future conditions. To implement this
work, the team will collaborate with stakeholders to both learn from their tacit
knowledge of the system and share results. In recognition of the multifaceted
nature of infrastructure challenges facing the next generation on engineers,
this project will also develop educational modules and techniques for guiding
students through synthesis that are applicable within and outside the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.