* 1942501
* CAREER: Microbial indicators Of Latent Dampness (MOLD)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2026
* Karen Dannemiller, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 414,005.00

Exposure to mold in homes costs billions of dollars every year. Exposure is
particularly harmful to the 8% of the United States population that suffers from
asthma; a leading cause of disability in children. Currently, odor, visible mold
growth, and dampness are the best indicators of mold indoors. However, these
measures are subjective. Existing quantitative methods focus on identifying
specific fungal species that grow in moldy buildings, but species vary region-
to-region and home-to-home. The goal of this project is to develop and validate
a new quantitative measurement tool to assess growth of any species of fungi and
potential adverse health outcomes. Successful completion of this research will
protect human health through improved understanding of fundamental microbial
processes that occur in damp buildings. Ultimately, a new measurement tool would
fulfill a critical need to evaluate the effectiveness of remediation efforts for
homes impacted by flooding. Environmental practitioners and other stakeholders
will be engaged throughout the project to learn and provide feedback.
Undergraduate researchers will also participate in the research to enhance the
graduate student pipeline while also improving communication and teaching skills
by working with K-8 students. Together, these efforts increase the Nation’s STEM
pipeline while increasing the scientific literacy of the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to establish an
evidence-based measurement target for evaluation of mold growth in homes based
on species-independent metabolic processes. We will identify and validate novel
targets to indicate microbial growth. The overall hypothesis is that products
from secondary metabolic pathways of fungi are species-independent and will be a
more effective indicator of mold growth than measurement of any specific
species. The first objective is to identify fundamental metabolic processes and
potential microbial indicators consistently associated with microbial growth in
damp homes driven by the hypotheses that secondary metabolic processes are more
prevalent and gene expression of secondary metabolic products will be more
strongly and consistently associated with damp conditions. This objective will
be achieved by collecting dust from 50 non-moisture-damaged homes to measure
gene expression through metatranscriptomic analysis and identify the processes
most strongly associated with damp conditions. This will be validated by studies
of three or more of potential indicators in 25 damp and 25 non-moisture-damaged
control homes to determine if the indicator is associated with other dampness
measures. Results will be evaluated by a stakeholder advisory board, and
environmental practitioners will learn about indoor microbial growth at a
workshop. Successful completion of this research will provide new insights into
fundamental microbial processes occurring in damp buildings, including metabolic
processes occurring in fungi. Ultimately, this work will both advance our
fundamental understanding of indoor microbial dynamics and human exposure as
well as pave the way for a new suite of tools to measure mold indoors to protect
human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.