* 1942839
* CAREER: All-Acoustic Image-Guided Implantable Microscopic Ultrasound Neuromodulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Mehdi Kiani, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Neuromodulation has the potential to map neural functions; enhance our
perceptual, motor, and cognitive capabilities; and restore sensory and motor
functions lost through injury or disease. Despite several decades of research
and development, state-of-the-art noninvasive neuromodulation techniques still
suffer from poor spatial resolution (more than several millimeters), while
implantable electrical and optical methods with finer spatial resolution only
provide a limited coverage of hundreds to thousands of neurons through extremely
invasive parenchymal implantation. These limitations are fundamental, and
further optimization of these technologies cannot simultaneously meet the
critical requirements of minimal invasiveness, microscopic spatial resolution
(hundreds of micrometers and below), and whole brain coverage. This program
includes scientific research in a radical approach that explores ultrasound,
which has already been effective in transcranial neuromodulation with sub-
centimeter resolution, as a minimally invasive implantable means for
unprecedented microscopic-resolution neuromodulation at large scale. The
proposed research will yield a unique building block for a comprehensive set of
minimally invasive neural interfaces. It will open new opportunities in
neuroscience with significant improvements in spatial resolution and coverage of
neuromodulation of the brain, initially in animals. Ultimately, it will also
have huge translational potential for many clinical applications in humans, such
as the treatment of neurological and psychiatric disorders and brain-machine
interfaces. Leveraging the multidisciplinary nature of the research, this
program also includes an integrated outreach and educational component created
around a "Troubleshooting and Inquiry-based Learning (TIL) Framework" to enhance
students' learning of principles and research skills at different education
levels. Transforming an undergraduate circuit course with the TIL framework will
enhance the research skills, problem solving, and creative thinking of many
undergraduate students. An annual week-long summer workshop for teachers with
educational TIL-based hands-on and in-class computer-game-based modules will
educate K-12 teachers and their students from districts underrepresented in the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields in this
research. A TIL-based "Ultrasonically Transferred Song" hands-on module for pre-
college female students will attract them to the engineering profession and
educate them in this research. A new medical-device course will educate graduate
students in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will explore
implantable microscopic ultrasound stimulation (IuUS) with minimally invasive
modulation of the whole brain with the spatial resolution of hundreds of
micrometers and below. This program will establish the fundamental basis for
IuUS, in which an ultrasound transducer array is implanted on the brain surface
(partially removed skull) with no parenchymal penetration to electronically
steer highly focused ultrasound beams towards different neural targets. Such a
system can be utilized in basic neuroscience experiments to address the most
fundamental scientific questions in ultrasound neuromodulation: underlying
mechanism, efficacy, and safety. This work will explore and establish vibro-
acoustography for high energy efficiency in IuUS. It will investigate
fundamental limits of spatial resolution and coverage as well as energy
efficiency in IuUS by developing numerical and computational models based on
wave equations to explore effects of different transducer geometries,
frequencies, and configurations as well as their interactions with tissue and
electronics. To manage post-implantation uncertainties (e.g. micromotions), this
work will explore and create a learning-based all-acoustic image-guided system
for accurate anatomical targeting. An on-chip machine-learning model with
offline training will be developed to dynamically map changes in the profile of
acoustic beams to micromotions and tissue changes in a fast and accurate
fashion. An inductively interrogated closed-loop (recording and stimulation)
system-on-chip with novel circuitry will also be developed for IuUS. Finally, a
system-level demonstration will establish the fundamental basis for
IuUS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.