* 1942913
* CAREER:  Streamlining Task Deployment on Crowdsourcing Platforms
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Senjuti Basu Roy, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 05/31/2025
* USD 428,441.00

Crowdsourcing leverages online infrastructure to tap an under-explored and
richly heterogeneous pool of human knowledge and cognition for solving a variety
of tasks that are otherwise considered hard for machines to solve alone.
Crowdsourcing systems are built on private or public platforms and are a popular
means of deploying a variety of tasks that require human intelligence. Task
deployment on such platforms requires identifying appropriate deployment
strategies to satisfy deployment parameters, provided by requesters as
thresholds on quality, latency, and cost, and also requires analysis of the
workforce that is available to undertake the deployed tasks. To date, task
deployment remains a painstakingly manual process, as there is little to no help
for requesters in deciding how to organize the workforce, in what style, and in
what structure to satisfy deployment parameters. Consequently, requesters and
workers are mostly confined to one platform, as there is no easy portability of
deployment processes across platforms. This project investigates a middle layer
that sits between multiple stakeholders in a crowdsourcing ecosystem to aid
requesters in deploying crowdsourcing tasks by allowing easy and flexible
specification of deployment constraints and goals, and then recommending
deployment strategies based on those specifications. Development of this system
thus enables the portability and reuse of deployment processes across
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this project develops a
middleware system called SLOAN (Scalable, decLarative, Optimization-driven,
Adaptive, and uNified) with three integrated components: (1) The Deployment
Strategy Recommendation Engine is optimized to accommodate multi-stakeholders in
the ecosystem, and is responsible for modeling and recommending deployment
strategies to a batch of requests. (2) The Workforce Analytics Engine analyzes
the available workforce and feeds to the Recommendation Engine, as the deployed
tasks are to be undertaken by the workers. The outputs of this engine are
estimations of workers' preferences or human factors, such as availability of
the workers, as precise (discrete), or imprecise (intervals or probability
distribution functions) information. (3) The Result Aggregation Module estimates
the quality of the deployed tasks, and then feeds to the other two engines for
readjustment. It is empowered by fully automated or hybrid algorithms that
sparingly involve human intelligence inside machine algorithms. The development
plan of SLOAN involves principled modeling, rigorous algorithm design,
declarative framework development, deployment and integration inside multiple
real world platforms. Different components of SLOAN are empowered with multi-
objective discrete optimization and computational geometric algorithms, as well
as multi-faceted modeling techniques adapted from machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.