* 1942150
* CAREER: Kinetics and Molecular Origin of Shear Banding in Wormlike Micellar Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Hadi Mohammadigoushki, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2025
* USD 397,875.00

Micelles are aggregates of surfactants that can form structures of various
shapes, including long flexible strands that are called wormlike micelles.
Micelles are used in a variety of products to control the physical properties of
the material during its processing and use. Under flow, solutions of wormlike
micelles sometimes exhibit a curious phenomenon known as shear banding in which
the micelles segregate into multiple thin bands. Shear banding is important,
because it can strongly influence the properties of the solution during
processing and affect the quality of the final product. This CAREER award will
support a comprehensive investigation of shear banding of wormlike micellar
solutions. Multiple experimental techniques will be used to understand how the
concentration of the wormlike micelles, their end-to-end lengths, and the
physical properties of the micellar solution influence shear banding. The
results will be useful to process engineers and scientists who work with a wide
variety of materials, because shear banding is also observed in other
industrially important materials such as emulsions, foams, oil-sands and
colloidal suspensions. The research team will involve diverse groups of students
in the research. To demonstrate the importance of the research to younger
students, the team will produce FlowKits for teachers and students to explore
the unusual properties the complex fluids in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms of shear banding in
wormlike micellar solutions remains a critical challenge due to limitations of
the traditional techniques to probe fluid microstructures. This CAREER award
will circumvent these limits and experimentally examine a) flow-induced micellar
breakage and b) flow-induced concentration gradients and c) the effects of
viscoelastic instabilities on the mechanisms of shear banding via Rheo-DOSY-NMR
and Rheo-qNMR techniques. This will be accomplished by measuring spatio-temporal
evolution of micellar length and concentrations across the gap of a Taylor-
Couette flow, i.e. flow between two concentric cylinders, for a broad range of
systems and conditions. The research will establish the connections among fluid
properties (elasticity, inertia, micellar entanglement), processing conditions
(flow ramp up and geometry curvature) and macroscale kinetics of shear banding
flow formation. A combination of experiments and simulations will provide the
first systematic comparisons between experiments and various models of shear
banding in terms of the local micellar length, concentration gradients, velocity
profiles and shear stresses. These experimental results will provide new data
which are essential for verifying existing theories and/or developing new
predictive models. Results will help engineers to rationally design novel shear
banding materials with improved properties for enhanced oil recovery, drag
reduction, and many consumer products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.