* 1942167
* CAREER: Circadian Control and Integration of Feeding and Metabolic Rhythms in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Daniel Cavanaugh, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/28/2025
* USD 780,905.00

Organisms exhibit ~24-hour (circadian) rhythms in behavioral and physiological
processes that depend on the presence of dedicated clock cells in the brain that
keep time through a molecular clock that maintains daily rhythms of gene
expression. In addition, molecular clocks are present in most peripheral
tissues, where they serve tissue-specific functions. Together, these make up an
extended clock network that synchronizes behavioral and physiological processes
with the external environment and organizes them with respect to one another.
For example, the circadian system generates rhythms in feeding behaviors such
that feeding occurs at optimal times of day, and concurrently upregulates
metabolic pathways in anticipation of increased food intake. Proper circadian
organization is essential for organismal fitness, but the cellular and molecular
mechanisms through which circadian rhythms are generated and integrated across
multiple clock-containing tissues are unknown. To that end, experiments outlined
in this project will use the powerful model organism of the fruit fly,
Drosophila melanogaster, to identify neuronal pathways through which clock cells
establish circadian rhythms of feeding behavior and to further delineate how
feeding rhythms are coordinated with peripheral metabolic rhythms. These
experiments will be conducted in collaboration with postdoctoral and
undergraduate researchers in the lab who will also serve as mentors for a summer
high school internship program that will expand participation to groups
traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
understanding of the manner through which the circadian system modulates
behavioral outputs and coordinates these with physiological rhythms requires
analysis of novel circadian endpoints in addition to rest and activity, which
has thus far been the focus of most circadian research. Objective 1 will use a
newly-developed feeding monitor to determine the cellular logic through which
the central clock regulates feeding rhythms. To determine whether distinct
central clock mechanisms control feeding and locomotor activity rhythms, period
and strength of feeding rhythms will be measured following genetic manipulations
that alter molecular clock function or neuronal activity in discrete clock cell
populations. Objective 2 will investigate downstream output pathways through
which feeding rhythms are produced. To enact behavioral rhythms, circadian
information must be transmitted across output pathways to brain areas that
regulate behaviors. The Cavanaugh laboratory recently implicated SIFa peptide-
expressing neurons as a component of the circadian output pathway controlling
feeding. To continue to trace the circadian feeding circuit, an RNA
interference-based behavioral screen will be conducted to identify cells in
which the SIFa receptor must be present for normal feeding rhythms. Finally,
Objective 3 will investigate how feeding and metabolic rhythms are coordinated
by the clock network. The fat body is a peripheral clock tissue that serves
metabolic functions. A combined transcriptomic and metabolomic approach will be
employed to determine how loss of SIFa signaling or selective molecular clock
abrogation in the brain or fat body affects fat body gene oscillations and
whole-animal metabolite abundance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.