* 1942734
* CAREER: Mechanisms of division plane orientation in plant cells
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Carolyn Rasmussen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,132,160.00

This research seeks to understand the mechanisms regulating proliferative plant
cell division, which eventually generates the majority of biomass on the planet.
Precise control over the positioning of divisions within cells plays a critical
role in overall patterning and development. Despite its fundamental importance,
we know relatively little about how division planes are oriented in
multicellular organisms. Plants are an excellent model to understand division
plane orientation within multicellular contexts because plant cells do not
migrate and have clearly defined structures and proteins that unambiguously
label the future division site. This project will investigate 1) how division
site-localized proteins and microtubules promote proper positioning of the new
cell wall 2) how the cell division machinery is guided towards the division
site, and 3) how the position of the cell division plane is modulated by local
mechanical or biochemical cues from neighboring cells. This project will provide
training that advances the U.S. scientific workforce in plant biology, an area
of national need. One graduate student, two undergraduates, five REU students,
and one postdoctoral researcher will perform this research while gaining
experience in communicating their work at local and national conferences,
mentoring others, project management, and ethics. In addition, 480 freshman
biology students will participate in this research to enhance their technical
training and understanding of genomics and molecular biology approaches. The
investigator continue to train and mentor under-represented, first-generation
undergraduate and graduate students from UCR, a Hispanic Serving Institution.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To test the hypothesis that division site localized
proteins modulate microtubule dynamics to position the forming cell wall, the
investigator will use a combination of in vitro microtubule protein-interaction
assays combined with in vivo imaging at the division site. In addition to
assessing how currently known proteins function at the division site, the
investigator has used a forward genetic approach to identify mutants with
defects in cytokinesis and division plane orientation in maize. Using mapping-
by-sequencing, she will identify the causative mutations in these mutants, and
elucidate their interaction with known division plane orientation pathways and
proteins. She hypothesizes that two functionally redundant pathways contribute
to division plane positioning in Arabidopsis. She will use a sensitized mutant
background to screen for synthetic enhancer mutations that cause defects in
division plane orientation. This will be carried out by an introductory biology
laboratory course at University of California, Riverside (UCR). Finally, she
will use a combination of mathematical modeling and biophysical experiments to
identify local cues that alter plant division plane
positioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.