* 1942763
* CAREER: Data-driven computations to infer chemomechanical coupling from cryo-electron microscopy and support zero-cost online biophysics programs in high schools
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Abhishek Singharoy, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 01/31/2025
* USD 611,586.00

The growth of modern civilization is closely tied to controlled movement. This
control is engineered by motors that extract energy from a fuel source and
convert it to mechanical energy. Similarly, motors are an indispensable part of
biology, and cells employ motor proteins to perform the energy conversions that
sustain life. These molecular motors must minimize energy loss, be robust enough
to withstand constant cycling, and display a high efficiency of energy
conversion. Data science approaches, hand-in-hand with experimental work, bring
forth the opportunity to learn how such features are achieved in a family of
molecular assemblies that function as biological motors. The working principles
revealed by this work will guide the design of better man-made, bioinspired
devices that harness energy for the world's future needs, can potentially be
utilized to enhance crop yields, or even tapped to understand the molecular
origins of ageing. Advances in computer technology allow us to bring the
excitement of research into how these powerful molecular machines work to high
schools with limited computer resources by creating virtual laboratories that
illustrate dynamic molecular machines in biological systems at no cost. Thus,
leading edge concepts in biology can be taught and appreciated, and spur
critical thinking, at otherwise underserved high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular motors exist as large oligomeric protein
complexes. A goal of this project to determine whether the oligomeric state or
copy-number of the motor proteins is responsible for their low overall light- or
nutrient-to-ATP yield, underscoring a "biological energy crisis". Three
different V-ATPase motors will be investigated to decipher the coupling between
ATP hydrolysis, reconfigurable oligomerization and metabolic activity.
Reengineering of these motors offers tangible biosynthetic alternatives (mutants
or chimeras) to improve biological energy turnover. The primary method for
studying the motor proteins include molecular dynamics and multi-physics
simulations. These computations will be guided by ATPase models derived from
experimental data by machine learning of two-dimensional cryo-electron
microscopy images. The computational results will be restrained by X-ray
crystallographic and single-molecule imaging experiments. As a technological
product, new schemes for deriving large-scale molecular dynamics from cryo-EM
and crystallographic data will be developed. Addressing a major societal need, a
cloud-based remote visualization platform will be created to offer free enquiry-
based online education to underserved high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.