* 1942918
* CAREER: Discourse Level Event-Event Relation Identification
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Ruihong Huang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2025
* USD 462,558.00

Understanding events (protests, elections, disease outbreaks, natural disasters)
from natural language text is key to important analytic tasks like predicting
future events, detecting fake news and other attempts to validate events,
managing extreme events, answering complex questions and generating concise text
summaries for analysis. Existing event extraction systems focus on identifying
isolated events, but have rarely considered relations between events.
Consequently, the extracted events are merely facts describing who did what, but
it is hard to interpret how and why those events happened. Indeed, events tend
to be described in a complex relationship with other events, for example, news
articles are incomplete if they report an assassination event without mentioning
how the event was conducted, or if they describe a protest event without
information on why it was launched. This Faculty Early Career Development
project aims to generate document-level event graphs that capture rich relations
between events mentioned anywhere in a document, which will enable us to
contextualize events, transform event extraction from simply extracting
individual event facts to extracting informative context-rich event
interpretations, and better support various event-oriented applications. The
project will integrate research with education, train and prepare future
researchers with advanced information extraction views and methods, as well as
expose a large number of diverse undergraduate students and high school students
to computer science and natural language processing research with a focus on
significantly broadening participation of minorities and underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building document-level event graphs requires
identifying relations between two events even when they are sentences away,
which presents multiple technical challenges. This project will lay the
foundation for discourse-aware event-event relation identification, and study
correlations between event-event relations and different dimensions of discourse
structures. The research is motivated by the observation that events are major
materials in forming a cohesive story and the presence of events is tightly
correlated with the overall discourse structure of a document. The project
develops both supervised and unsupervised learning methods to build effective
discourse level event-event relation recognizers. Specifically, the project
develops discourse guided approaches to identify two important types of event-
event relations, coreference and temporal ordering, which are fundamental for
building meaningful event graphs. Then, guided by event discourse correlations
obtained via supervised learning, unsupervised learning methods are developed
that can effectively make use of large volumes of unlabeled data, deal with
lexical diversity issues and improve robustness of systems for event-event
relation identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.