* 1942922
* CAREER: Investigation of the transcriptional networks that coordinate sperm morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Jordan Ward, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 11/30/2024
* USD 956,879.00

Sperm are highly specialized types of cells which, along with eggs, are
essential for passing genetic information down to the next generation. This
project will use the nematode, C. elegans, in order to understand how genes are
turned on and off to coordinate the complex cell development program leading to
sperm formation. The research will be driven in large part by University of
California-Santa Cruz undergraduate transfer students. UC Santa Cruz is a
Hispanic-Serving Institution with a diverse student body. The institution
enrolls a large number of junior transfer students, which is expected to
increase due to a UC initiative to streamline the application process. The
transfer student populations are diverse, comprising a large percentage of
underrepresented minorities, and face significant challenges in STEM education
and access to research experiences. This project will test a program to increase
the retention and academic success of junior transfer students, involve them in
research, create community, build identity, and help them navigate their journey
to a UC Santa Cruz degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spermatogenesis involves a
cascade of morphogenetic events. A single precursor cell must adopt and maintain
a sperm fate, undergo reductive division, eliminate the vast majority of its
cytoplasmic contents in the residual body, assemble and traffic organelles, and
condense its chromatin. This project uses a combination of cutting-edge genome
editing, drug-inducible protein depletion, and genomics to define the
transcriptional networks that coordinate sperm morphogenesis. The research will
investigate how the nuclear hormone receptor transcription factor NHR-23
controls meiotic division and organelle formation in spermatogenesis. It will
test whether transcription factor inactivation is necessary for chromatin
compaction and subsequent meiotic events in spermatogenesis. Genome editing and
conditional protein depletion will be used to screen 20 uncharacterized
transcription factors enriched in the spermatogenic germline for roles in
spermatogenesis. Defining the gene regulatory networks underpinning
spermatogenesis and defining key effectors is essential for developing formal
models of sperm fate execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Genetic Mechanisms cluster and the Cellular Dynamics and Function
cluster in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.