* 1942851
* CAREER: Building Secure Applications with Non-Static Information Flow Policies
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Danfeng Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 416,863.00

Many security concerns in computer systems can be understood in terms of
information flows: private and untrusted data, as well as data derived from
them, should never flow to unintended channels in a computer system. In real-
world systems, such security concerns typically change over time. For example, a
payment system is allowed to use credit card details during a transaction, but
it should not retain any record of credit card details once the transaction is
complete. The dynamic nature of security concerns makes it challenging to build,
verify and debug applications with non-static information flow policies.
Consequently, the information flow policies of many security-sensitive
applications are currently either unspecified at all, or being treated in an ad-
hoc manner, resulting in large trusted computing bases and many security bugs in
real applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award investigates an
integrated research and education plan designed to transform the way that
programmers understand, specify, verify and debug non-static information flow
policies. It contains three components to address the key obstacles of building
secure applications with non-static policy: (1) Dependent policy gives a simple,
declarative and unified view of non-static policies, including dynamic policy,
downgrading policy and erasure policy that are currently formalized and checked
with unconnected semantic goals, (2) CONST, a constraint language for analyzing
non-static policies in applications, and (3) An error diagnosis module that
provides useful feedbacks when a program violates the specified non-static
policy. This research will also develop and open-source a new toolchain that
integrates the three novel components, making it feasible to specify, verify and
debug real applications with non-static information flow
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.