* 1942693
* CAREER: Designing Head-Mounted Display Systems to Support People with Low Vision in Outdoor Navigation
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Shiri Azenkot, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2025
* USD 423,932.00

Even with guide canes and dogs, people with visual impairments face severe
challenges when navigating outdoors. Researchers have proposed mobility and
wayfinding systems like smart canes and accessible routing applications that
provide a range of audio or haptic feedback. However, over 90% of the visually
impaired population has low vision, which means they have usable but limited
vision that cannot be fully corrected. People with low vision typically prefer
to use their vision and not rely on audio or haptic tools. This research program
aims to design applications for this user community. Unlike prior approaches to
accessible navigation, different kinds of visual enhancements and audio cues
will be explored to help with several outdoor navigation tasks. Project outcomes
will help developers of low vision technologies, teachers, orientation and
mobility instructors, and rehabilitation counselors who work with people with
low vision. Additional broader impact will derive from this research by engaging
people with disabilities as members of the team as well as through the design of
a new accessibility course in which students have extended interactions with
mentors who have disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop
and evaluate applications for head-mounted displays that provide targeted visual
and audio enhancements and cues to help people with low vision in outdoor
navigation tasks. Through an iterative user-centered design process, different
types of vision enhancements and visual and audio cues, such as magnification,
arrows, and beeps, will be designed and compared. These enhancements and cues
will highlight salient information in the environment and increase its
accessibility. Four navigation tasks will be addressed: avoiding obstacles in
one's path, navigating elevation changes, reading signs, and wayfinding to a
specified destination. For each task, one or more functional prototypes will be
implemented and evaluated in naturalistic settings with involvement of members
of the target user community. Based on the findings, guidelines for the use of
visual vs. audio cues for different kinds of low vision conditions will be
promulgated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.