* 1942192
* CAREER: How female aggression evolves: scaling genomics and phenomics from individuals to species
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Kimberly Rosvall, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,010,941.00

Animal behavior is an interdisciplinary science, but research that integrates
genetic and physiological mechanisms across multiple species is limited, leaving
uncertainty as to how behavioral diversity arises in nature. The research fills
this knowledge gap by focusing on female-female aggression, a behavior that is
widespread and beneficial in the animal kingdom, but poorly understood. This
research will experimentally test how individual differences in aggression arise
at the level of the brain. In addition, experiments and comparative analyses
will explore whether the physiological and environmental drivers of aggression
are conserved or unique across multiple species. These efforts will yield
quantitative models on the origin of behavioral variation, including
perspectives that connect multiple levels of biological complexity, from genes
to the environment and from individuals to species. This research is coupled
with an educational plan that injects writing into research-based curricula in
animal behavior. Activities include writing exercises and training that will
improve scientific comprehension, critical thinking and communication in
undergraduate and graduate students. Freshmen and sophomores will also be guided
through the full scientific process through a new writing intensive course-based
research program using data collected here. These activities will generate
lasting institutional programs for improved research and scientific education.
By removing poor writing as a barrier to success, these activities will attract
and retain diverse scientists, generating a better prepared workforce in animal
behavior and allied biological disciplines. Dissemination of results to
community groups and schools will further amplify these goals, improving science
literacy and knowledge of animal behavior for the general public and specialists
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to integrate
mechanistic and functional perspectives on within- and among-species variation
in female aggression to unveil how behavioral evolution unfolds. By contrasting
neurogenomic responses to aggression at both individual and species levels, new
data will reveal how the mechanisms generating behavioral variation are
conserved across levels of biological organization. Together with phylogenetic
analyses on the evolutionary drivers of female aggression across &gt;30 species,
this research will systematically test the degree of parallelism (or lack
thereof) in behavioral evolution, including both functional and mechanistic
perspectives. Earlier efforts to understand competitive traits in females have
met with limited success, but the hypotheses tested previously were derived from
research on male animals. Considering that female birds are the initial
dispersers and therefore front-line responders to new environmental challenges,
the studies on females are especially critical. The integrated research and
educational plan offers an extraordinary opportunity to link function and
mechanism of behavior over evolutionary time, while also changing the culture of
scientific training in ways that feed back to advances in animal behavior and
allied STEM fields. The writing-research activities directed at multiple levels
in higher education will better prepare the future STEM workforce. Through the
mentorship of undergrad, grad, and postdoctoral trainees, and new partnerships
with a writing intensive course-based research experience, this grant
facilitates exceptional training in integrative behavioral research and
establishes self-sustaining programs that will generate advances at the
interface of behavior, evolution, and genomics. This work is jointly funded by
the Behavioral Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems
and the Evolutionary Processes Cluster in the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.