* 1942402
* CAREER: Maintaining volitional effort during electrical stimulation-assisted stroke rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Michael Fu, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2025
* USD 549,988.00

Limb paresis (muscular weakness due to nerve damage or disease) affects millions
of Americans with neurological injuries such as stroke and cerebral palsy.
Functional electrical stimulation (FES) is widely used to assist weakened limb
movement so that people with neurological injury can better participate in
therapy. Though it has never been proven, FES is thought to promote motor skill
relearning because it synchronizes a person’s intent to move with limb movement.
If this is not the case, there is a risk that participants can&lt;br/&gt;”slack”
by reducing effort and allowing FES to passively move the weakened limb, which
does not benefit motor skill relearning. This CAREER project addresses this
issue by developing techniques to measure and prevent slacking during FES
assisted therapy, which could have broad clinical impact as FES is widely used
in rehabilitation medicine. The project's educational goal is to use video game
production as a platform to develop opportunities for K-12 and college students
to actively participate in rehabilitation science and engineering.
Rehabilitation video game development will be integrated into ongoing science
education programs for primary school, high school, and college students. A
“Games for FUNction” program will train college and high school students to
create video games for clinician clients and an “E-stim for Educators” lab will
train primary school teachers to introduce rehabilitation engineering to their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator’s long-term mission is
to deploy home-based virtual environment therapies that restore lost function
for people with brain injury. Towards this mission, this CAREER project will
create an effort-dependent FES assistance modality and demonstrate its ability
to maintain participant effort during task-based and video game-based stroke
rehabilitation. Studies are designed to answer the following questions: How
accurately can effort be estimated during FES? Does FES assistance cause
participants to slack during task practice? Can an effort-dependent FES control
algorithm maintain participant effort during hand therapy video games? The
project builds on preliminary results showing that, during time-varying (dropped
pulses) FES stimulation, methods can be developed to extract volitional EMG
(electromyography) signals, which can be used to estimate participant effort,
from EMG signals that also contain the much greater in amplitude signal evoked
by the stimulation. The Research Plan is organized under three Aims. The FIRST
Aim is to determine how accurately volitional EMG can be estimated during time-
varying FES using existing methods. Using data obtained from adults with chronic
post-stroke hemiplegia with hand opening impairment, studies are designed to
reveal how well existing signal processing techniques can eliminate FES
interference and estimate participant effort during volitional finger extension
efforts. The SECOND Aim is to characterize the effect of FES assistance on
finger extension efforts when practicing tasks with FES-assisted hand opening to
determine if FES assistance causes participants to slack during finger extension
efforts and to shed light on the unknown relationship between FES and effort.
Computational EMG occlusion models will be used to create person-specific
calibrations to prevent effort underestimation. The THIRD Aim is to design an
FES assistance modality that maintains continuous effort during task practice.
The design includes an effort-dependent control framework that translates the
degree of non-paretic hand opening directly into the stimulation pulse width
applied to the paretic hand by way of a recruitment curve. This contralaterally-
controlled FES modality (CCFES) will be used to investigate whether slacking can
be prevented during FES assisted finger extension when FES assistance is applied
in direct proportion to volitional effort and hand opening error, with the
expectation that effort dependent FES will increase participant effort compared
to effort independent FES. Though this project focuses on motor function
recovery following stroke, FES is widely used in rehabilitation medicine, thus
the proposed effort-dependent FES modality is also expected to lead to more
effective delivery therapy for people with cerebral palsy, spinal cord injury,
traumatic brain injury, sports injury, and pain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.