* 1942597
* CAREER: Exploiting Topology in Graph Algorithm Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Kyle Fox, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2025
* USD 489,631.00

Graphs, also known as networks, are used to represent many kinds of
relationships between pairs of entities. For example, a graph may describe pairs
of networking devices directly connected together or pairs of roadway
intersections connected by a stretch of road. Many useful tasks, such as
understanding the reliability of a computer network or finding the fastest route
between two locations, can be performed by doing computations on these graphs.
When a graph has certain properties such as being drawable on a piece of paper
without crossings between its connections, it becomes possible to do these types
of computations much more quickly than if the properties were not present. Many
of these faster computations rely on important results from topology, the
mathematical study of what properties geometric objects maintain after certain
types of deformations. This project seeks to better understand the role topology
can take both in performing fast computations on graphs and explaining what
graph properties are necessary for these fast computations. The project aims to
make substantial topology based additions to the toolkit used in graph
computations. These additions should make new computational tasks possible and
greatly simplify established tasks. The project involves a substantial education
component as well that includes educating students on the known connections
between topology and computer science and providing undergraduate minority
students their first opportunities to participate in the research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities have three components. The
first involves generalizing known planar graph algorithms for many fundamental
problems in computer science to graphs embeddable in low complexity surfaces.
The second component explores how topological intuitions and tools created
during the first component can be used to solve difficult problems back in the
setting of planar graphs. The third component involves pushing these tools to
their limits in the creation of algorithms for more general families of graphs
than those embeddable in low complexity surfaces with a focus on the so-called
H-minor-free graphs. The types of problems studied for all three components
include the computations of optimal network flows, minimum cuts, and shortest
paths. Student education will take place through the development of a new course
in computational topology at the awardee institution that focusses on graph
algorithms and topological data analysis. Activities for undergraduate minority
students will consist primarily of the implementation and experimental analysis
of algorithms designed during the primary research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.