* 1942143
* CAREER: Delineate context-specific gene regulation in 3D chromatin space
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Jianrong Wang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 06/30/2025
* USD 678,820.00

The genome is home to thousands of genes, whose activities are turned on and off
by many biological molecules. The proper functioning of gene control systems
profoundly influences all aspects of life, such as the formation of diverse
tissues, evolution of different species, and response to environmental stimuli.
However, the genome is not simply a one-dimensional entity but takes on complex
three-dimensional (3D) structure, which plays a fundamental role to facilitate
interactions among biological molecules. The overarching goal of this project is
to develop rigorous computational methods to discover the control mechanisms of
genes by integrating 3D genome structure information. The answer to this
question is crucial for revealing the underlying rules of life which will
provide us the capacity to link complex genome to changes in a biological
system. This project will generate open-source software and large-scale
resources with wide applications and impacts in cell biology, bioengineering,
disease diagnostics, crop improvement and ecology. Activities, such as summer
research experiences, online resources for public scientific literacy, and
education modules for high-school students, will greatly motivate next
generation students to pursue interdisciplinary study and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a suite of advanced
probabilistic models and efficient inference algorithms to delineate complex
gene regulation by systematically integrating the 3D chromatin structure
information. The first goal of this project is to develop a predictive algorithm
of cell-type specific transcription factor binding site based on a novel
Bayesian graphical model. The second goal is to design an efficient search
algorithm to identify structures of regulatory circuitry of transcription
factors involved in context-specific gene expression. Building upon these
methodological developments, the third goal is to develop a new regulatory
network-based algorithm to predict gene expression changes induced by different
perturbations. The algorithms and software generated by this project will be
tools for both experimental and computational biologists to analyze large-scale
multi-omics datasets, to derive interpretable predictions, and to understand how
complex gene regulatory systems are coordinated in 3D chromatin space. To
motivate and engage students, especially underrepresented minority
undergraduates, into biological and computational science, novel virtual reality
visualization Youtube videos and Jupyter notebooks teaching materials will be
disseminated along with participation in national Women in Engineering Program
and NSF REU program. Results of this project, including the developed
computational infrastructure and education materials, can be found at
https://cmse.msu.edu/directory/faculty/jianrong-wang/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.