* 1942178
* CAREER: Phenotypic and developmental effects of enhancer variation on cichlid craniofacial evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Kara Powder, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

Genes are precisely turned on and off by their regulatory elements. This project
examines how altered gene regulation can generate changes in animal development,
specifically in the facial skeleton. This work will identify regulatory elements
through genome analysis, quantify how altered gene regulation during embryonic
development changes facial shape, and assess the effects of DNA mutations on
regulatory function using microscopy. Given that (1) &gt;85% of disease-causing
mutations affect gene regulation and (2) changes to gene regulation are
predicted to be a major source of evolutionary diversity, this work will provide
insights into how DNA changes can produce both natural variation in animal
development and disease in humans. Educational activities will improve factors
key in retention of undergraduate and K-12 students in STEM disciplines. This
will be accomplished through (1) mentorship of undergraduates and (2) creation
of inquiry-based activities for the middle school classroom that will be
implemented in local schools and distributed to educators nationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the functional impact of genetic variation
in cis-regulation is a major gap in our understanding of the generation of
phenotypic diversity. The research objective of this project is to analyze the
phenotypic function of non-coding, gene regulatory enhancers within the context
of craniofacial evolution in cichlid fishes, a textbook example of an adaptive
radiation. The specific aims are to (1) utilize four complementary genomic
strategies to comprehensively identify candidate enhancers with genetic
variation, (2) quantify phenotypic and transcriptional effects of modulating
enhancer activity using CRISPR-Cas9, and (3) empirically assess the effect of
genetic variation on enhancer activity. With a focus on the functional effect of
enhancers in vivo in terms of activity, transcriptional regulation, and effect
on phenotype, this work will address a major gap in knowledge of the genotype-
phenotype relationship. These data will provide empirical information for those
designing models of the grammar of gene regulation, a framework to significantly
accelerate the discovery and systematic documentation of causal genetic
variations in non-coding DNA, and experimental evidence for a central theory of
Evolutionary Developmental Biology (Evo-Devo).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Developmental Systems Cluster of IOS, and by the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.