* 1942930
* CAREER: Equity in the Making: Investigating Spatial Arrangements of Makerspaces and Their Impact on Diverse User Populations
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Marijel Melo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 05/31/2025
* USD 581,860.00

Makerspaces are places for hands on application of STEM concepts and skills.
They are stocked with high-tech tools, supplies, and equipment, such as 3D
printers, to support collaborative, creative work to build things. Given their
potential to support STEM learning, makerspaces are increasingly integrated into
universities across the country. However, if observers watched to see who
decides to take advantage of a makerspace, they would see many students stick
their heads in the door, look around, and leave. The observers would also likely
note that disproportionately more of the students who decide to leave are from
groups that are underrepresented in STEM. In this CAREER project, the researcher
will examine the role that the spatial arrangement of a university makerspace
plays in deterring and attracting diverse undergraduate participants. Broader
impacts of the work include the potential to identify approaches to make STEM-
rich learning environments more welcoming and inclusive.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will investigate the emotional and
affective responses that a university makerspace induces in potential users, and
in turn examine approaches to re-design the arrangement of a university
makerspace to attract participation of broad and diverse undergraduate
communities. This qualitative, applied research program will employ interviews,
surveys, and naturalistic inquiry-based quasi-experiments that are situated
within physical and virtual environments. The guiding questions for the research
include: What are the defining features of a university makerspace? What and who
are involved in the design process? What is the rationale underlying these
design decisions? To what extent does the spatial organization of a makerspace
influence whether students, particularly those from underrepresented
undergraduate communities, decide to use their university's makerspace? What
design interventions are needed to spatially communicate that a makerspace is
equitable and inclusive? The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
is a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that supports early-career
faculty who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education. This CAREER project is supported by NSF's Education &amp; Human
Resources Directorate Core Research Program and its Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.