* 1942193
* CAREER: Digitized data, dung beetles and the dome: improving the understanding of species distribution through research and planetarium-based education.
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Nicole Gunter, Cleveland Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 01/31/2025
* USD 837,897.00

Understanding species distribution is central to the biodiversity modeling that
is increasingly used to inform conservation planning and other applied sciences
that benefit society. This project integrates a research program with a new
informal education program to enhance both the scientific and public
understanding of evolutionary and planetary processes that contribute to species
distribution. The research component of this project will assess the importance
of evolutionary history in niche modeling that estimates species distribution,
with the aim of improving the approach used to select variable environmental
layers used in these models. The ability to more accurately predict species
distribution under both present and future climate scenarios is essential for
identifying and understanding the habitats of species at risk of extinction,
modeling the spread of introduced species or medically important invertebrates
that can transmit disease, and much more. The findings from the research will be
incorporated into the new informal education program that teaches biogeography
under a planetarium dome. This program also will leverage the global efforts
that have amassed over 1.3 billion specimen records worldwide, as well as
technological advances in planetarium software, to visualize biodiversity data
in an immersive and dynamic setting. This novel outlet to broadcast digitized
data will transform how institutions equipped with planetariums communicate
biodiversity data and will create endless opportunities to develop new programs
for sharing biodiversity research with the public. Improved public understanding
of these complex scientific concepts can facilitate changes in attitudes to the
impact of environmental change through increased awareness of the connectivity
between planetary processes and life on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combined
systematic and phylogeographic study of Australian dung beetles (Coleoptera:
Scarabaeidae: Scarabaeinae) will be used to assess the importance of
evolutionary history in environmental niche modeling. This model-group contains
both a relictual Gondwanan and a younger Indomalayan clade that will be assessed
in a phylogenetic and ecological framework to explore the heritability of
environmental tolerance in closely-related but biogeographically distinct taxa.
The evolution of niche dynamics for these biogeographically distinct faunas will
be assessed through comparative analysis of niche models, predicted niche
occupancy profiles and disparity through time plots. Findings will inform
environmental layers selection for future analyses and improve the understanding
of biotic and abiotic factors that contribute to species distribution. Beyond
informing a key question in evolutionary biology, these results will be
integrated into the new planetarium program that aims to improve public
scientific literacy relating to species' evolution, ecology and planetary
change. Program content will align with Ohio's grade 8 learning standard for
STEM and will be presented to museum guests in the onsite planetarium, while
offsite school programming will be hosted in a mobile planetarium. Program
evaluation will assess the impact of teaching evolution using planetariums, the
contribution of museums to informal education, and best-practices for leveraging
curatorial expertise in public and school programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.