* 1942438
* CAREER: The Tuning and Topography of the Ventral Visual Stream
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Talia Konkle, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 574,153.00

Humans can recognize thousands of objects, like cups, cars, shoes, and
buildings, all from patterns of light entering our eyes. A major scientific
frontier is to understand how the brain accomplishes this feat. How are incoming
light waves converted by the brain into representations of objects in the world
around us? The goal of this project is to characterize the organization of
object information across the visual system--what kind of visual information is
being represented at different stages of the visual processing, and how is it
mapped along the brainâ€™s surface? By using a combination of methods, including
measurements of human brains, coupled with computational modeling approaches,
this project will advance our understanding of visual brain organization. The
project will also promote women's advancement in science, highlighting women in
computational fields, with the goal to foster young women's scientific careers
into academic professorships and research-focused industry
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim will focus on the nature of the
tuning of brain responses to objects along the visual processing hierarchy.
Specifically, the project will examine the hypothesis that mid-level features
related to generic texture and shape information are tightly linked to high-
level properties of objects like their animacy and real-world size. The second
aim will characterize the tuning of responses in the ventral stream, by
measuring visual and cognitive similarity spaces using both behavior and deep
neural networks, and then relating these with neural responses measured with
functional neuroimaging. The third aim will introduce a computational framework
to relate tuning to topography using Kohonen self-organizing maps. Specifically,
the PI will first focus on the large-scale organization of early visual cortex
retinotopy as a proof of concept, and then expand this framework to object-
responsive cortex. Thus, the PI aims to combine mathematical models of spatial
organization with deep neural network representations of visual features, to
produce artificial cortical maps that are directly comparable with the cortical
organization of the human brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.