* 1942580
* CAREER:Exploring Teacher Noticing of Students' Multimodal Algebraic Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Janet Walkoe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 05/31/2025
* USD 673,274.00

Effective teachers of mathematics attend to and respond to the substance of
students’ thinking in supporting classroom learning. Teacher professional
development programs have supported teachers in learning to notice students’
mathematical thinking and using that noticing to make instructional decisions in
the classroom. This project investigates and expands teachers’ learning to
notice in two important ways. First, the research expands beyond teachers’
noticing of written and verbal thinking to attend to gesture and other aspects
of embodied and multimodal thinking. Second, the project focuses on algebraic
thinking and seeks specifically to understand how teacher noticing relates to
the content of algebra. Bringing together multimodal thinking and the
mathematical ideas in algebra has the potential to support teachers in providing
broader access to algebraic thinking for more students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
study teacher noticing of multimodal algebraic thinking, this project will
facilitate video club sessions in which teachers examine and annotate classroom
video. The video will allow text-based and visual annotation of the videos to
obtain rich portraits of the thinking that teachers notice as they examine
algebra-related middle school practice. The research team will create a video
library focused on three main algebraic thinking areas: equality, functional
thinking, and proportional reasoning. Clips will be chosen that feature
multimodal student thinking about these content areas, and provide moments that
would be fruitful for advancing student thinking. Two cohorts of preservice
teachers will engage in year-long video clubs using this video library, annotate
videos using an advanced technological tool, and engage in reflective interviews
about their noticing practices. Follow-up classroom observations will be
conducted to see how teachers then notice multimodal algebraic thinking in their
classrooms. Materials to conduct the video clubs in other contexts and the
curated video library will be made available, along with analyses of the teacher
learning that resulted from their implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) proposal awarded under the
Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. The Discovery Research PreK-12
(DRK-12) program seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.