* 1942558
* CAREER:Electro-Optical Logic Gates Based on Perovskite Phototransistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* John Labram, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/28/2025
* USD 554,999.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate opto-electronic circuits based on
a new class of materials, metal halide perovskites. These materials are
semiconductors like silicon, but they can be solution processed at low
temperatures. Their electronic and optical properties can also be chemically
tuned. The combination of low cost processing and wide variety has led to
intense studies of these materials for devices such as solar cells and light
emitting diodes. However, they have been scarcely considered to-date for opto-
electronic circuits. The opto-electronic properties of perovskites will be
studied, and they will be used to make proof-of-principle devices such as
phototransistors. These devices will be incorporated into next-generation
electronic circuits for applications such as differential amplifiers and optical
sensors. They even have promise for neuromorphic circuits inspired by biological
nervous systems. The PI will create and distribute videos related to this
research via a YouTube channel as a part of this integrated research-education
project. The PI will also develop stereoscopic videos compatible with virtual-
reality (VR) headsets based on either 3D-rendered environments such as the
inside a molecule or filmed in the laboratory. Web-based and desktop interactive
3D teaching applications compatible with VR headsets for education and research
are also planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;Despite being
intensely studied for applications in solar cells and light emitting diodes,
metal halide perovskites (MHPs) have to-date scarcely considered for
information-processing applications, such as transistors and logic gates. Their
high carrier mobility and strong, tunable, absorption properties make them ideal
candidates for opto-electronic logic gates. While 2-terminal photodiodes have
been employed as optical sensors in many applications, the authors here will
restrict detection and amplification to a single device: a three-terminal
phototransistor. Despite being poorly understood, phototransistors can
potentially detect and process optical signals in a single circuit element,
possess a responsivity tunable through the voltage applied to the third (gate)
terminal, and can be employed in differential amplifiers. Within this project,
the team will undertake a broad set of research activates concerning the
optimization and study of MHPs for application in thin-film electronics; in
particular, for implementation in phototransistor-based optical NOT gates.
Reproducible and predictable MHP-based phototransistors will enable a range of
novel devices such as differential amplifiers, mechanically flexible devices,
optical polarization sensors, and neuromorphic light sensors. As part of this
integrated research-education project, the PI will disseminate videos on topics
related to this program of research via a YouTube channel. The PI will also
develop and disseminate stereoscopic videos compatible with virtual-reality (VR)
headsets based on either 3D-rendered environments (e.g. inside molecules), or
filmed inside laboratories / classrooms. Additionally, web-based and desktop
interactive 3D teaching applications compatible with VR headsets for education
and research will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.