* 1942825
* CAREER: Systems-Level Identification and Characterization of Cellular Export and Efflux Systems for Renewable Chemicals
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Xuan Wang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2025
* USD 755,852.00

The capacity of cells to mass transport molecules across the cell membrane is an
important feature of microbial systems that are used for the production of
renewable biochemicals. This project investigates the means by which bacterial
cells can be engineered to increase the production characteristics of microbial
processes by manipulating the systems that cells use to export biochemicals from
the cells. Core concepts from this project are integrated into a series of
impactful learning experiences designed to engage and train students at multiple
stages along the STEM education pipeline. The aim of this activity is to promote
the students' interest in pursuing advanced studies in STEM areas. In a separate
activity, the scientific content of this research is incorporated into online
and in-person synthetic biology education module in an effort to enhance the
teaching curriculum for systems and synthetic biology. The project also
incorporates a bridge program to promote career development, for graduate
students in biology, through workshop and career consultation activities.
Students from underrepresented groups in science are proactively recruited and
engaged in all aspects of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this project is to provide a systematic understanding of export and
efflux systems in Escherichia coli for renewable chemicals, including short
chain mono- and dicarboxylic acids as well as small aromatics. Aided by the
large amount of experimental dataset obtained in this project, machine-learning
prediction algorithms will be developed and optimized to accurately predict
native exporters for select mono- and dicarboxylic acids. The predicted
transporters will be experimentally validated for their potential export
functions. Using similar approaches, heterologous efflux systems with activities
for select aromatics will also be identified. The iterative optimization aided
by integrated experimental and computational data will improve the prediction
algorithm. Finally, a complete plasmid collection encoding all putative E. coli
membrane proteins will be created to facilitate systems-level study of the E.
coli membrane proteome in support of efficient microbial production of
biochemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.