* 1942326
* CAREER: Optimal Control of Energy Systems via Structured Neural Networks: A Convex Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Baosen Zhang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The electric energy system is currently undergoing a period of unprecedented
transformations. On the one hand, large-scale deployment of technologies such as
rooftop solar and smart building management systems have the potential to make
the power system more efficient, sustainable and reliable. On the other hand,
achieving this promise has proven to be far from trivial, as many capabilities
remain unused. Two primary systems of interest are the heating, ventilation, and
air conditioning (HVAC) systems of commercial and industrial buildings, and
distributed energy resources in the power distribution system. A fundamental
challenge in controlling these systems is that their behaviors are often
governed by complex dynamics with unknown parameters. For instance, the
relationship between temperature setpoints in different zones and the HVAC power
consumption is governed by a set of nonlinear high dimensional partial
differential equations, whose parameters depend on detailed building
characteristics that are difficult to measure in practice. Similarly, the
distribution system is governed by nonlinear AC power flow equations, but since
they are typically not monitored, their topology and line parameters are either
not known or severely outdated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal
addresses this challenge by leveraging the significant amounts of measurement
data that are now becoming available. Fundamentally different from many existing
AI applications, the physical laws governing the behaviors of these systems---
laws of thermodynamics for heat transfers in buildings and power flow equations
---are well studied, but the system parameters are not known and cannot be
easily measured. The goal of this project is to provide algorithms with provable
guarantees that combine physical laws with data to safely and efficiently
operate these energy systems. Specifically, we present a model-based framework
that uses structured neural networks to achieve both model tractability and
representability, by designing them to be convex from input to output. This
project will tightly integrate research and education by working with the campus
sustainability office and the local utility, thus training a generation of
professionals qualified both in power systems and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.