* 1942460
* CAREER: Deciphering the mechanisms of forearc basin formation by engaging undergraduate and middle school students in field and analytical geoscience research
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Devon Orme, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 02/28/2025
* USD 606,963.00

Mountain belts that incorporate chains of volcanoes, called magmatic arcs,
develop at tectonic convergent margins where an oceanic plate is subducting
beneath a continent or island arc. Forearc basins develop oceanward of the
magmatic arc of a convergent margin and trap sediment in deep troughs. These
basins can exist for tens to hundreds of millions of years, serving as a long-
term record of past Earth environments, processes, climate regimes, and life.
They also host natural resources such as oil and gas. The goal of this research
is to determine the origin of forearc basins by investigating the relationship
between the types of rocks that underlie the basin and the sedimentary rocks
preserved within the basin. The research and education components of this
project focus on increasing diversity in, and accessibility to, the geosciences
through sustained engagement with underrepresented undergraduate students and
middle school girls from rural communities in Montana. Students will participate
in research design, field and laboratory work, and national conferences.
Students also will help lead a STEM workshop for middle school girls focused on
rocks and minerals from the western U.S. and Tibet. The project will resolve
critical questions in the evolution of Earth and offer opportunities to students
who traditionally have limited participation in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms of forearc basin formation are
not well understood because of poor preservation in the rock record or
overprinting of primary tectonic and stratigraphic relationships by subsequent
deformation. This research will test the hypothesis that extension of the
underlying basement in a forearc region provides a mechanism to trap sediment
and initiate basin subsidence as a precursor to forearc basin formation. The
hypothesis will be tested by applying chronologic and geochemical methods to
describe the tectonic setting of basement formation, timing and rates of
basement-forearc development, and subsequent geologic history. The research will
combine field mapping and sedimentology with sandstone petrography,
biostratigraphy, geochronology, paleomagnetism, and low-temperature
thermochronology. Field areas include the Great Valley forearc, California and
the Xigaze forearc, Tibet. Each field area preserves primary relationships
between basement and basin stratigraphy in similar, but not identical tectonic
settings. The education plan integrates with the research activities by
establishing the Montana State University Sedimentary Undergraduate Research
program (MSU-SUR), which seeks to broaden the Earth Science community through
sustained engagement with Native American and first-generation college students.
Students in the MSU-SUR program will contribute directly to the research by
participating in literature review and field planning, along with collecting and
evaluating data and disseminating results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.