* 1942581
* CAREER: Understanding the interplay between lipid composition and biomolecule transport in biological membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Peter Beltramo, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 03/31/2025
* USD 592,332.00

The phospholipid membrane is the barrier that divides the interior and exterior
of cells. It is laden with membrane-bound objects such as proteins and ion
channels which are under constant motion and dictate various functions of the
cell. Unraveling the role of the phospholipid membrane and the significance of
high concentrations of membrane proteins in biological signaling processes could
lead to an improved understanding of how cells communicate, transport material,
and orchestrate essential processes. These discoveries can, in turn, enable new
advanced drug delivery systems, biosensors, and other biomimetic materials. This
CAREER award will support the development of experimental methods to create
robust artificial mimics of cell membranes, quantify their properties, and
determine the interplay between those properties and the dynamics and transport
properties of membrane-bound objects. The project will help advance one of NSF’s
Big Ideas- Understanding the Rules of Life - by addressing a fundamental
question in biology: how is material and information transported between cells?
This research will be integrated with a robust educational component that
includes workshops training K-12 educators on how to translate challenging
concepts in engineering, biology, and chemistry into interactive classroom
demos, the recruitment of underrepresented undergraduate students from local
community colleges in the Pioneer Valley for summer research internships, and
the development of a new course to strengthen student understanding
relationships between chemical engineering research, industry, and the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cell membrane plays an outsized role in many
biological processes due to the presence of large concentrations of peripheral
and integral membrane proteins that selectively regulate the transport of
material and information across the barrier. Selective transport across the
membrane has been exploited to develop biosensors, but most work relies on
monitoring the transport across a single ion channel. Developing technologies
that leverage the heterogeneity and high concentrations of ion channels could
enable multiplexed biosensing with improved signal-to-noise and throughput.
However, changing elastic properties of protein-laden membranes, membrane
deformations, and crowding effects can alter transport characteristics.
Therefore, this project aims to understand how the properties of the
phospholipid bilayer in biologically relevant membranes alter the spatiotemporal
dynamics of membrane bound objects. A novel experimental platform to fabricate
planar, freestanding, artificial cell membranes and measure membrane properties
(thickness, lateral elasticity, Young’s modulus) will be extended to incorporate
leaflet asymmetry. Controlled quantities of membrane bound microparticles will
be introduced and microrheological techniques will be applied to reveal
fundamental insight into thin film rheology and the two-dimensional
hydrodynamics of crowded membranes. By utilizing simultaneous optical monitoring
of the membrane by fluorescence microscopy and electrophysiological techniques
to measure ion transport, the concentration-dependent diffusion and gating
activity of ion channels will also be investigated. The objectives of this
CAREER award are to provide insight into how biological membranes regulate
intracellular transport by 1) evaluating the change in elastic properties in
membranes mimicking different types of cells, 2) determining the modification of
lateral dynamics as membranes become increasingly covered with peripheral
objects, and 3) quantifying the concurrent alteration in trans-bilayer ion
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.