* 1942574
* CAREER: Nanobody Technology to Decipher the Essential Roles of O-GlcNAc in Cells
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Christina Woo, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 01/31/2025
* USD 625,000.00

O-Linked N-acetyl glucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is a sugar that is attached to a large
number of different proteins that cells use to signal genes to turn on or off in
response to nutrients and stress. Eliminating O-GlcNAc is lethal to mammals.
Furthermore, incorrect cellular signaling resulting from faulty attachment of
O-GlcNAc is linked to numerous human diseases, including neurodegeneration,
diabetes, and cancer. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program
in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Christina Woo from Harvard University
to study and interpret an “O-GlcNAc code”, the biochemical rules by which the
addition or removal of O-GlcNAc affects signaling in living cells. Dr. Woo
attaches small antibodies (called nanobodies) to enzymes that attach or remove
O-GlcNAc from other proteins. These nanobodies are designed to bring these
modifying enzymes to specific target proteins and, in this way, systematically
determine how introducing or eliminating O-GlcNAc affects the biochemical
mechanisms of cell signaling. The new mechanistic understandings from this
research project will impact the interpretation of the O-GlcNAc code, and its
potential use as biomarkers and in the design of new therapies against human
diseases. This research will provide graduate students with specialized training
in the chemistry of sugars in biology (glycoscience). In addition, the outreach
program of the project introduces elementary and middle school students, along
with primary school teachers to the science of sugars (glycosciences) and the
influence of sugars in life processes, using a hands-on “Is it sugar?”
laboratory experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to decode
cellular signaling through O-linked N-acetyl glucosamine (O-GlcNAc) using
nanobodies as a mechanism to systematically alter the O-GlcNAc code in living
cells. O-GlcNAc is an essential post-translational modification, yet the
regulation of all O-GlcNAc proteins by only two enzymes, O-GlcNAc transferase
(OGT) and O-GlcNAcase (OGA), has limited the study of O-GlcNAc signaling and
dynamics in cells. The primary hypothesis is that nanobody fusions to OGT or OGA
could serve as an orthogonal mechanism to tune O-GlcNAc levels and protein
selection in live cells, and thus transform the elucidation of O-GlcNAc
signaling. The research project implements chemical glycoproteomics and nanobody
technology as tools to probe O-GlcNAc levels on proteins, with the goal to
systematically evaluate hypotheses in how OGT introduces O-GlcNAc and how OGA
dynamically removes O-GlcNAc to target proteins in live cells. The overall
outreach and education objectives are to strengthen diversity and improve
glycoscience education in the Massachusetts STEM pipeline via the development of
research and educational activities aimed at students in elementary school
through undergraduate levels, as well as the education of local public school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.