* 1942133
* CAREER: Elucidating Large-Scale Spatial Patterns of Ecosystem Traits with Data Assimilation
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Alexandra Konings, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason West
* 01/31/2025
* USD 531,914.00

Computer models are used to make global predictions about the state of life on
earth and the atmosphere that surrounds it. These models make important
predictions about global climate and the links to plant and microbial life on
earth. Many of these models rely on simple relationships about plants on earth
and their connections to the atmosphere. This CAREER award will explore new ways
of developing these very important relationships and the factors (changes in
soil, light, water, and more) that result in their differences. Because there is
not enough information about spatial variations in vegetation and soil types,
most models assume that vegetation response types vary only based on land cover
types. Past research suggests that other well-known properties affect vegetation
sensitivities, for e.g. how dry a particular location is, or how much clay the
soil has. This CAREER award will use a new modelling framework together with
satellite data to derive a map of optimal plant parameters around the world, and
to test these relationships even in regions where field measurements are scarce.
The research will also determine whether using these relationships can improve
model predictions of how much carbon dioxide ecosystems absorb. The results of
this award will improve predictions of how ecosystems respond to climatic
changes by enabling more accurate predictions of carbon dioxide uptake, plant
growth, and soil decomposition. Additionally, this award includes several
educational components for high school students (teacher training) through
undergraduates (including redesign of the material for a class, and
undergraduate research experience) to post-collegiate (creating a workshop on
mathematical techniques for incorporating observations into models).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large scale models of terrestrial ecosystems are one of
the dominant sources of uncertainty in predictions of climate change. They have
remained uncertain despite decades of effort to increase the sophistication of
process representations. However, much less attention has been paid to parameter
optimization. Ecosystem model parameters are assigned solely based on a handful
of plant functional types, without accounting for the enormous variety of plant
behavior across the globe. This project will test a new pathway for forming
alternatives to plant functional types: using data assimilation. The proposed
work will use the CARbon DAta MOdel fraMework (CARDAMOM), which combines a
simple ecosystem model, remote sensing data, and Markov Chain Monte Carlo
simulations to determine ecosystem parameters that result in the most realistic
fluxes and carbon pools in each pixel across the globe. The resulting parameter
maps cannot be used directly in other models but will be used to test so-called
environmental filtering relationships to predict ecosystem parameter variability
based on other factors whose spatial variation is well known (e.g. climate, soil
type, etc). This award will test whether assimilating remote sensing data in
CARDAMOM can be used to derive environmental filtering relationships across the
globe using approaches similar to those from recent in situ analyses, but
without relying on the quality and quantity of in situ measurements
(particularly problematic in traditionally under-sampled regions like the
tropics). It will also create and demonstrate the value of such relationships
for heterotrophic respiration, whose spatial variability cannot be constrained
by in situ measurements alone. The educational components of the project include
development of several instructional modules on topics related to ecosystem
processes and climate change for middle and high school biology, chemistry, and
physics teachers. The project will also be used to support a bi-annual workshop
on data assimilation with CARDAMOM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.