* 1943082
* CAREER: Exploring environmental drivers of morphological change through phylogenetic paleoecology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2026
* James Lamsdell, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2026
* USD 465,814.00

Understanding what drives the evolution of new animal forms and the occupation
of previously unused environments is critical for understanding the history of
life on Earth. New forms arise through a process called heterochrony, where
changes in the timing or speed of a species’ growth result in adults with either
more juvenile-like or exaggerated adult-like characteristics. What is unclear is
whether moving into new environments causes changes in development, or whether
changes in development allow animals to move into new environments. This
research explores the relationship between changes in animal traits and shifts
in ecology to determine what drives the evolution of new species. The project
will fund graduate and undergraduate research, and the results will be
integrated into college classes. The research also will be used to engage middle
school students in the study of geological processes and how they have changed
Earth’s surface at varying temporal and spatial
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Database, museum, and literature data will be used
in concert with phylogenetic frameworks to generate a comprehensive view of
patterns in ecological occupation, heterochronic trends, and evolutionary rates
across a diverse set of aquatic arthropods. This will produce a synthesis of the
rate and mode of morphological change with shifts in ecological occupation to
determine the driving forces behind the development of novel phenotypes and
factors mediating ecological expansion. The chief merit of the project is the
integration of a hierarchical framework using phylogenetic relationships with
ecological and phenotypic data from the fossil record. The development of a
quantitative metric to evaluate heterochrony will permit direct comparison of
heterochronic trends between clades for the first time. The project will support
K-12 education by enriching undergraduate pre-service science teachers'
preparation with high-quality lessons prepared by the Principal Investigator and
a Master Teacher who will use this research to draw interest and provide real-
world examples and data. The completed lessons will be available on a national
K-12 educator clearinghouse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded with
the Systematics and Biodiversity Sciences program (Division of Environmental
Biology).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.