* 1943364
* CAREER: A Novel Blueprint for Representation Learning of Relational Invariances
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Bruno Ribeiro, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 04/30/2025
* USD 388,565.00

Graphs, tensors, and logical formulae are three of the most fundamental
mathematical abstractions used to model complex data dependencies. These
constructs are essential for the design of many modern AI innovations such as
recommender systems in social networks, robots that reason about their
environment, using generative models to design new drugs, or extracting business
rules from data. Our theoretical understanding of graphs and tensors has
significantly advanced in the past century, and the opportunity now exists for
the development of practical tools for day-to-day machine-learning tasks. This
research project aims to make available to neural network architectures data
representations that are sufficiently expressive for complex tasks and
computationally tractable for more tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages the PIâ€™s prior work into a novel blueprint for better modeling complex
relational input data, thereby translating the modern theoretical interpretation
of sets, graphs, tensors, and logical formulae into provably more capable
practical tools. The key insight is to leverage invariant theory to develop a
novel framework for representation learning of complex relational data via
approximate invariances. The full development of the framework of this proposal
holds promise to harness the synergy between invariant theory and computational
methods. Specifically, this study investigates: (a) most-expressive tractable
models through ergodic theory and variational approximations; (b) adaptive model
tractability and expressibility through invariance relaxations and quasi-
invariant neural architectures; and (c) novel model evaluation metrics and tests
of expressiveness for invariant representations. This project also explores the
application of these methods on tasks defined on temporal graphs and tensors,
sets and multisets, hypergraphs and simplices, logical formulae, and molecules.
This project will also support substantial outreach activities, including
workshop organization, course development, and the recruitment of
underrepresented minorities to STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.