* 1943020
* CAREER: An Immunoengineering Approach to Create Purely Synthetic Microenvironments Enabling Generation of Antigen-Specific Effector B cells
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Kyung-Ho Roh, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2025
* USD 507,777.00

A type of white blood cells called B cells play a critical role in our immune
system by producing antibodies to combat various infections. However, B cells
are not on alert all the time; they need to be selectively activated to
proliferate and change (differentiate) to become antibody-producing cells in a
special physiological microenvironment called the germinal center (GC). Due to
its complicated structure, function, and dynamically evolving nature, creating a
fully functional GC model ex vivo (outside the body) is extremely challenging,
and thus requires an interdisciplinary and comprehensive engineering approach.
This CAREER project seeks to develop a purely artificial GC model system by
recreating the most critical components of the GC capable of inducing a full
array of B cell reactions. Using the ex-vivo model system with precise and
independent control over each critical parameter, the roles of these GC
components in producing B cell reactions will be investigated in unprecedented
detail compared to using conventional in-vivo (inside the body) observations.
These outcomes will enable critical advancement of various fields, including
vaccination, immunotherapy, autoimmune diseases, and cancers. As complementary
educational and outreach plans of the highly interdisciplinary project, focus
has been made on three aspects: 1) the development of effective curricula for
immunoengineering that teaches the topics at the interface between immunology
and engineering, 2) the creation of uniquely collaborative environment for
education and research among academia, local research institutes, and industry
partners, and 3) the promotion of underrepresented high school and college
students in Northern Alabama to be engaged in immunoengineering and general STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigatorâ€™s long-term research goal is to
develop translational cellular and molecular immunotherapies for cancers,
infections, and autoimmune diseases through the unconventional amalgamation of
biomaterials engineering and immunology, namely immunoengineering. Towards this
goal, this CAREER project will develop an artificial ex-vivo model system that
enables the mimicry of the most important functional feature of the geminal
center (GC): to create B cells that can produce affinity-matured antigen-
specific antibodies. Despite tremendous achievements in B-cell biology and
immunology, no artificial model system has yet been fully capable of
recapitulating all the critical features of the GCs ex vivo. Motivated by
findings from state-of-the-art GC models, this project hypothesizes that there
are three critical components of the GC microenvironments, without the correct
mimicry of which, the recapitulation of ex-vivo GC reactions would be
impossible: 1) the optimal CD40L-CD40 signaling that requires help signals from
T-follicular helper (TFH) cells, 2) the zonal structure of the GC and interzonal
migration between the light zone (LZ) and the dark (DZ) of the GC B cells, and
3) the temporally controlled on-and-off B cell receptor (BCR) signals that
require antigen presentations from follicular dendric cells (FDCs). The Research
Plan is organized under three objectives that address each of the identified
critical components. Each objective includes development of systematically
controllable biomaterial platforms that will provide critical biological signals
and microenvironments to artificially developing GC B cells. The FIRST Objective
is to control the quality and quantity of the CD40 signaling provided by
follicular helper T (TFH) cells, by providing CD40 ligand (CD40L or CD154)
molecules on bio-mimetic/bio-responsive viscoelastic hydrogels that have tunable
modulus and stress relaxation characteristics. The expected outcome is enhanced
understanding of how to control the quantity and quality of signaling events by
designing mechanical properties of biomaterials platforms for the presentation
of ligands to cell-surface receptors, especially to various molecules of the
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily to which CD40L belongs. The SECOND
Objective is to provide a microenvironment mimicking the zonal structures of GC
(DZ and LZ) by creating controlled chemokine gradients within a microfluidic
device for the artificial GC B Cells. By providing a controlled chemokine
gradient using microfluidic devices, a systematic study about the conditions
that enable artificially activated B cells to migrate and the consequences of
the interzonal migrations in terms of GC reactions will be enabled. The THIRD
Objective is to introduce On and Off temporal regulation of BCR signaling via
reversible surface conjugation of model antigens to microbead-based artificial
FDCs, hypothesizing that the BCR signaling needs to be temporally regulated on-
and-off in order to enable an extended proliferation of GC B cells The expected
outcome is a clearer understanding of the role of BCR signaling in GC reactions.
Finally, the outcomes of this project are expected to enable realization of a
functional artificial ex-vivo GC model that could: 1) facilitate the development
of novel vaccines against major pathogens for which no effective vaccines are
yet available by enabling recognition of novel B-cell epitopes without T-cell
dependency, 2) be developed as a linearly scalable cell-manufacturing platform
for generation of antigen-specific effector B cells as adoptive cell therapy,
and 3) serve as a better-controlled and more cost-effective model system in
biomedical sciences that studies B-cell biology and B-cell
malignancies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.