* 1943492
* CAREER: How do microorganisms and grazing mammals interact at local to regional scales to regulate grassland nitrogen cycling processes?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Lydia Zeglin, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2025
* USD 699,969.00

Grassland ecosystems cover over a third of Earth's vegetated surface. Except for
those converted to agriculture, most grasslands are used for livestock grazing.
For the first time, this NSF CAREER project will study interactions between
grazing mammals and soil microbes, organisms that together control grassland
nitrogen (N) cycling and soil fertility. Hypotheses to be tested include: 1)
whether large grazers promote dispersal of soil microbes, and 2) whether this
affects different steps of the soil N-cycle based on the diversity of
microorganisms that control each step. To do this, project personnel, including
students and citizen scientists, will work together to measure soil microbe
biodiversity and N-cycling activity in bison- and cattle- grazed and ungrazed
areas of tallgrass prairie. These experiments will be conducted across distances
ranging from 10-cm (local soil microbial habitat) to 1000-km (Flint Hills, KS
region). Results from this work will advance general knowledge of the factors
regulating grassland soil fertility, including those supporting ecosystem N
retention at local to regional scales. Understanding N retention is important
for protecting public drinking water quality. Outcomes will also include broad
and timely communication of this knowledge to students and citizens, and
engagement of students and citizens in the scientific research process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of grassy ecosystems globally and
the key role of grazing animals in these ecosystems, there is no coherent
perspective on the generalized effects of large ungulate grazing on grassland N
cycling processes, beyond the “grazing lawn” phenomenon, in which a higher
proportion of N is in plant-available form due to consumer-driven nutrient
recycling. The overarching hypothesis of this work is that the distribution of
grassland soil N cycling microbes is more strongly affected by landscape-scale
than local factors, with greater functional consequences for guilds with lower
functional redundancy. In other words, the presence of large grazers at the
landscape scale will affect microbial diversity more strongly than will edaphic
factors at the soil core scale, and this will be associated with differences in
soil nitrification potential (a more specialized N-cycling function) more than
differences in denitrification or decomposition potential (sequentially less
specialized functions). Evidence to evaluate this hypothesis will be collected
in collaboration with land managers across the Flint Hills, KS, region, and will
be disseminated through communication with ranchers, high school classes and
college classes, as well as traditional academic outlets. In addition to this
regional-scale pattern evaluation, experimental work will parse the independent
effects of microbial community composition and soil pH, organic matter and N
availability on N cycling processes. Larger-scale spatial, temporal and
conceptual knowledge gain, and dissemination of this knowledge to a broad
audience, are the main goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.