* 1943300
* CAREER: Synthesizing Architectural Tactics
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Mehdi Mirakhorli, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 335,058.00

Software architecture refers to the discipline of designing the structure of
software systems. The structure consists of software elements (or modules or
components) and relations among them, as well as properties and constraints on
the structure and behavior of the elements. The term “architecture” used in this
sense is a metaphor, analogous to the architecture of a building. The software
architecture serves as a blueprint for the system and the developing project,
and guides the design and development of the software. During the designing of a
software architecture, attributes such as reliability, availability, security,
and performance are addressed by posing and comparing alternate solutions,
understanding their trade-offs, and ultimately making a series of interrelated
design decisions with the intention of optimizing the degree to which each of
the quality concerns is satisfied. As in building architecture, the software
architecture discipline has developed standard methods, called architectural
tactics, of making these architectural design decisions. The main objective of
this project is to develop and validate new technologies that could make
software architecture design more intuitive, particularly for novice programmers
and new learners. The vision is to someday be able to have programmers express
their design intent intuitively and generate error-free software programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software architecture design is notoriously difficult to
learn and even harder to master. In order to satisfy quality attribute
scenarios, appropriate architectural solutions need to be chosen and
implemented. These solutions are often based on well-known architectural tactics
and software frameworks that deliver these tactics. This project presents a
solution to change software design and programming from purely manual and
exclusive tasks to one in which a programmer and an automated tactic synthesis
tool collaborate to generate defect-free software design and implementation that
satisfy quality attributes scenarios. This project will create (1) a context-
aware inference algorithm capable of recommending suitable architectural tactics
to programmers, (2) learning by example techniques for inferring the
specification models that describe how a tactic can be implemented using a
software framework, and (3) automated tools and an intuitive domain-specific
language for the synthesis of tactical code. In addition, this research will
design, develop, evaluate, and release new interventions in terms of software
design strategies that can help novices and new learners during software design
and programming activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.