* 1943002
* EAGER: Citizenly: Empowering Communities by Democratizing Urban Data Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Naveen Sharma, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2023
* USD 298,734.00

Governments around the nation have been using data-driven approaches to drive
improvements in city operations and citizens' quality of life. Large cities such
as New York, Chicago, and Boston have reported impressive results from the use
of data in addressing urban issues. Smaller cities such as Rochester, NY have
mostly lagged behind. Data has not played a large role in addressing problems of
urban neighborhoods. Midsize cities are large enough to have data collection
systems in place. But they cannot afford a team of data scientists to make use
of them. The open data sets, provided by data.gov and many other organizations,
contain raw data. This data requires specialized skills to access, make sense
of, and to compute with. Most established open data sets are most suitable for
conducting large data analysis. They require significant efforts in filtering
data down to specific scenario of local interests. Citizens and community
leaders are key consumers of open data. But they are not able to access,
decipher, and use this data in meaningful ways. While many tools and algorithms
for conducting data science exist, most of these technologies cannot simply be
used by anyone. Democratizing data science is the notion that anyone, with
little to no technical expertise, can do data science. But they must be provided
the right data and user-friendly tools. This project will put urban data science
into the hands of citizens and community leaders. It will integrate citizens
into the development of urban policy and solutions for local issues. Community
leaders would like to see data filtered down to their community levels. The
resulting analysis should be made relevant to citizens. A major impact of the
work is that it can significantly lower the barrier to entry for community
leaders and citizens to meaningfully leverage urban data. Of particular
significance is the engagement of neighborhood youths. They will become
neighborhood innovators, designing technology applications to support
neighborhood-based self-sufficiency strategies. Moreover, the project will
develop infrastructure that can be replicated for other/similar midsize cities
as well pave the way to democratize data science in other
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the underlying
scientific and engineering foundations necessary to create the Citizenly
cyberinfrastructure to democratize data science amongst citizens and city
governments. This project is multidisciplinary and it will bring together a team
of investigators, with expertise in big data analytics, program synthesis,
active learning, and social sciences. Key partners, all in the city of
Rochester, NY, include the Office of Innovation and Strategic Initiatives and
the Office of Research and Analytics at the Common Ground Health. The project
will address the following key scientific and technical challenges: (1)
Community-focused Data Infrastructure: Design and implementation of a
lightweight citizen sensor. Design anexpressive and efficient model for
community dataset and implement a scalable Extract-Transform-Load (ETL) system
to automate its creation. (2) Citizen-centric Programing: Design domain specific
language for citizens and community leaders to access community datasets and to
express the intent and constraints for desired urban application. (3) Urban Data
Science Applications: Using the Citizenly approach, develop: (a) predictive
models for the influence of presence of vacant lots on city's property values;
and (b) assessment models for health impact from socio-economic factors.
Citizenly will integrate community data and common services along with necessary
systems and algorithm innovations to provide next generation cyberinfrastructure
for city leaders and citizens. Citizenly will enable research efforts broadly in
urban data science and community-based participatory research by providing
Cyberinfrastructure (CI) services to a diverse scientific community or
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.