* 1943356
* CAREER: High-Aspect-Ratio Multi-Material Three-Dimensional Microstructures via Microfluidic Direct Laser Writing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Ryan Sochol, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2025
* USD 551,569.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will focus on understanding
and advancing a novel additive manufacturing strategy to enable entirely new
paradigms of multi-material, and in turn multi-functional, three-dimensional
(3D) structures at sub-micron scales for emerging scientific applications. The
ability to manufacture geometrically complex yet functionally advantageous
microsystems comprised of multiple fully-integrated materials—corresponding to
desired optical, biological, chemical, electrical, and/or mechanical
properties—offers the potential to revolutionize a multitude of fields,
including biomedicine, optics and photonics, metamaterials, and microrobotics. A
recently created additive manufacturing technique, "microfluidic direct laser
writing," is uniquely suited to realize such capabilities. By using tightly-
focused laser pulses to solidify distinct, sequentially loaded photoreactive
liquids in designated locations, this approach allows for multi-material 3D
microstructures to be built with unparalleled geometric versatility at
100-nanometer length scales. Current methods of additive manufacturing at this
scale appear to be limited to building 3D constructs with small height-to-width
aspect ratios. This research project seeks to understand, explain, and
ultimately control the fundamental process mechanisms that have heretofore
hindered the use of direct laser writing for printing multi-material 3D
microstructures with large aspect ratios. In concert, this CAREER program will
establish education and outreach activities that are either directly integrated
with or inspired by the research plans, including: (i) non-competitive additive
manufacturing activities for high school women, (ii) year-long integrated
research projects for high school students, (iii) a four-year-long Honors Thesis
project for undergraduate students, and (iv) new multi-material projects for the
additive manufacturing curriculum. By leveraging the unique accessibility of
additive manufacturing (or colloquially, "3D printing"), these activities are
expected to increase science and engineering exposure and inspire a lasting
interest and confidence in advanced manufacturing research for high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, with an emphasis on inclusion for women
and students of color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the research
is to uncover and access regions of the microfluidic direct laser writing
processing design space to achieve accurate and repeatable manufacturing of
entirely new classes of multi-material 3D nanostructured components that are not
restricted to low aspect ratios. At present, the roles of underlying
microfluidic direct laser writing process factors—namely, those stemming from
two-photon polymerization phenomena and microscale mechano-fluidic
interactions—remain poorly understood. To bridge these knowledge gaps, this
research project will combine theoretical and experimental studies to
systematically investigate and reveal the fundamental relationships connecting:
(i) the point-by-point, layer-by-layer writing path of the scanning laser, (ii)
microfluidic infusion conditions, (iii) mechanical and shrinkage-based
microstructure deformation dynamics, and (iv) material misalignment error
propagation during intermediate microfluidic direct laser writing stages. It is
envisioned that the results of the research activities will catalyze new
technologies for optical, biomedical, and microelectronics applications in
academic, commercial, and governmental sectors. This project will allow the PI
to significantly advance the state of knowledge in multi-material additive
micro/nanomanufacturing, expand the use of direct laser writing, and firmly
establish the PI's long-term career in advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.