* 1943486
* CAREER: Privacy-aware Predictive Modeling of Dynamic Human Events
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Mingxuan Sun, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2025
* USD 338,252.00

Machine learning that leverages individuals' event data can improve the
prediction accuracy of future events, but introduces high risks to each
individual's privacy. Nowadays, large volumes of human event data, such as
online TV-viewing records, domain name server queries, and electronic records of
hospital admissions, are becoming increasingly available in a wide variety of
applications including network analysis and services and healthcare analytics.
Predictive modeling of those collective event sequences is beneficial for
promoting nationwide economic and safety development. For example, in network
traffic diagnosis, the analysis of user activities can be used to predict and
control dynamic traffic demand, which improves risk response efficiency. In
health informatics, the analysis of patient admission events can detect and
optimize treatment for individuals at risks, which enhances public health
preparedness and healthcare outcomes. However, by optimizing for the unitary
goal of accuracy, machine learning algorithms trained on historic event data may
amplify privacy risks. Studies have demonstrated that it is possible to infer
private attributes such as demographics and locations from human activities such
as online browsing histories and location check-in events. This project is to
develop a trusting-based machine learning framework that better protects human
privacy while minimally impacting utility for predicting dynamic events.
Research and education on interdisciplinary topics of machine learning and
privacy are integrated in curriculum development, student research projects, and
academic seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a series of novel
models and algorithms to analyze dynamic human events in three synergistic
research thrusts. (1) Besides time-stamped event sequences, additional marker
information such as event types and tags can be utilized to better capture the
dependencies between events. This project investigates novel point processes,
multi-view learning, and deep learning methods for analyzing dynamic human
events with event marker information. (2) To improve human understanding and
trust of predictive modeling, the project develops interpretable algorithms to
explain how their information is used in event prediction and what potential
private information can be inferred based on their inputs. (3) Balancing between
privacy and utility is of mutual benefit to both individuals and service
providers. This project investigates a user-specific privacy-preserving approach
for event prediction and addresses utility-privacy tradeoff by formulating it as
a min-max optimization problem. These three research aims are complemented by a
comprehensive evaluation in a number of application
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.