* 1943681
* CAREER: Volcano-Tectonic Interactions During Early Phases of Continental Rifting
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Dorothy Stamps, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2025
* USD 450,223.00

Continental rifting is a fundamental facet of plate tectonic theory and is being
intensely studied by a range of researchers. Several projects focus on later
stages of continental rifting, but this work aims to investigate early processes
- when a continent is just beginning to break apart. The East African Rift
System (EARS) is an archetype continental rift system, thus an ideal place to
study continental rifting. This CAREER project investigates the Natron Rift, a
part of the EARS that resides in Tanzania and expresses early phase rifting.
Melted and partially molten rock beneath the surface has been shown to play an
important role in accommodating faulting during continental rifting, but the
influence of active volcanism and the volcanic plumbing system remains debated.
In the Natron Rift, an active volcano is juxtaposed by the Natron Fault, the
major rift border fault in the region. This project will tackle 2 fundamental
issues using new and existing surface motion observations and computational
modeling: 1) elucidating volcano-tectonic interactions during early phases of
continental rifting and, in turn, 2) advancing our understanding of volcanic
eruptive processes. Utilizing surface motion data, an integrated 4-step
computational modeling approach of the volcano-border fault system will be used
that involves simplistic models of the system’s geometry, 3D physics-based
models of the same system, eruptive processes modeling, and the application of a
technique that detects anomalous behavior of the volcano. The Educational
component of this CAREER engages a range of students, particularly
underrepresented groups, towards increasing diversity in the geosciences. An
undergraduate training opportunity will prepare students for graduate studies in
the geosciences trough coding and data analysis. High school outreach will
impact over 200 students with diverse backgrounds. Furthering our understanding
of volcanic hazards is a natural broader impact of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has long been recognized that continental
rifting is initiated through mechanical stretching and/or magma (including
fluids)-assisted processes, but the role of volcanism during early phase rifting
remains elusive. The goals of this project are to tackle 2 key scientific
objectives: (1) elucidating the volcano-tectonic process during early phase
rifting and, in turn, (2) advancing our understanding of volcanic eruptive
processes. The natural laboratory is the Ol Doinyo Lengai-Natron Border Fault
system of the Natron Rift, an early phase rift in the East African Rift System.
This region comprises the only accessible volcano-border fault system in an
immature continental rift. This study uses open-access data from a Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) to observe the active volcano Ol Doinyo
Lengai and computational modeling to address the scientific objectives. Modeling
components include simple analytical forward models with dMODELS, magma-physics
models of the volcanic system, finite element modeling with PyLith, and an
inversion technique to detect potential transients in the GNSS data. Results
from the main project on early phase rifting will be compared with intermediate
and mature phase rifting settings that have volcanoes to better understand how
the physics of volcano-tectonic interactions during early phase rifting may be
linked with the evolution of later phase continental
rifting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.