* 1943550
* CAREER: Foraging Ecology and Physiology of Emperor Penguins in the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Birgitte McDonald, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2025
* USD 935,931.00

Part I: Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms that
animals use to find and acquire food is a fundamental question in ecology. The
survival and success of marine predators depends on their ability to locate prey
in a variable or changing environment. To do this the predators need to be able
to adjust foraging behavior depending on the conditions they encounter. Emperor
penguins are ice-dependent, top predators in Antarctica. However, they are
vulnerable to environmental changes that alter food web or sea ice coverage, and
environmental change may lead to changes in penguin foraging behavior, and
ultimately survival and reproduction success. Despite their importance in the
Southern Ocean ecosystem, relatively little is known about the specific
mechanisms Emperor penguins use to find and acquire food. This study combines a
suite of technological and analytical tools to gain essential knowledge on Ross
Sea penguin foraging energetics, ecology, and habitat use during critical
periods in their life history, especially during late chick-rearing periods.
Energy management is particularly crucial during this time as parents need to
feed both themselves and their rapidly growing offspring, while being
constrained to regions near the colony. Penguin ecology and habitat preference
will also be evaluated after the molt and through early reproduction. This study
fills important ecological knowledge gaps on the energy balance, diet, and
habitat use by penguins during these critical periods. Finally, the project
furthers the NSF goals of training new generations of scientists through
training of undergraduates, graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher.
Public outreach activities will be aligned with another NSF funded project
designed to provide science training in afterschool and camp programs that
target underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify behavioral and physiological
variability in foraging Emperor penguins that can be directly linked to
individual success in the marine environment using an ecological theoretical
framework during two critical life history stages. First, this project will
investigate the foraging energetics, ecology, and habitat use of Emperor
penguins at Cape Crozier using fine-scale movement and video data loggers during
the energetically demanding life history phase of late chick-rearing.
Specifically, this study will 1) Estimate the relationship of foraging
efficiency to foraging behavior and diet using an optimal foraging theory
framework to identify what environmental or physiological constraints influence
foraging behavior; 2) Investigate the inter- and intra-individual behavioral
variability exhibited by emperor penguins, which is essential to predict how
resilient these penguins are to environmental change; and 3) Integrate penguin
foraging efficiency data with environmental data to identify important habitat.
Next the researchers will study the ecology and habitat preference after the
molt and through early reproduction using satellite-linked data loggers. The
team will: 1) Investigate penguin inter- and intra-individual behavioral
variability during the three-month post-molt and early winter foraging trips;
and 2) Integrate penguin behavioral data with environmental data to identify
which environmental features are indicative of habitat preference when penguins
are not constrained to returning to the colony to feed a chick. These fine- and
coarse-scale data will be combined with climate predictions to create predictive
habitat models. The education objectives of this CAREER project are designed to
inspire, engage, and train the next generation of scientists using the data and
video generated while investigating Emperor penguins in the Antarctic ecosystem.
This includes development of two university courses, training of undergraduate
and graduate students, and a collaboration with the NSF funded “Polar Literacy:
A model for youth engagement and learning” program to develop after school and
camp curriculum that target undeserved and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.