* 1943113
* CAREER: Advancing the Development of Realistic and Probabilistic Shear Wave Velocity Ground Profiles Using Advanced Inversion Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Clinton Wood, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2025
* USD 0.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will advance our
ability to image below the ground surface by utilizing surface wave methods to
develop more realistic and probabilistic shear wave velocity (Vs) profiles. As
advanced as the tools of daily society have become, the world of in-situ site
characterization still remains mired in the past and continues to rely heavily
on empirical approaches, which were developed over 100 years ago, while the
medical industry has made leaps forward in the field of non-invasive imaging. As
the profession moves forward, the advancement of non-invasive methods is
critical to meeting the challenges of tomorrow in a cost-effective manner. As a
step toward this goal, this project plans to advance our ability to develop
realistic and probabilistic subsurface models through advanced inversion
schemes. These schemes will harness artificial intelligence and additional
wavefield information to replace a level of user skill now required to develop
these subsurface models. These realistic subsurface models are critical to
utilizing parameters, such as shear wave velocity, in applications including
liquefaction triggering, site response analysis, bedrock rippability, and
settlement analyses. In addition, the educational impacts of the project center
on promoting the use of non-invasive methods by (1) inspiring future engineers
to embrace new technologies through engineering summer outreach programs, (2)
educating students through an international student exchange program, and (3)
providing training to practicing engineers through a speakers bureau.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research lies in the
development of state-of-the-art surface wave inversion algorithms. These
algorithms will incorporate a Bayesian statistical framework into high-level
inversion algorithms using machine learning and trans-dimensional Monte Carlo
methodologies. The algorithms will incorporate expert knowledge into the inverse
problem and characterize the uncertainty of the developed Vs profiles based on
the experimental data. The use of Bayesian and machine learning methods will
allow uncertainty in the solution to be considered and presented in a more
robust way than current approaches. In addition, further understanding of the
petrophysical link between multiple data types advances our knowledge of how
different data types work together within joint inversion frameworks to
constrain the inversion problem. Advances in the inversion framework will
produce broader impacts for multiple applications including site response,
liquefaction analysis, and infrastructure evaluation. Moreover, the development
of more accurate, realistic, and probabilistic Vs profiles allows for the
inclusion of resulting Vs profiles into performance-based designs. Lastly,
advancements in inversion algorithms and knowledge of petrophysical links are
transferable to other non-invasive geophysical methods, which all suffer from
non-uniqueness issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.