* 1943751
* I-Corps: Device to treat chronic subdural hematomas
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Alexander Papanastassiou, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the area
of neurosurgical treatment for evacuating abnormal fluid collections in the
brain. While the technology is primarily intended to treat chronic subdural
hematomas, it may have a role in treating other types of brain hemorrhage,
infection, and cancer. A chronic subdural hematoma is a fluid collection
containing blood breakdown products and is located between the brain and its
covering called the dura. Current treatment for such fluid collections typically
involves surgery to evacuate the fluid collection through holes or surgical
removal of bone pieces of varying sizes, followed by irrigation and drain
placement. This is the one of the most common neurosurgical procedures. Recovery
is often prolonged, and recurrence can be common. There is a significant need
for less invasive and more effective treatments. A less invasive treatment would
allow for an effective bedside procedure, reducing the cost associated with a
major brain surgery and facilitating recovery. Reduction in recurrence rates is
expected to lead to improved health, reduced disability and increased
independence in patients, and reduce costs associated with repeat
hospitalizations and procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
aimed at determining the commercial potential of a device for evacuating
abnormal fluid collections in the brain. The device is a system that allows for
continuous irrigation of areas in the head with control of the pressure and
monitoring of the fluid. The desgn allows for percutaneous bedside placement of
bolts connected to catheters and a pump that replaces the chronic subdural
hematoma with normal cerebrospinal fluid. Access is minimally invasive, and the
approach is designed to be a bedside procedure. Next steps in the development
include plans to test the prototype device in biophysical brain models.
Depending on these results, it may be necessary to develop animal models of the
conditions intended to be treated, or it may be possible to proceed to human
clinical trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.