* 1943810
* CAREER: Multiscale Turbulent Flow Interaction with Flexible Branched Trees for Storm Impact Research
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Kourosh Shoele, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 528,662.00

The goal of this research is to systematically investigate the fluid-structure
interactions of a tree canopy and the turbulent flow over the canopy, paving the
way to improved predictions of storm severity. The canopy has flexible branched
trees that deform and dynamically adapt to unsteady turbulent flow and
continuously exchanges air with the atmosphere. There are still significant open
questions about the formation of coherent flow structures and their connection
to the canopy architecture and tree characteristics. The multiscale interactions
between the tree canopy and large-scale turbulent coherent will be studied to
fill a critical gap in the current knowledge about turbulent flow over canopies
and to identify the processes that control storm severity and are also critical
factors in global biogeochemical cycles and climate change. The primary
educational objective is to enhance the multidisciplinary education of
Mechanical Engineering students and increase the retention rate of minority
undergraduate students. Nature-inspired examples and live demonstrations will be
used to motivate students to pursue science and engineering disciplines. A
tightly integrated outreach program will be developed to increase public
knowledge about the fluid dynamics of wind in canopies, its role in storms, and
the associated impacts on climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research uses flexible multi-branch trees and a wind tunnel with rotational
capabilities to study turbulent flow interactions above flexible tree canopies.
Large-eddy simulations and a dynamic multilink model of branched trees from
foliage to the trunk will be used to form a multiscale interaction model of the
turbulent flow and a fractal tree and to identify the previously unknown
physical mechanisms responsible for momentum and energy transfers between
atmosphere and tree canopies. The feedback process between wind-induced
deflection of a branched tree, aerodynamic damping due to branch oscillation and
turbulent unsteady flow will be investigated to explain the process of the
canopy breathing during ejection (burst) and sweep (gust) turbulent phases and
to find the origin of distinct spatial and temporal transport features during
these phases. The results will be used in a predictive linear coupled technique
to study progressive deformation waves and flow coherent structures observed in
canopies. An expected outcome of this research effort is an explanation for the
puzzling observations of canopy flows and improved predictions of turbulent
structures in detrimental weather conditions such as wind
storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.