* 1943283
* CAREER: Meiotic double strand break repair on sex chromosomes
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Michael White, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 11/30/2024
* USD 835,000.00

DNA double strand breaks occur throughout the genome during meiosis and must be
properly repaired to ensure overall genome stability. This process is
challenging on sex chromosomes (i.e., X and Y) because there is limited sequence
shared by the two chromosomes available for repair. A clear understanding of how
double strand breaks are resolved on these chromosomes is important, as it may
have a role in maintaining essential gene function on an otherwise degenerating
Y chromosome. In addition, errors in the process have been linked to several
disorders, including sterility and sex reversal. This project will identify how
double strand breaks are localized and repaired on X and Y chromosomes. It will
also provide extensive training in research, teaching, and mentoring to junior
scientists at all levels. Local secondary education teachers will also be
recruited to develop inquiry-based curricula focused on sex chromosome biology.
Finally, this project will enable a program at University of Georgia that
supports undergraduate attendance at the annual Southeastern Population,
Ecology, and Evolutionary Genetics Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goals of this project are to use the young sex chromosomes of the threespine
stickleback fish to (a) understand how double strand break initiation and repair
occurs, and (b) clarify how these processes influence the preservation of gene
function on the Y chromosome. An array of comparative and functional genomics,
gene editing and cytogenetics approaches will be employed to address the
specific aims. Aim 1 will determine how double strand breaks are localized and
whether breaks are associated with sex-chromosome-specific changes in chromatin
features. Aim 2 will identify the preferential repair templates for double
strand breaks across sex chromosomes. Aim 3 will determine whether genes subject
to non-crossover gene conversion on sex chromosomes have essential functions.
The results of this project will be broadly applicable across species, as
meiotic recombination is highly conserved across the tree of life and utilizes
the same proteins to regulate double strand break initiation and repair on sex
chromosomes and autosomes alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.