* 1943008
* CAREER: Physics-Constrained Modeling of Molecular Texts, Graphs, and Images for Deciphering Protein-Protein Interactions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Yang Shen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 394,339.00

Proteins are essential parts of biological systems that often function through
interactions. Toward understanding and engineering biological systems, data are
rapidly accumulating on what proteins and what protein-protein interactions
(PPIs) are present in such systems, but a major barrier remains as knowledge is
limited on how proteins interact in 3-dimensional (3D) space. This project is
designed to help fill the knowledge gap by developing computational methods that
predict mechanism-revealing 3D structures formed by PPIs. While developing such
methods, a data-focused yet physics-rationalized approach will be pursued, which
is expected to advance the state of the knowledge across natural science and
artificial intelligence. The outcome of the project will facilitate deciphering
and engineering genome-wide PPIs for wide applications such as novel
therapeutics, clean energy, and smart materials. The project is also designed
with educational activities to promote the awareness, participation, training,
and communication of data-driven science discovery for students, educators,
domain scientists, and general public. The highly interdisciplinary research and
education activities will be integrated to foster a diverse globally-competitive
workforce, including historically underrepresented groups, to be ready for the
era of big data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to
advance the state of the art for structural PPI prediction and re-think and
tackle the problem as explaining how pairs of proteins, represented in various
data forms such as texts, graphs, or images, interact under governing physics.
In pursuit of the goal, the research objectives of the project involve three
levels of PPI structural prediction of increasing resolutions and challenges:
residue-level contact maps, residue-level distance distributions, and atom-level
3D structures. Initiated by these objectives, novel machine learning algorithms
will be developed and contribute to foundational algorithm research, including
the effective integration and learning from heterogeneous data as well as the
flexible representation and incorporation of domain knowledge. Such advance in
foundational algorithm research will expand the applicability of PPI structural
prediction to genome-scale and learn physical principles underlying diverse PPIs
rather than “memorizing” patterns in similar PPIs. Moreover, such methodological
advance is expected to impact broad application fields beyond PPI structural
prediction. The proposed research is integrated with an educational plan by
feeding research results and trained personnel to multi-scale education and
outreach activities, involving educated students in research, and engaging
general public in citizen science. New curricular and co-curricular activities
will be developed to enhance the accessibility to interdisciplinary data-science
training for a diverse student body and domain scientists. Also, multi-level
outreach activities in collaboration with existing programs will be used to
foster the awareness of and interest in interdisciplinary data science among
diverse middle- and high-school students as well as the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.