* 1943100
* CAREER: Secure Voice-Controlled Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Yuan Tian, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2023
* USD 260,583.00

Voice control technologies, which utilize natural language processing (NLP)
techniques to enable handsfree interactions through Voice User Interface (VUI),
are widely deployed in a plethora of IoT platforms, such as Amazon Alexa, Google
Home, and automotive voice assistants. In addition to the built-in
functionalities, voice-controlled devices are enhanced by an ecosystem fostered
by their providers, such as Amazon and Google. In such an ecosystem, third-party
developers can build new functions to offer additional services to the end-users
for example, order food, manage bank accounts, and lock doors. These systems
have already been deployed to households around the world and utilized by tens
of millions of users. However, they could bring in new security and privacy
risks, whose implications are not adequately understood so far. This work
focuses on addressing the security and privacy issues in voice-controlled
platforms. The project defines how we secure users while using voice interfaces
and make key progress towards securing the IoT infrastructure and enhancing
national security. Combined with integrated education and outreach efforts, this
work provides a technical foundation for designing IoT platforms with strong
security and privacy properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protecting Voice User
Interfaces is fundamentally challenging, owing to the lack of effective means to
authenticate and authorize the parties involved in the open and noisy channel.
The project focuses on protecting users by helping them avoid unexpected
sensitive behaviors through the noisy, open, and low-bandwidth voice channel.
The work is organized around three main thrusts: (1) the design of a chatbot-
based effective and efficient testing framework that combines semantic
understanding and security domain knowledge to generate inputs, and understands
outputs for determining unexpected sensitive behaviors in the voice apps during
installation time, (2) the design of context-based integrity check and detection
for unexpected voice command at runtime, and (3) the design of usable interfaces
to communicate with users about the risks identified in the first two thrusts.
These explorations culminate in the design options for a security module as part
of a voice-controlled platform, and broader security and privacy recommendations
for IoT platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.