* 1943413
* CAREER: Community-Engaged, Sensor Network for Identifying Air Pollution Sources
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Kerry Kelly, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2025
* USD 399,533.00

Formaldehyde is a key air pollutant and known human carcinogen. Each year over
25 million Americans are exposed to formaldehyde at levels exceeding the US
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) cancer risk threshold. This is a
particularly urgent problem in northern Utah because formaldehyde levels are 50
times greater than the cancer risk threshold on average. Combating this problem
requires controlling emission sources, which are largely unknown in northern
Utah. Identifying emission source(s) requires a large number of samples over
space and time. The expense of performing these measurements limits data
collection, making it nearly impossible to identify the source(s). This CAREER
project will address this issue by developing lower cost nanofiber sensors.
These sensors will be deployed in dense arrays in northern Utah using advanced
analytical techniques and a community-based network. The results are anticipated
to lead to identification of sources for eventual control and improvement of air
quality. Technological developments resulting from this project will be broadly
applicable nationwide for communities, policy makers, and researchers to
identify and address pollutant sources to protect human health. This project
will also develop a rich framework for attracting and retaining engineering
students to enhance the Nation’s STEM workforce. This effort will be focused
particularly on students from under-represented populations through the
development and delivery of engaging, place-based educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER
project is to provide innovative solutions to reduce the expense of collecting
time-resolved, chemically speciated, air-quality measurements. This will be
achieved through the development of cost-effective carbon nanofiber sensors,
with complementary data analytics and community-engaged measurements to solve
critical air-quality issues. The sensors will be deployed in a high-resolution
sensor network capable of geolocating air pollution sources. Formaldehyde, a
human carcinogen, is the focus of the project because it is an urgent problem in
northern Utah due to local ambient levels that are 50 times greater than US
EPA’s cancer risk threshold. The objectives of the research project are to
develop: (1) A broadly applicable set of techniques and principles for
identifying a pollutant source that leverages a distributed network of
validated, cost-effective, carbon-nanofiber-based, air-quality sensors; (2)
Cost-effective techniques to differentiate between primary and secondary
pollutant sources; and (3) Versatile data analytics for integrating
meteorological information with measurements of key chemical species. Data
analytics will include multivariate data analysis techniques, forward and back
trajectory modeling, conditional bivariate probability functions, and cluster
analysis. Together, these novel developments will be applied to a low-cost
sensor dataset to detect formaldehyde source(s) in northern Utah. The proposed
research will be broadly impactful as the general nature of the approach will
work across numerous domains, including smart and connected cities, community-
engaged science, chemical threat detection, indoor-air quality, environmental
justice, and education. This project also provides a rich framework for STEM
education and sustainable opportunities for attracting and retaining engineering
students, particularly those from under-represented populations through the
development and delivery of engaging, place-based educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.