* 1943041
* CAREER: Fostering broader participation and thriving in STEM: A comprehensive investigation of faculty mentorship of doctoral students
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Jacqueline Chen, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 04/30/2022
* USD 290,745.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who
exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent
education, and the integration of education and research within the context of
the mission of their organizations. This project awarded to a CAREER scholar has
the goal to increase our understanding of effective faculty mentoring and its
connection to STEM graduate student “thriving”, defined in terms of engagement
and achievement. This project integrates research and education with graduate
traineeships, annual training workshops, and the dissemination of research.
Besides developing training materials for faculty, the educational activities
include training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. This
award is supported by the EHR Core Research program which supports fundamental
STEM Education research initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will apply a
framework based on the psychological theory of social support to understand the
role of faculty mentorship in student outcomes. Within this theoretical
construct, the impact of social identity is linked to the student’s perception
of the mentor’s belief in the student’s potential as well as the student’s
perception of support provided by the mentor. These appraisals by the student
can contribute to “thriving” as measured by objective outcomes (e.g. passing
requirements, publications) and subjective experiences (e.g. motivation,
stress). The study will examine: what aspects of faculty mentorship are
perceived by doctoral students to impact their success; the role of perceived
and observed faculty support; and, what types of behavior by a faculty mentor
impact the student’s perception. In-person workshops will serve as the basis for
the development of an online training module on effective mentoring by STEM
faculty. The results of this project will expand knowledge of the impact of
mentorship on preparing graduate students and reducing attrition rates by
increasing our understanding of how faculty mentors can impact the success of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.