* 1943561
* CAREER: Modeling Human Gait to Optimize Exoskeleton Control and Understand How the Goal Changes across Walking Tasks
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Anne Martin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2025
* USD 397,040.00

Robotic leg exoskeletons, wearable devices that act as amplifiers to enhance,
reinforce or restore human performance, could improve the quality of life for
individuals who have trouble walking by helping the user walk more normally.
Because humans frequently change speeds while walking, it is important to
understand how these speed changes occur and for the exoskeleton to provide
appropriate assistance during both steady and variable speed walking. Thus, the
objective of this CAREER project is to determine if the human goal, i.e., the
humanâ€™s subconscious thoughts about the best way to walk, is the same for
constant speed walking, changing speeds, and exoskeleton assisted walking for
both healthy and post-stroke individuals. This will be accomplished by
developing a physics-based predictive computer model of human walking that
includes deriving a mathematical function that describes the subconscious goal
of human walking. Studies are designed to provide fundamental insight into human
gait control and to provide a tool to design optimal exoskeleton controllers.
The integrated educational plan will use the appeal of exoskeletons to humanize
engineering by producing professional videos highlighting how engineering can
help improve impaired walking. An exoskeleton-based project will be developed to
improve undergraduate engineers' ability to model a system, something with which
many students struggle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's
overarching research goal is to study how people walk and to use that knowledge
to improve rehabilitation techniques for individuals who have trouble walking.
Towards this goal, this CAREER project will determine if the human goal is the
same for constant speed walking, changing speeds, and exoskeleton assisted
walking for both healthy and post-stroke individuals, which will provide
fundamental insight into human gait control and a tool to design optimal
exoskeleton controllers. Novel physics-based (sagittal six-link model with
revolute hip, knee, and ankle joints connecting the thighs, shanks, and feet),
predictive models will be developed that can account for the highly nonlinear
and non-intuitive nature of human-device interaction and create controllers that
correctly account for this interaction. The models developed will better predict
human gait, including transition between speeds, and quantify how people change
walking speed. Model development requires determination of an objective function
that mathematically describes the subconscious goal of human walking. Initially,
the objective will be based on the assumption that humans minimize energetic
effort while walking. If minimum effort does not correlate well with chosen
gaits, incorporating fall risk into the function will be considered.
Participants in the studies include healthy young adults (30), healthy elderly
adults (12), slow elderly adults (12), and post-stroke elderly adults (12) who
walk with difficulty but are able to walk without an assistive device and can
follow directions. The Research Plan is organized under four tasks: 1) Quantify
the spatial-temporal (step length, duration and speed) and kinematic properties
of speed transitions for young, elderly, and post-stroke adults for the first
time, and generate human-like speed transitions for the model by combining
several methods from robotic control in a novel manner; 2) Determine if the same
objective function can predict healthy human joint kinematics for steady,
variable speed, and exoskeleton-assisted walking, providing novel insights into
how humans react to exoskeleton assistance; 3) Determine how advanced age and
stroke alter the objective function used to predict walking, providing novel
insights into how age and stroke affect walking priorities and 4) Create a
method to design exoskeleton controllers in simulation that accounts for the
nonlinear human-device interactions and produces the desired human gait without
additional tuning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.