* 1943699
* CAREER: Learning Design Representations: The Effect of Differential Geometric Manifolds on the Inference of Design Structure
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Mark Fuge, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will answer the
following question: "When (or under what conditions) does incorporating and
merging multiple, known differential geometric manifolds into a learning
algorithm significantly improve the sample efficiency of learning a design
representation, given data?" Finding useful mathematical representations of
designed products and systems is one of the field's long-standing, fundamental,
open research problems. It affects almost every major design task, whether that
be optimization, understanding decision making and preferences, manufacturing
planning, uncertainty quantification, or studying design cognition, behavior, or
creativity, among others. But finding useful representations is difficult,
because they must concurrently describe multiple mathematical structures, whose
types vary across a design's shape, behavior, and function. If successful, such
learned design representations can: (1) accelerate technological and economic
competitiveness — e.g., by improving optimization convergence — (2) enable
uncertainty quantification for more complex systems than presently possible —
e.g., in systems with chaotic dynamics like Large Eddy Simulation; and (3)
permit fast, accurate manufacturing analysis, computer geometry queries, and
design synthesis — e.g., by providing compact search spaces for analysis
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining advances across three novel
mathematical areas -- Differential Geometry, Statistics, and Machine Learning
(ML) — with Engineering Design, the work will advance the science behind how to
infer underlying mathematical representations for complex systems, e.g., by
enabling existing design methods to extend from single Euclidean representations
to general Differential Geometry. Unlike past approaches to design
representation, this approach of using both differential geometry and ML enables
the research to answer fundamental questions regarding the practical limits of
what is "learnable" about a system's design in finite samples when multiple,
diverse types of representation are needed — the generated knowledge will answer
related questions that arise across other scientific fields. Education and
outreach will include: (1) a set of graduate summer programs that experiment
with an unconventional part-workshop, part-summer school format for helping
translate key results from new areas of mathematics into Engineering Design; (2)
open-source, research and teaching infrastructure for broadening access to
topics at the intersection of Design and Machine Learning; and (3) cross-cutting
education and outreach activities that focus on increasing industrial relevance
and participation of underrepresented groups in research and education at the
college and K-12 level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.