* 1943977
* CAREER: Aligned Tandem Semiconductor Microwire Slurries for Low-cost, High Efficiency Solar Hydrogen Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Joshua Spurgeon, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2025
* USD 545,014.00

Solar energy be used to photochemically "split" water into hydrogen and oxygen
gases. Hydrogen can be used as a fuel to power fuel cells or as a building block
molecule for the manufacture of chemical products and materials. This research
project will study novel catalysts and reactor designs for producing solar
water-splitting semiconductor microparticles that are capable of solar-to-
hydrogen conversion efficiencies at a level that could make slurry reactor
designs practical for commercial solar hydrogen production. The resulting
discoveries will help advance solar energy technology along a path towards low-
cost solar energy storage and sustainable fuel production. Such technologies
potentially can revolutionize the energy industry and greatly enhance the energy
independence of the United States. The research project is complemented by an
educational and outreach plan that engages undergraduate and graduate students,
as well as the wider community, in learning activities related to solar energy
and renewable resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, a design
approach will be pursued for monolithic single-particles of ideally matched top
and bottom cell bandgaps materials. The objective is to maximize light
absorption and quantum efficiency while minimizing the deleterious ohmic
resistances and back reactions. The specific research objectives are to: (1)
Produce a tandem semiconductor photoelectrode on a base of silicon microwires
capable of unassisted water-splitting under 1 Sun solar energy flux, and
demonstrate a tandem single-particle slurry reactor at greater than 1 percent
solar-to-hydrogen efficiency for more than 24 hours; (2) Investigate the
fundamental effects of particle alignment and light scattering on the efficiency
of a tandem single-particle slurry reactor by invoking variable levels of
magnetic alignment and back reflection during operation; (3) Investigate the
effects of particle density and single-particle current density on water-
splitting back-reaction rates and co-evolved hydrogen and oxygen concentration
with variable illumination intensity and carrier gas flow rate; (4) Perform
mesoscale modeling via multi-physics simulations of tandem single particles to
predict current distribution as a function of particle alignment and light
scattering, as well as hydrogen and oxygen concentrations in the electrolyte as
a function of particle current density and carrier gas flow rate, and validate
the modeling by experimental results; (5) Incorporate a ternary III-V
semiconductor of optimized bandgap as the top sub-cell in the tandem particles
to produce a slurry reactor capable of solar-to-hydrogen in excess of 8 percent,
and utilize a protective TiO2 coating to extend the particle lifetime beyond 24
hours. The educational activities will feature solar and renewable energy course
development and broad dissemination, the incubation of a materials and energy
science masterâ€™s degree program and certificate program, and direct inclusion of
underrepresented undergraduates into the research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Catalysis
and Electrochemical Systems programs and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.