* 1943439
* Exploration of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii Epigenetic Regulation in a Research-Classroom Setting
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* James Pesavento, Saint Mary's College of California
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 11/30/2023
* USD 560,264.00

Basic research on the green microalgae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Chlamydomonas)
has the potential to benefit society in many transformational ways, from the
generation of sustainable biofuels to the synthesis of novel compounds. This
project aims to expedite realization of these benefits by investigating a
fundamental mechanism governing algal gene expression–the packaging of DNA by
histone proteins and their chemical modification. The research will decipher
components of the algal "histone code" that influence how algae control gene
expression. The project will be undertaken at Saint Mary’s College of
California, a primarily undergraduate, Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI) and
features intensive research collaborations at national and regional laboratories
in Berkeley, CA and St. Louis, MO. It will provide research training
opportunities in the laboratory for several students during summer and the
academic year, and will be integrated into the classroom to create unique,
course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) for ~80 students over a
four-year period. Moreover, community college students, also from an HSI, will
have the opportunity to shadow molecular biology students working on the CUREs,
giving them insights into upper-division science at a 4-year university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little research has been done on how histone modifications
influence Chlamydomonas' epigenetic regulation and chromatin structure. The
project will address this question through research and educational objectives
that: (1) determine the function and epigenetic role of a newly discovered
monomethylation on histone H4 by identifying and characterizing the enzyme
responsible; (2) investigate histone methyltransferase gene expression by
harnessing the power of student numbers in a course-based undergraduate
experience (CURE); and (3) ascertain the role histone H4 monomethylation plays
in higher-order chromatin structure and stability by immunofluorescent staining
and microscopy. The outcomes will provide key spatiotemporal and mechanistic
insights into histone modifications and the modifying enzymes in Chlamydomonas.
This information will be of interest to researchers studying evolution of
histone-based epigenetic regulation across plants, animals and fungi, and
advance the use of algae as a source of biofuel and
bioproducts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.