* 1943554
* CAREER: Biological Production of Carbonates for Sustainable Cementitious Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Wil Srubar III, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will leverage biological
processes to create functional carbon-storing minerals for use in cement and
concrete. Concrete is the second-most consumed material on earth after water.
Its production, use, and disposal therefore have global environmental
consequences. The production of cement alone accounts for 2.2 billion tons—or
6%—of global carbon dioxide emissions. Given that global demand for mineral
aggregates for concrete materials exceeds 50 billion tons per year, a grand
opportunity exists to leverage biological processes to produce carbon-storing
minerals for use in cement paste, mortar, and concrete. This research project
will exploit biological mechanisms of microbial-induced calcium carbonate
precipitation to produce carbon-storing nano- and microscale minerals and will
study their effect on properties of concrete. The research will be complemented
by education and mentoring activities designed to educate the public on the
benefits of low-carbon construction, while cultivating a new, inclusive, and
diverse generation of interdisciplinary materials scientists and civil
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research goal of this project is to
use genetically engineered bacteria and other photosynthetic microorganisms to
produce biologically precipitated calcium carbonate nanoparticles with distinct
morphological architectures. Morphologies and nanomechanical properties of
carbonates produced by engineered bacteria strains will be compared to those
produced by native carbonate-producing strains. The carbon storage potential of
carbonates produced by each strain will be quantified and compared using
process-based life cycle assessment. Finally, structure-property relationships
of biogenic carbonate nanoparticle additions on both fresh- and hardened-state
properties of cement paste will be investigated to inform engineering
specifications for biomineral use in cement paste, mortar, and concrete. The
education goals of this project are (1) to mentor a new, diverse generation of
materials scientists in a Living Materials Laboratory experience that will
foster the creation of a new discipline at the intersection of synthetic biology
and civil engineering; (2) to disseminate benefits of biological building
materials by hosting a Carbon-Smart Building Materials Summit; and (3) to create
graduate school pathways for lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender engineering
students by engaging and mentoring them in interdisciplinary materials science
research. This project will lay the scientific foundation for the PI to achieve
his long-term career goals of transforming the built environment from a carbon
emitter into a carbon sink, while broadening the diversity, inclusion,
education, and training of next-generation materials scientists and civil
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.