* 1943409
* CAREER: Coding Theory for Efficient Data Centers via Redundancy Adaptation
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Rashmi Vinayak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2025
* USD 509,047.00

In the present information age, data plays an ever important role in society and
the economy. Large-scale data-storage systems---systems that store data in a
durable and accessible manner---are thus a critical infrastructure component
serving as the backbone for Internet based services. The devices on which data
is stored in these systems often fail. To ensure that data is not lost when
devices fail, storage systems store data in a redundant fashion. This added
redundancy consumes additional storage space and thus directly translates to an
increase in the consumption of resources and energy. The amount of redundancy is
configured based on the failure rates of storage devices. These failure rates
have been observed to vary significantly over time, and hence dynamically
adapting the redundancy level to observed failure rates provides an opportunity
for significant storage space savings. Conventional redundancy adaptation in
today's storage systems, however, consumes prohibitively high amount of
resources. This project will develop a theoretical framework to study redundancy
adaptation in storage systems, establish the fundamental limits on resource
overhead, and design practical algorithms to enable efficient redundancy
adaptation. By addressing the foundational and algorithmic questions related to
the resource, cost and energy efficiency of storage systems, the project
directly contributes to ensuring the scalability and sustainability of data
infrastructure. This project will also have significant educational and outreach
impact via course modules for graduate and undergraduate students, specially
designed modules for K-12 students and teachers, and tutorials at conferences
for researchers and industry practitioners. Directed efforts will be undertaken
for promoting diversity in STEM education and in mentoring undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale storage systems typically employ
erasure codes for adding redundancy. While adapting redundancy to observed
failure rates has been shown to be promising, such adaptation in erasure-coded
storage systems require converting already encoded data from one code to
another. Such code conversion under traditional codes consume prohibitively
large amounts of cluster resources such as accesses, disk I/O, and network
bandwidth. The overarching goal of this project is to develop information- and
coding-theoretic tools and principles for resource and energy efficiency in data
centers via redundancy adaptation, along with educational and outreach efforts
centered around big-data systems. Specifically, the project aims to (1) design
an information-theoretic framework to study code conversion, (2) establish
fundamental limits on associated resource overhead, and (3) develop a unified
theory for storage codes to design practical codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.