* 1943323
* CAREER: Translating Innovations from the Sleep Laboratory to Enhance Classroom Education and Informal Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Michael Scullin, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 02/28/2025
* USD 723,332.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who
exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent
education, and the integration of education and research within the context of
the mission of their organizations. This award to a scientist at Baylor
University has the goal of improving STEM education at the undergraduate level
by bridging the gap between laboratory-based and home-based studies in sleep
science. Ten million American college students regularly suffer from short or
poor-quality sleep, a national problem that has immediate and long-term health,
social, economic, and educational consequences. Recent work indicates that sleep
problems are particularly prevalent in women and minority groups who
historically have also been underrepresented in STEM fields, thereby signaling a
novel opportunity to mitigate a longstanding educational challenge known as the
achievement gap. To address these national and longstanding concerns, this
project will: a) experimentally test how variable sleep and mild sleep loss
affect oneâ€™s ability to learn challenging STEM content; b) investigate whether
sleep interventions that are implemented in STEM classroom settings can improve
academic outcomes and reduce achievement gaps; c) broadly disseminate the
optimal means to improve sleep via a diversity of student-led community outreach
activities and the development of a permanent sleep exhibit at the local museum.
Collectively, the project will help to achieve desired societal outcomes
including augmenting educational practices, strengthening science literacy and
public communication, and improving the well-being of students, parents, and
teachers. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports work that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM learning
and broadening participation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will combine experimental and correlational methods to inform how sleep
restriction and sleep variability impact learning and stress in the context of
gateway STEM courses. In a polysomnography-monitored laboratory setting,
participants will sleep on a consistent, restricted, or variable schedule prior
to attempting to learn challenging organic chemistry content. In a naturalistic
setting, students enrolled in organic chemistry will wear wristband actigraphy
across the semester to determine which sleep patterns are predictive of academic
outcomes. In classroom-based intervention studies, students will be randomly
assigned to receive sleep education only or sleep education augmented with
behavioral change techniques. The goal is to determine whether students can
improve their sleep in the midst of demanding STEM courses, and if doing so
benefits their academic performance. For all studies, this project will test
whether sleep patterns mediate the relationship between academic achievement and
race, ethnicity, and gender. The polysomnography, actigraphy, and survey data
will be further analyzed to investigate longitudinal associations between sleep
patterns and STEM outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.