* 1943240
* CAREER: Automatically Learning to Evade Internet Censorship
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* David Levin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 321,457.00

The Internet provides unprecedented opportunities for open communication,
diplomacy, and education. Unfortunately, the openness of the Internet is
challenged by powerful countries around the world who today engage in nationwide
censorship of Internet traffic. For decades, security researchers have engaged
in a cat-and-mouse game with censors, developing new schemes to evade censors,
who in turn have developed increasingly sophisticated countermeasures. Censors
have long had an inherent advantage in this arms race: details of their systems
are typically not made publicly known, and thus researchers have had to undergo
manual, laborious steps of measuring, innovating, implementing, and testing for
new evasion techniques. This project proposes an ambitious research agenda
towards developing artificial intelligence to automate the rapid discovery of
new methods for evading and understanding nation-state censors. The ultimate
goal of the project is to safely reach the logical conclusion of the
evade/detect arms race--and to prepare for the next one. This project also
includes an education plan that seeks to address the meteoric rise of enrollment
in undergraduate computer science programs, by exploring ways to scale-up and
broaden participation in undergraduate research. The project proposes
Breakerspace, a lab designed around group undergraduate research projects, and
integrates these into the work on automating censorship
evasion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research follows three broad thrusts:
(1) Developing new AI-based techniques for automatically evading in-network
censors of various kinds, (2) Deploying AI-assisted censorship evasion
strategies and developing new algorithms to efficiently scale-up discovery of
new strategies via collaborative, crowd-sourced training, and (3) Performing AI-
assisted measurement of censorship at unprecedented scale. The proposed research
plan takes a practical approach--training, evaluating, measuring, and deploying
against real nation-state censors, and making evasion software freely available
for censored users. If successful, the AI this project builds and deploys, and
the measurements it performs, will enable more agile evasion of new forms of
censorship, and will lend deeper insight into how censors (fail to) work, how to
circumvent them, and how they update over time. As a result, this project has
the potential to break the manual evade/detect cycle that researchers and
censoring regimes have engaged in for decades, thereby assisting millions of
users around the world in achieving open access to
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.