* 1943433
* CAREER: Understanding Strategic Dynamics in the Engineering of Decentralized Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Paul Grogan, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will diagnose and
provide understanding of strategic dynamics among a set of interactive and
autonomous design actors through the combined use of game theory and simulations
to inform architecture and design decisions. Design activities for engineering
systems across infrastructure, aerospace, and defense domains more closely
resemble a collective decision-making process than centralized authority in
traditional systems engineering practice. This topic is of interest because U.S.
agencies and firms are actively architecting systems with decentralized decision
authority, described variously as Internet 4.0, cyber-physical systems,
Internet-of-things, or systems-of-systems across domains, including energy,
transportation, manufacturing, and space systems. The design of these
engineering systems differs from that of other systems because their large
scale, long lifetime, and proximity to social systems evoke complex features
such as adaptation, self-organization, and emergence, which take place over
strategic timescales. A deeper understanding of how strategic dynamics impact
designer interactions across theoretical and empirical perspectives can help to
avoid costly overruns and cancellations by identifying and mitigating
undesirable dynamics in conceptual design phases. Advances in systems
engineering must develop theory, methods, and tools to coordinate and facilitate
collective design activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a
line of economic methods applied to engineering design including utility theory,
decision theory, social choice, and game theory. Collective systems design is
modeled as a bi-level problem, where lower-level decisions correspond to an
optimization problem and upper-level strategy decisions correspond to a
coordination game. Normative models of agent behavior are based on classical and
Bayesian game theory with utility functions incorporating behavioral factors
such as risk attitudes. Multi-agent simulation studies evolution of strategies
under repeated interaction among agents. Behavioral experiments collect
empirical data about human decision-making for validation. The research will
contribute new knowledge about how to characterize, study, and modify the
strategic dynamics of engineering systems during conceptual design phases. The
educational plan develops and delivers simulation activities to model systems
problems by combining technical modeling and social interaction. The simulation
activities behave as a highly abstracted model system to elicit rich strategic
behaviors through face-to-face interaction, engage students with challenges of
socio-technical problems, and retain computational tractability to teach
analytical methods in educational contexts. Development and broad public
dissemination of simulations in the context of Earth science space missions will
expose a wide audience to strategic issues of government-commercial
interdependency in space systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.