* 1943271
* CAREER: Design Automation of Integrated Power Electronics: From Architectures to Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Jennifer Kitchen, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2025
* USD 442,119.00

Power management circuits and systems generally regulate voltage and current
under battery drain, provide power conversion to various electronic loads for
optimizing system efficiency, and provide low-noise supplies to sensitive
circuits. At present, these systems are optimized through custom architecture
selection and design optimization by an experienced team -- a process that is
not conducive to the low-cost, fast-paced development cycles required for market
deployment in consumer applications, e.g., IoT devices, wearables, and
automotive. This project aims to develop a design flow that minimizes the number
of complex steps requiring human oversight, substantially reduces product
development cycle time and cost, and maximizes power-converter performance by
considering performance variation/degradation over lifetime. The automation
platform developed through this award will allow a small number of engineers to
design and optimize these systems, enabling designers to spend more time on
developing novel converter architectures and exploring the design space for new
circuit topologies. The educational activities involve integrating design
automation for integrated electronics with of student training from academic
stages from K-12 through college level. The findings of the project will be
incorporated into two courses at Arizona State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advocate a novel paradigm for
automating design of analog systems, in particular power electronics. Integrated
built-in-self-test will be used to monitor power system performance and update
statistical models used during the design phase, thus increasing the occurrences
of first-pass design success. The design automation of these closed-loop systems
will be achieved through: a) creation of analytical models to express the
numerous power converter architectures, b) development of a circuit component
design library, c) a circuit simulation methodology for collecting a
representative subset of design parameters that will correlate to the relevant
performance space, d) creation of statistical models and data that can be used
to fit to geometric programming (GP) and support vector machine (SVM)
algorithms, and e) development of a computationally efficient and accurate
optimization approach. The automation methods generated from this research
effort, including the methodology for creating statistical models and collecting
empirical data, the generated circuit component design library, and the
algorithms for optimizing a closed-loop power converter system with hierarchical
circuits may be used for design of other closed-loop or complex analog systems,
such as phase-locked loops (PLLs) and sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.