* 1943934
* CAREER: Surfacing deeply-held beliefs about gender- and race-based minoritization in engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Emily Dringenberg, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Grant
* 07/31/2025
* USD 612,547.00

Women and people of color remain systematically excluded from engineering. This
problem is due, in part, to the deeply-held beliefs that people in positions of
power hold about race and gender. However, such deeply-held beliefs often remain
outside of a person’s conscious awareness. This CAREER project will contribute
to broadening participation in engineering by 1) analyzing the beliefs that
engineering faculty, staff and administrators hold about why minoritization of
women and people of color endures in engineering culture, 2) analyzing how they
justify these beliefs, and 3) characterizing the experiences that they recognize
as key to their evolution. These research contributions will directly inform the
design of meaningful opportunities for others (engineering educators or members
of society more broadly) to surface and critically reflect on their deeply-held
beliefs in order to evolve towards ever-increasingly inclusive conduct,
especially with respect to race- and gender- based minoritization in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work on broadening participation in
engineering has primarily focused on understanding minoritized students and
their experiences, commonly from a deficit perspective. This CAREER project
takes a complementary approach by focusing on race or gender-based majority-
group (male and/or white) engineering faculty, staff and administrators who are
recognized as proponents of diversity and inclusion by a member of a minoritized
group. The motivation for studying these privileged individuals includes the
following: (i) the vast majority of engineering faculty and administrators
belong a racial and/or gender majority group, so efforts to broaden
participation must enable their development as inclusive educators, (ii) the
privileges associated with their majority-group status(es) potentially allow
them to evolve without ever critically reflecting on how their socialization has
enabled beliefs that maintain racist and sexist educational systems, (iii) their
decisions shape the design and implementation of undergraduate engineering
education programs, and (iv) they have the systemic power to shift engineering
culture more broadly. Methodologically, the research will include a series of
in-depth, semi-structured interviews with participants framed by Argumentative
Thinking as a way to access deeply-held beliefs and Narrative Analysis in order
to situate beliefs within an individuals’ salient life experiences. The research
findings will inform the design and implementation of professional development
opportunities targeting other majority-group educators to take responsibility
for disrupting the problematic status quo for participation in engineering by
surfacing and critically reflecting on their own deeply-held beliefs. By
understanding how to effectively surface and potentially change the deeply-held
beliefs of majority-group engineering educators, this project is a critical step
for broader change toward a culture where majority-group members hold each other
accountable for broadening participation in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.