* 1943526
* CAREER: Non-Text-Based Smart Learning in Multi-Person Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Ziho Kang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,714.00

Non-text-based smart learning refers to technology-supported learning that uses
(1) non-text features (i.e. visualized information) and (2) adapted learning
materials based on the individual’s needs. Fully immersive multi-person virtual
reality (MVR) refers to humans located at different places wearing VR devices to
join a single virtual room, a classroom with unlimited size, to learn from an
instructor. The learning environment is poised to undergo a major reformation,
and Virtual Reality (VR) will augment, and possibly replace, the traditional
classroom learning environment. The purpose of this research is to discover new
smart learning methodologies within the MVR environment using nonintrusive
multimodal analysis of physiological measures, including eye movement
characteristics, haptic interactions, and brain activities. By doing this
research, the project explores new questions on the range of human behaviors
(e.g. what they observe and how they interact) within the non-text-based MVR
learning environment. Non-verbal physiological measures can be used to assess
the individuals’ engagement in learning and support the individuals’ learning
needs in a timely manner. Furthermore, the project includes assisting the
children, especially the underrepresented minorities and those in rural, under-
developed areas, that will allow the investigation of the physical
shifts/changes when a child is learning or not learning, and provide
opportunities to explore what the child can learn in specific environments and
with specific teaching methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project bridges smart
learning pedagogy in MVR with the assessed humans’ behaviors and transforms them
into a cohesive multimodal analysis model. Multimodal analyses in MVR are
composed of two main thrusts. The first thrust is to evaluate the multi-person
learning performance through discovering the relationships among the multiple
physiological measures and to use the relationships to predict learning
performance. The physiological measures that can effectively address the data
complexity and variability include, but are not limited to, entropy (i.e. degree
of disorder or randomness in the visual interrogation or haptic interaction
patterns), visual groupings (i.e. objects or information blocks that were
closely interrogated or interacted back and forth more often than others), and
cerebral hemodynamics. The second thrust is to develop MVR learning materials
and discover non-text-based smart learning scaffolding strategies to improve
learning performance. The utilization of the predictive measures paired with
behavioral traits will lead to the development of a more personalized training
and creation of a more integrated smart learning system to meet the diverse
needs of underperforming learners. The research results from the project will be
used for professional development of teachers and state-of-the-art learning
opportunities to the students, through the Oklahoma Virtual Academic Library
(OVAL), a virtual meeting place designed for teaching and teaching
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.