* 1943907
* CAREER: Roll-to-Roll Fabrication of Porous Materials Using Nanobubble Templates
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Roseanne Warren, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant explores a new
manufacturing approach for creating templated, nanoporous materials that is
compatible with high-throughput, scalable manufacturing protocols, including
roll-to-roll fabrication. Nanoporous materials are materials characterized by
pore sizes in the sub-micrometer range (for reference a human hair is
approximately 20 micrometers). They have many important applications in
electrochemical energy storage, catalysis, ion separation and tissue
engineering. In electrochemical cells, including batteries and supercapacitors,
electrode pore structure is critical to achieving good transport of ions and
electrons through the cell, thus enabling higher energy and power densities.
While numerous methods exist for synthesizing electrodes with controlled pore
structures, there is a critical need to find new approaches for fabricating
templated, nanoporous materials that are compatible with the high-throughput,
roll-to-roll manufacturing processes currently employed in industries such as
battery production. This project explores a new porous material manufacturing
approach that uses nanoscale bubble templates in place of traditional hard
templating materials, thus enabling precise control over the resulting porous
structure while eliminating process complexities and waste associated with
removal of the hard-templating material. The research is integrated with an
educational plan that supports the training of graduate and undergraduate
student researchers, enhances educational opportunities in the field of
nanomanufacturing, and creates new opportunities for underrepresented minority
groups in STEM, with a focus on Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to test the
hypothesis that nanosized bubbles can be used as templates to fabricate meso-
and macroporous materials, and that the pore structures of these materials can
be precisely engineered by controlling the size distribution and position of the
bubbles during the templating process. The research addresses the follow key
question: Can nanoscale bubbles be used to controllably template porous
structures across micro-to-millimeter thick films at manufacturing rates
compatible with meter-per-second scale (i.e. roll-to-roll) processing? The
research addresses gaps in current knowledge of nanobubbles, including: i)
mechanisms of solid film formation at nanobubble three-phase (gas-liquid-solid)
interfaces; ii) the physics of nanobubble generation and stability, and iii) the
precision with which nanobubble positions can be manipulated using methods such
as acoustic standing waves. The research also tests new methods for real-time
investigations of nanobubbles using in-situ liquid scanning transmission
electron microscopy to advance fundamental knowledge of nanobubble interfaces
and stability. Overall, the research and education plans establish the PIâ€™s
long-term career in advanced manufacturing of nanoscale materials for
electrochemical energy storage and other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.