* 1943490
* CAREER: Rethinking the Architectures and Systems for Autonomous Driving Infrastructure
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Yang Hu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 01/31/2022
* USD 187,431.00

The automated driving ecosystem is considered as a highly multi-disciplinary
realm requiring a major design shift, from a single-body car-based platform
which encompasses entire competencies within a car, to a networked multi-object
system where competencies interact among cars and surrounding resources via the
state-of-the-art computing and communication technologies. Such an evolution is
stymied by complexity challenges in hardware, system and service models while
supporting safety, bandwidth, and service differentiation. This project develops
a new service model and a hardware/software approach, Omni, that spans cars and
edge computing platforms to provide end-to-end fine-grained coordination of
communication and computation, and thus meets the stringent safety and
performance requirement of future connected driving automation systems. The
outcomes can benefit many other application domains, such as Augmented
Reality/Virtual Reality and industrial Internet of Things. This project designs
new curricula and contributes to society by engaging under-represented groups,
developing research tools/benchmarks dissemination for education and training,
as well as technology transfer to industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops a synergistic research program that rethinks the system
hardware/software stacks and service models to enable the connected driving
automation system to allocate communication and computation resources
seamlessly. First of all, this project develops a cross-platform uniform
computing framework called Omni that addresses the cross-platform
interoperability between the communication functions and computation functions,
and enables the platform independence of application deployment. Based on the
uniform computing framework, an intelligent service slice-provisioning scheme
enables Omni to automatically provision service slices according to usersâ€™
performance requests. The service model is responsible for inferring the
performance implications and organizing the specific integrated hardware-
software stacks across the car/edge platforms for the requested service slice.
The uniform computing framework and service model is developed upon a series of
hardware and system support techniques, such as hardware accelerator designs
with service slice implication, a heterogeneity-/resources-aware runtime, and a
middleware layer to enable the vehicle-edge cooperation for flexible service
deployment and task processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.