* 1943545
* CAREER: Towards Non-Conservative Learning-Aided Robustness for Cyber-Physical Safety and Security
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Sze Zheng Yong, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 02/28/2023
* USD 289,857.00

The goal of this project is to provide a scientific basis to understand and
leverage the interaction among physical systems, artificial intelligence/cyber-
human agents and their environment through the development of control synthesis
tools to reason about safety and security under real-world uncertainties. Such
cyber-physical systems, which include many vital infrastructures that sustain
modern society (e.g., transportation systems, electric power distribution) are
usually safety-critical. If compromised, serious harm to the controlled physical
entities and the people operating or utilizing them as well as significant
economic losses can result. However, model mismatches between the real system
and an imperfect model of the system, in addition to other sources of
uncertainties (e.g., measurement errors) disable existing safety and security
protection, while robust solutions without learning may be overly conservative.
These challenges demonstrate the need to design novel computational tools that
can guarantee robust safety and security of cyber-physical systems under real-
world uncertainties without sacrificing performance. The project includes
research activities that are integrated with education and outreach to engage
students and industry partners to appreciate the importance of safety and
security for computing-related technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable
learning-aided robust safety and security for cyber-physical systems, this
project will develop mathematical foundations and control synthesis algorithms
based on set-membership and learning approaches for uncertainty quantification,
secure/attack-resilient estimation and safe-by-design control. The research
endeavor will produce novel scientific foundations representing: 1) a shift from
the conventional average or stochastic characterization of uncertainty of
machine learning- and/or physics-based models to a set-membership representation
using hybrid inclusion, 2) a transition from secure point estimator designs to
secure set-membership estimators with run-time learning of man-in-the-middle
attack models/strategies, and 3) a progression from fixed safe-by-design control
algorithms with uncompromised state feedback to attack-resilient output feedback
designs with learning from run-time data. Together, these contributions lay the
foundations in learning-aided control synthesis for cyber-physical safety and
security, enabling non-conservative safe and secure solutions for a broad range
of cyber-physical systems, including the main application to self-driving cars
used to drive the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.