* 1943104
* CAREER: Interface Formation in Laser Processed Thermoelectric Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Saniya LeBlanc, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant integrates advanced
materials and manufacturing techniques to create next-generation energy devices.
Advanced manufacturing of energy materials and devices has the potential to
transform the energy efficiency landscape. Over fifty percent of energy
resources are wasted as heat. Thermoelectric device, which convert a temperature
change to a voltage change, convert heat directly into electricity, and can
dramatically improve energy efficiency and enable distributed electricity
generation. To put these materials into widespread use, a manufacturing approach
that enables effective materials engineering and integration as well as
customizable device design is needed. Additive manufacturing, particularly
laser-based additive manufacturing, presents a potential solution to enable
widespread thermoelectric device fabrication. Very little is known, however,
about how laser processing in Additive Manufacturing (during which materials
rapidly melt and re-solidify) impacts thermoelectric materials' structure and
properties. This research project aims to uncover the relationship between rapid
melting and solidification and the resulting nano-, micro-, and meso-scale
structures, and understand the impact of these structures on thermal and
electrical properties of thermoelectric materials. The research is integrated
with an educational and outreach approach that uses materials science,
manufacturing, and energy engineering as a platform to broaden and diversify the
engineering workforce and create educational and professional development
experiences for a future workforce that is equipped to prosper in technology
design, development, and deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates how the interfaces created by laser processing alter the transport
properties of thermoelectric materials. The project will examine whether the
interface density resulting from laser-induced melting and solidification causes
the thermal conductivity to decrease and the thermoelectric power factor to
increase. Laser processing parameters determine the temporal and spatial
variation of the temperature gradients, and these gradients determine what,
where, and when interfaces form. The size, density, and location of those
interfaces determine how they will impact energy carrier transport. The research
approach is to experimentally and computationally investigate the process-
structure-property relationship by (1) experimentally characterizing the multi-
scale structures and properties and (2) modeling the time-varying, three
dimensional temperature gradients along with the formation of microstructural
crystalline morphologies. The project focuses on interfaces in the form of
grains, dislocations, phase segregation, and point defects. This work enables
laser processing to engineer interfaces (and thus control energy carrier
transport) in semiconductor materials, and it advances laser powder bed fusion
from a manufacturing technology limited mostly to metals to one that includes
semiconductorsâ€“paving the way for additive manufacturing of new, multifunctional
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.