* 1943488
* CAREER: Molecular mechanisms underlying yeast cellular starvation tolerance; spatial reasoning to increase STEM participation
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Loren Hough, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,132,207.00

All organisms must respond to changes in their environment. For example, yeast
which grow on grapes must survive drought, sudden rain, and changes in alcohol
concentration during fermentation. In response to stress, cells alter the
composition and chemical properties of their interior. An outstanding question
is how changes in the interior of cells result in protection from stresses.
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) is a technique which can give
information on the atomic level behavior of proteins within cells. In this
research, NMR will be used to measure changes in protein behavior as cells are
stressed. In addition, this project will facilitate the training of elementary
school teachers and their students in spatial reasoning. Spatial reasoning is
broadly defined as the ability to visualize, mentally manipulate, and create
representations of complex three- dimensional objects. A widescale cultural
misconception is that spatial reasoning skills are immutable; in fact, they are
one of the most trainable of STEM-related skills. By targeting elementary school
students, this project will serve to increase STEM participation in general and
to mitigate disparities in STEM for underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells respond to environmental perturbations through wide-
scale changes in their intracellular chemical environment, protein localization
and dynamics, and global cytoplasmic physical properties. All of these responses
are thought to be necessary for cell survival. To reconcile the sensitivity of
stress-responsive proteins with the unknown changes in the cellular environment
under stress conditions, we require an atomic-scale readout of intracellular
protein behavior. In this research, in cell NMR experiments will be used to
probe the intracellular environment in budding yeast. Budding yeast have well
developed genetic, environmental and pharmacological perturbations that can be
used to selectively control aspects of the cellular stress response. Comparisons
between solution and cellular protein behavior by NMR will be used to determine
how proteins change in cells and how cellular stress further effects proteins.
NMR will be used to map atomic-level changes in stress-responsive proteins and a
library of protein fragments will be used to determine sequence specificity of
stress response. Manipulations of the yeast cells will be used to determine
underlying chemical perturbations that lead to those
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.