* 1943141
* CAREER: Towards open and community-responsive ecological editing
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Kevin Esvelt, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2025
* USD 763,741.00

Could genetically-engineered daughterless mice replace the use of poisons in
order to keep wild mouse populations at low levels? Rodenticides are arguably
more dangerous, less effective, and less humane than introducing daughterless
males into a population could be. To determine whether daughterless males could
safely replace rodenticides, the public would need to understand the effects of
introducing daughterless males into animal populations. In this project, the
effectiveness of releasing daughterless males will be studied in laboratory
populations of nematodes (worms), which can be genetically engineered more
easily than mice, reproduce faster than mice, and can be grown in large
laboratory populations. Because the females, males, and daughterless males will
be engineered to glow in different colors, the effect of daughterless males can
be studied at the molecular and population levels simultaneously. Because
nematodes reproduce quickly, the project can study the consequences of
introducing daughterless males over many generations. These data will be used
along with mathematics to predict the effects of introducing daughterless males
into wild mouse populations, analogous to the way that meteorologists use
observations to forecast the weather. The predictions will be tested
experimentally using genetically engineered daughterless male mice in the
laboratory setting. The principles learned in this research could be applied to
understanding the impact of genetic engineering on control of any pest
population. The glowing worms will be used in museum workshops to educate
citizens and invite participants to help determine how local communities can
best guide democratic decisions about using genetically-engineered animals to
replace rodenticide poisons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Male-female (dioecious) C.
elegans will be generated and then further modified using CRISPR/Cas9 technology
to create targeted nuclease activity that selectively prevents development of
female embryos. Daughterless males, labelled with green fluorescent protein,
will be engineered to block development of red fluorescent protein-labeled
female embryos. Normal males in the population will be labelled with blue
fluorescent protein. The effects on population dynamics will be studied over
many generations by tracking the number of eggs laid in each generation and the
frequencies of each fluorescent marker in adults. The effective brood size and
the presence of gene flow will be varied. The data will be used to test and
refine mathematical models of population suppression. Additionally, daughterless
male mice will be generated by using a CRISPR system deposited into zygotes by
sperm. The result will be deletion of a DNA sequence required for inactivating
the X chromosome, which ought to block XX female embryo development but have no
effect on the development of XY males. This project will test the potential of
ecological engineering in two unrelated species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.