* 1943046
* CAREER: Robust Adaptive Optimization Algorithms for Differentially Private Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Jaewoo Lee, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 02/28/2025
* USD 414,794.00

Privacy-preserving optimization algorithms are essential tools for solving
machine learning (ML) problems while protecting the privacy of individuals in
the datasets used for training ML models. Despite the recent advances, there is
a lack of a theoretical foundation for understanding their performance and hence
their use in practice is limited because of utility concerns. This project seeks
to develop a theory to understand the performance of private optimizers and use
it to guide the design of algorithms with reliable and robust performance. To
this end, the project focuses on the three main challenges related to
differentially private learning: (i) bridging the gap between theory and
practice by developing a unified theoretical framework that can be used to
better understand and explain the performance of private optimizers; (ii)
applying the theory to guide the design of private optimizers whose privacy and
utility guarantees have robustness to hyperparameter choices; (iii) extending
the framework, established principles, and algorithms to deep learning models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projectâ€™s novelty is in providing a unified
theoretical framework that enables rigorous performance analysis of private
optimizers. By providing a theoretical foundation, this project will help
accelerate research on differentially private learning, for example, by allowing
the principled design of robust and reliable training algorithms. More broadly,
this project has a great potential to accelerate advances in other domains of
science by providing tools to share and analyze sensitive data without having to
sacrifice the privacy of individuals. The project involves both graduate and
undergraduate students in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.