* 1943266
* CAREER: Actin Cytoskeleton Biomechanics and Mechanobiology in Complex Cellular Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Ellen Kang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2025
* USD 508,718.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support an
interdisciplinary research and education program to investigate the fundamental
roles of the actin cytoskeleton. The actin cytoskeleton is an essential
structural component of a living cell and exists in a complex environment.
Changes in actin mechanics and structure occur in response to environmental
stresses such as crowding. These changes are linked to cell physiology and
disease states. The PI and research team will use protein biophysics and
nanoscale tools to measure how the mechanical and structural properties of the
actin cytoskeleton change with crowding. The knowledge gained will impact a
broad range of applications in multiple scientific fields including cell
physiology and aging. Integration of the research findings to a uniquely
designed biophysics pedagogy will benefit undergraduate and graduate students at
the University of Central Florida (UCF). Educational materials will be developed
for STEM education of K-12 students and outreach activities for general public.
Through this project, the PI will recruit and train underrepresented minority
students at UCF as well as from local community colleges. The PI will also
mentor young female scientists to foster their interests and careers in STEM.
These efforts will contribute to a more diverse scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Actin assembly drives many important cellular
processes, which take place in a crowded and confined cytoplasm. Despite
increased appreciation of macromolecular crowding effects, it is not well
established how crowded intracellular environments, along with altering ionic
and osmotic conditions, modulate cytoskeletal filament mechanics and structure.
The goal of this CAREER project is to identify molecular mechanisms by which
varying intracellular environments modulate the conformations, mechanics, and
mechanosensing of actin cytoskeleton. The central hypothesis is that changes in
filament mechanics and conformations induced by crowding or osmotic stress
affect interactions with actin binding proteins, which in turn can alter
cellular mechanics and physiology. To prove the hypothesis, the work will 1)
determine how mechanics and conformations of actin filaments and crosslinked
bundles are modulated in crowded environments at the nanoscale, 2) evaluate
filament assembly dynamics and interactions with actin crosslinking proteins in
crowded environments, and 3) determine how actin cytoskeleton responds to
geometric constraints, mechanical forces, and cellular environmental factors, in
addition to osmotic stress. By combining molecular biophysics and state-of-the-
art nanoscale characterization, this work will transform the understanding of
cell physiology and disease states in terms of the mechanisms that control the
physicochemical, mechanical, and structural properties of actin
cytoskeleton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Molecular Biophysics cluster of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences provided cofounding for this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.