* 1943899
* CAREER: A Hybrid Local-Nonlocal Peridynamics Framework to Model  Failure Across Deformations and Strain Rates
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Michael Hillman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2024
* USD 580,845.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports fundamental
research on modeling fracture processes in materials and structures. Due to the
several types of loading that can induce failure, these problems span a broad
spectrum of coupled physical phenomena, deformations, loading rates, and length
scales, where physical testing is often limited and costly. Current
computational methods provide viable means but have their limitations in
accurately and robustly performing failure simulations across all
considerations. This research will innovate by developing novel algorithms that
overcome these limitations by combining the advantages offered by existing
computational techniques. Consequently, this research will allow investigations
of dynamic fracture, complex three-dimensional failure modes, and damage
initiation and propagation, thus accelerating the understanding of the science
behind these events. Engineering applications of this work include mitigation of
disasters and deterioration of infrastructure, and advances in diverse areas
such as additive manufacturing, tool wear, and biomechanics. The educational
portion of this program will develop open courses that will aid in learning the
fundamentals of the knowledge and disseminating the results. The learning
material and research will be integrated with an outreach program for
underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students, to recruit, retain, and
train the next generation of engineers in simulation-based
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective approaches for simulating three-
dimensional complex fracture has been a long-standing challenge. To overcome
this challenge, the main objective of this research is to achieve a unification
of the local classical reproducing kernel meshfree method and the nonlocal
peridynamics method, to form the hybrid reproducing kernel peridynamics (RKPD)
framework. This unification is intended to enhance several critical features in
the non-local approach, necessary for effective numerical analysis of complex
failure problems across a wide range of deformations and deformation rates: high
accuracy and optimal convergence, ease of integration of multiple physical
processes, high-order accurate shock wave propagation, and contact mechanics.
The framework will be tested and validated against data obtained from
experiments on a nanosilica reinforced epoxy composite, possessing a complex
microstructure. Moreover, these computational developments will be incorporated
into an open-source software that will be freely available to the science and
engineering communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.