* 1943595
* CAREER: Sub-picosecond spectroscopy and imaging of mitochondrial respiratory chain redox
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Jesse Wilson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Nearly all the oxygen we breathe is consumed by our mitochondria, tiny energy-
producing organelles found in each of our cells. Though mitochondrial defects
are rare, they can cause extreme fatigue, headaches, loss of eyesight, and even
premature death. Figuring out how to repair defective mitochondria is
surprisingly difficult because every case is unique, and we lack the technology
to fully test how individual mitochondria respond to interventions. This project
will develop new tools for probing mitochondria, based on laser interactions
with key molecules that mitochondria use to produce
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the goal of this proposal is label-
free redox measurement of the mitochondrial respiratory electron transfer hemes
with subcellular resolution. The group will achieve this using pump-probe
microscopy, combining measurements of coherent molecular vibrations and
electronic excited-state relaxation. They will optimize the selection of pump
and probe wavelengths by modeling the excited-state dynamics of electron
transfer hemes and validate the approach on live cells and tissues with prepared
respiratory chain states. As part of the Broader Impacts, they will design a
STEM activity kit to teach high school students core concepts in seeing
metabolism through optical spectroscopy in a fun and engaging
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.