* 1943035
* CAREER:Energy Management for Smart Residential Environments through Human-in-the-loop Algorithm Design
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Simone Silvestri, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2025
* USD 548,987.00

While substantial progress has been made in the control of electric grid
considering the cyber and physical characteristics, there has been a gap in the
integration of smart grid research as it integrates with human behavior --
especially in interactions with energy management systems. For example
residential energy consumption has been rapidly increasing during the last
decades, especially in the U.S. where 2.6 trillion kilowatt-hours were consumed
during 2015, and an additional 13.5% increase is expected by 2040 . Research
efforts such as demand response have been made to reduce this consumption
especially in smart residential environments. Concepts such as demand response
have largely overlooked the complexity of human behaviors and perceptions, and
recent research in the social-science domain and recent experience has
challenged the effectiveness of this approach and in some instances led to an
abandonment and avoidance of such concepts. The objective of this proposal is to
overcome the limitations associated with state-of-the-art energy management
systems by designing novel algorithms, machine learning models, and optimization
techniques that specifically consider user behaviors, perceptions, and
psychological processes. This revolutionary approach will unleash the full
potential of smart residential environments in reducing residential energy
consumption and has the potential to transform the way in which energy
management systems are designed, implemented, and used by people. This project
also supports innovative educational activities such as classes, real time
demonstrations, coding challenges, and research experiences for high school
students. The PI will also lead a cohort of students to the diversity-oriented
Grace Hopper conference and teach seminars for Hispanic elementary students.
Finally, a new class on Cyber-Physical-Human System will be designed and several
graduate and undergraduate students will participate in the research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research combines novel
algorithmic, machine learning, and optimization solutions that consider
previously un-examined human behaviors, perceptions, and psychological
processes. Specifically, in order to enable fine grained energy monitoring, we
propose novel stream-based appliance recognition algorithms for smart outlets.
These algorithms learn the appliance consumption signatures and the user
engagement with the system to optimize the learning process. In addition, energy
saving optimization strategies are designed by considering the user perception
through social-behavioral well-being models. These models learned and refined
through novel machine learning algorithms based on regressograms, interpolation,
and regression using user feedback provided through a smartphone. In addition,
we develop optimization algorithms for energy exchange in the context of smart
residential environments equipped with renewable energy generation. These
algorithms match the users' demand and production, by considering and learning
also their availability and preferences in the energy exchange process. The
proposed research is validated through real testbeds and large-scale simulations
based on real traces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.