* 1943149
* CAREER: Quanta Computational Imaging with Single-Photon Cameras
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Mohit Gupta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 324,937.00

Single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) are an emerging sensor technology capable
of detecting individual incident photons and capturing their time-of-arrival
with picosecond precision. Due to their high sensitivity and time resolution,
SPADs are driving an imaging revolution, enabling extreme applications that were
hitherto considered impossible: imaging at trillion frames-per-second, non-line-
of-sight imaging, and microscopic imaging at nano time-scales. Despite these
capabilities, SPADs are considered specialized devices used only in ultra-dark
environments and restricted to a limited set of niche applications. This project
develops technologies to expand the scope of SPADs as general-purpose cameras
with a broad range of applications. The developed technologies will not only
spur wide-spread adoption of SPADs in fields like life science, astronomy, and
medicine, where operating with the smallest amount of light possible is critical
to success, but also enable new, highly demanding applications. 3D cameras will
be able to achieve substantially higher depth resolution than current state-of-
the-art at long distances, enabling vehicles (aerial, terrestrial, and
underwater) to navigate autonomously in challenging weather conditions and on
rugged terrains. The results from this research will be disseminated through
scientific conferences and journals. Some materials will be integrated into a
textbook on active 3D imaging techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
develops mathematical and physical foundations for a new class of imaging and
computational techniques which will transform SPADs into `all-purpose' cameras
capable of operating in diverse conditions (dark to bright sunlight), for
recovering high-quality images and 3D scene information over the entire gamut of
imaging conditions. This project develops (a) coded and asynchronous single-
photon imaging, two novel families of active single-photon imaging techniques
that minimize non-linear distortions and can reliably operate in high-flux
environments; (b) single-photon computational imaging techniques for capturing
scene intensity under passive, uncontrolled lighting (e.g., sunlight); and (c)
novel machine learning algorithms for extracting high-level scene information
from single-photon sensor data, based on spiking neural networks, enabling
rapid, power-efficient scene understanding in dynamic environments, on low-power
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.