* 1943239
* CAREER: Drivers of Plant-Microbe Symbiosis Evolution During Crop Domestication
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Stephanie Porter, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/28/2025
* USD 862,963.00

Over thousands of years of domestication and crop improvement, humans have
shaped hundreds of wild plant species into the diverse crops we depend upon.
While beneficial microbes that live on and inside of plants play key roles in
plant health, little is known about how a plants’ ability to benefit from these
cooperative microbes changes during domestication. Plant-microbe cooperation is
not stable. In fact, plants have repeatedly abandoned cooperation with microbes
over evolutionary time, and growing evidence shows that some crops evolve to
depend less on microbes over the course of domestication. This reveals a gap in
our understanding of the evolution of cooperation: what evolutionary processes
result in abandoning cooperation? And why does cooperation with microbes decline
for some plant species, but not others? To investigate how these symbiotic
relationships differ between modern crops and their wild relatives, this project
will use seed collections and genomic resources for legume crops ranging from
soybeans to peas. The utility of legumes in agriculture lies in their unique
symbiosis with rhizobial bacteria, which convert atmospheric nitrogen into
chemical forms usable to plants, essentially fertilizing them. At least forty-
one legume species have been domesticated. Researchers will compare domesticated
legumes’ ability to benefit from rhizobia to that of their wild relatives by
using modern genetic and analytical approaches. These techniques will provide
insight into how natural selection has changed patterns of cooperation between
legumes and rhizobia during domestication. Legumes account for a quarter of
global crop production and a third of human dietary protein. Understanding how
and why rhizobial symbiosis has evolved during domestication will provide a
critical road map for ways in which we could improve crop yield in order to
increase our ability to feed our growing human population. Crop domestication is
also a tangible example of evolution in action--domesticated species have
provided an intuitive model for evolutionary biology since Darwin’s original
arguments. Project research will engage undergraduates with evolutionary
problems in familiar food crops. To increase the inclusion of underrepresented
minority and community college transfer students in science, the researchers
will develop a new Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) module
on symbiosis and crop domestication and a new Science Scholars Program to
recruit and retain diverse undergraduates in scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A paradigm shift in the field of mutualism
evolution is a newfound appreciation for the frequency with which host
organisms, such as plants, have abandoned mutualisms with symbiotic microbiota.
Yet, little is known about the micro-evolutionary processes that lead to
declines in host symbiosis traits. This project will use germplasm and genomic
resources that exist for legume crops as a powerful system with which to
investigate declines in plant symbiosis traits over replicated evolutionary
lineages from wild plants to modern elite cultivars. By integrating approaches
from phylogenetics, molecular genetics, quantitative genetics, and genomics,
this project will contribute fundamental knowledge about the role of trade-offs,
natural selection, and genetic costs in shaping micro-evolutionary dynamics in
symbiotic mutualism. To elucidate the traits, forms of selection, and loci that
underlie changes in legume-rhizobium symbiosis across thousands of years of
evolution in agriculture, researchers will: 1) quantify how the nitrogen-fixing
symbiosis with rhizobia differs between leguminous crops and their wild
relatives, 2) test whether legume symbiosis traits have negative genetic
correlations with legume traits favored under artificial selection, 3) test
whether fertilization relaxes selection on legume symbiosis traits or selects
for reduced symbiosis, and 4) infer whether genetic costs of domestication are
predicted to degrade symbiosis traits in crops. This work will pave the way
towards integrating an understanding of the evolutionary forces and constraints
that underlie dynamics between hosts and microbial symbionts into the mainstream
of evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.