* 1943389
* CAREER: Microwave transmission spectroscopy of van der Waals materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Scott Dietrich, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 471,272.00

Nontechnical abstract: We often consider electricity as flowing like water in a
pipe, but this analogy breaks down when electrons interact strongly. This so-
called "collective behavior" of electrons in a material often leads to exciting
new electronic properties. This project uses microwave radiation to characterize
these electronic phases. By understanding the collective behavior, new
technology can be developed around it. This project involves early career STEM
undergraduate researchers in every aspect of the research. A nanofabrication
course that is cross-listed between Physics and Engineering extends the impact
of this research by engaging undergraduate and graduate students in related
technical fields. Educational outreach components of this project focus on K-12
students in the greater Philadelphia area through partnerships with local
libraries as well as public and private schools. These events expose students to
hands-on STEM activities that are directly related to the project’s research
areas: nanotechnology, electronics, cryogenics, and quantum mechanics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: Measuring the properties of fragile
electronic states in highly-interacting electronic systems is a difficult task.
This project employs microwave transmission spectroscopy to study collective
electronic states in van der Waals materials at low temperatures and high
magnetic fields by coupling microwave radiation to the two-dimensional electron
system through an adjacent coplanar waveguide. The transmission of microwave
radiation is sensitive to carrier conductivity and the collective oscillations
of solid phases associated with pinning to crystal impurities. This project
characterizes several electronic solids in graphene and compares these results
with transition metal dichalcogenides that have strong spin-orbit interaction.
The research also expands the spectroscopic technique to investigate two-
dimensional superconductors. This investigation revolves around the recently-
questioned dissipationless state that exists below the
Berezinskii–Kosterlitz–Thouless transition by measuring the frequency-dependent
conductance. Several phases of both electrons and composite fermions are
studied: Wigner and Skyrme crystals, stripe phases, superconducting condensates,
superconducting vortex lattices, and possibly never-before-seen quantum states.
This project addresses fundamental questions at the frontiers of highly
interacting electronic systems in materials that will advance the field of
quantum electronics and are therefore of the highest interest to broad academic
and industrial communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.