* 1943939
* CAREER: The Impact of Electrons on Laboratory Plasma Jets of Astrophysical Relevance
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Pierre Gourdain, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 01/31/2025
* USD 858,915.00

This CAREER award supports exploration of the underlying physics of the
formation and stability of astrophysical plasma jets in a laboratory setting.
Astrophysical jets are thought to be generated by supermassive black holes
sweeping interstellar matter into a jet, intimately connecting the properties of
the parent black hole and the jet itself. While black holes are difficult to
observe, it is much easier to do so for astrophysical jets that can be hundreds
of light years in length. The jet formation models benchmarked in this research
could allow for precise determination of masses of black holes that give rise to
astrophysical jets, leading to a better understanding of the distribution of
dark matter throughout the Universe. While the deep gravitational well created
by a black hole is missing in laboratory experiments, it is possible to form
high energy density flows with very similar parameters. Thus, the basic
mechanisms of jet formation can be studied in the laboratory using scaled-down
versions of astrophysical flows. This research effort will also include and
immerse students, including high school and undergraduate students, in an
environment crossing over many scientific disciplines and continents, giving
them new perspectives in high energy density physics and plasma astrophysics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The typical assumptions used to describe astrophysical jet
dynamics tend to be oversimplified and often ignore the impact of electrons in
astrophysical flows. While laboratory experiments cannot reproduce the
gravitational well of a black hole, they can still generate flows of
astrophysical relevance. This research program will investigate the impact of
electrons on turbulent, supersonic jets generated by pulsed-power drivers
focusing on three key questions: (1) Can electron effects improve collimation of
turbulent jets? (2) Is it possible for electron flows to be a source of
macroscopic instabilities? and (3) Can the physics models benchmarked in pulsed-
power experiments be carried over to laser-driven jets and, ultimately, to
astrophysical systems? The exceptional temporal and spatial accuracy of the
diagnostics to be used in this study will allow not only to measure the electron
density and magnetic field across space and time, but to also infer the electron
flow velocity and electrical currents. All four quantities will be used to test
electron effects across a wide range of scales. The main goal of this research
is to clearly demonstrate when and where electron effects play an important role
in high energy density plasmas and how these effects scale all the way to
astrophysical systems. The experimental work will be conducted on the High
Amperage Driver for Extreme States (HADES) facility constructed with support
from the NSF Major Research Instrumentation program. The multi-disciplinary
nature of the research will expose students to different scientific perspectives
and nurture a culturally diverse research environment. Through mentoring,
outreach, recruitment and experience abroad, this program will train students in
becoming effective mentors and inspired scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.