* 1943930
* CAREER: Understanding Quasicrystalline Superstructures Formed from Pyramidal Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Ou Chen, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2025
* USD 534,562.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Crystalline materials are characterized by a
structure with a regular, repeating pattern of atoms, while amorphous materials
such as glass are disordered. Quasicrystalline (QC) materials are unusual in
that they are ordered but not periodic, making them a fundamentally different
category of materials which is neither a crystal nor a glass. The unique
structure gives QC materials intriguing thermal, electrical, magnetic, optical
and mechanical properties, making them useful for applications such as non-stick
and thermally insulating coatings or corrosive-resistant and extremely strong
materials for medical devices and surgical instruments. This CAREER award,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program within the Division
of Materials Research, enables study of QC materials self-assembled from
pyramid-shaped nano-sized particles (nanocrystals). The project includes
detailed characterization of new QC materials’ structures and formation
processes and also develops new characterization and growth methods that may be
applicable to studying other soft matter assembly systems. The research offers
ample fundamental and visual interest, as well as technological relevance, all
of which are integrated into the PI’s education and outreach activities. YouTube
movies with a jargon-free, storytelling style are created and promoted through
various social media platforms. These videos take unique advantage of the
connection between the beautiful and eye-catching QC patterns created by this
fundamental study and real-world art, decoration and architectural design.
Additionally, the project supports outreach to local high school students
through an annual STEM Day. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research,
integrates education and research on quasicrystalline (QC) superstructures
assembled from pyramid-shaped nanocrystals (NCs). Self-assembly of NCs into
novel superstructures is a promising approach for transporting nanoscopic
properties into macroscopic materials to eventually enable highly efficient
solar cells, low-energy-consumption lighting and displays, and more sensitive
biological sensors. To realize these opportunities requires rational control
over the formation of NC superstructures. Quasicrystals are ordered but not
periodic and as such defy classification as either a crystal or a glass. The
study of NC QC superlattices (QC-SLs) is in its infancy compared to efforts on
conventional NC crystalline superstructures. It remains an outstanding question
how NCs organize into these long-range ordered yet aperiodic lattices; methods
to produce and characterize these unique materials are limited. To address these
issues, the PI's group first synthesizes anisotropic pyramidal NCs and assembles
them into QC superstructures. These materials are then characterized using
combinations of in situ and ex situ real space methods (electron microscopies
and tomography) complemented by reciprocal space measurements (electron
diffraction and X-ray scattering). In addition to 2D superlattices, 3D QC
supercrystals grown via microfluidics will be structurally characterized using a
new super-crystallography technique. Together, these tools provide exquisite
detail concerning the packing of these structures and specify the relative
orientation of individual NCs. Such information clarifies how NC synthesis,
superstructure formation and transformation work together to create QC
superstructures. Results generated in this research are integrated into a series
of outreach activities that target younger students and adults alike with
compelling, visual stories designed to provoke interest in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.