* 1943452
* CAREER: Valence Orbital Control in f-Block Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Henry La Pierre, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2025
* USD 449,999.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division
supports the research of Professor Henry S. La Pierre at the Georgia Institute
of Technology to establish the synthetic chemistry, magnetism, and spectroscopy
of compounds in which lanthanide atoms have unusual high or low charge. The
chemical elements that drive the nuclear age are from the bottom of the periodic
table and include the actinide and lanthanide elements. Together these are known
as the f-elements. Today, the f-elements and their chemical complexes play key
roles in energy production, conversion, and use. In addition, these elements are
driving large-scale technological developments in areas including lighting, hard
magnets, and electronics. While the f-elements have been intensively studied
over the years, fundamental chemical control of their bonding is incomplete. In
this respect knowledge that can expand our ability to utilize unusual bonding
features of the f-elements is very important. These species are a foundation,
for new lanthanide-based technologies in applications including quantum
information science and quantum materials. The graduate and undergraduate
students who carry out this research will be trained in a wide range of physical
and synthetic techniques. They will also participate in an outreach program to
the community to increase access to scientific careers among economically
disadvantaged and underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project establishes the synthetic chemistry and ligand design to control and
exploit multi-configurational and mixed-valence ground states in lanthanide
complexes. These goals require the development of synthetic methodology to
regulate the accessible oxidation states in the lanthanides: in particular, to
expand the scope of accessible tetravalent and divalent lanthanide complexes.
This synthetic methodology, in conjunction with physical characterization and
reactivity studies, provides fundamental insight into how multi-configurational
and mixed-valence phenomena emerge in lanthanide materials and how these
phenomena influence thermodynamics, kinetics, and magnetism. In particular,
X-ray absorption spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance, and magnetic
probes are employed to elucidate the electronic basis of the stabilization of
the tetravalent oxidation state and the ligand field considerations which lead
to mixed-valent ground states in tri- and divalent lanthanides. Determination of
these fundamental physical and chemical properties may enable important
f-element-based technological advances. This support also establishes an
educational and outreach program to increase awareness of and access to
scientific careers among economically disadvantaged and underrepresented
minority communities the Atlanta Metro area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.