* 1943448
* CAREER: Imaging dynamic macromolecules in solution with x-ray lasers
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Richard Kirian, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 01/31/2025
* USD 845,339.00

An award is made to Arizona State University (ASU) for the development of new
biomolecular imaging techniques that exploit the unique capabilities of
ultrabright x-ray sources. The research aims to enable broadly applicable
methods of visualizing dynamic motions of proteins and other biomolecules in
solution at physiological temperature. The education plan integrates
undergraduate and PhD students into the specific research project, as well as
the broader initiative to develop ultrafast x-ray science at ASU. Opportunities
are tailored to undergraduate first-generation community college transfer
students to engage in mentored independent research at ASU. A team of
undergraduate and PhD students will work together toward complementary research
goals and will travel to large-scale laboratory facilities, such as the Linac
Coherent Light Source at SLAC National lab, to learn how diverse teams of
scientists work together. Student career development will be supported through
cross-training opportunities at collaborator institutes, participation in
international conferences, assistance with individual development plans, and
other forms of mentorship. A new freely available open-source software suite
will be developed as a pedagogical tool to help a broader audience of students
master x-ray data analysis methods and explore new imaging concepts. A
complementary optical diffractive imaging laboratory apparatus will be developed
to teach experimental techniques. These hardware and software tools will be
integrated into undergraduate physics curriculum at ASU and will also provide a
foundation for an interactive diffractive x-ray imaging display to be showcased
at public outreach events at ASU. The educational plans are highly synergistic
with the existing NSF BioXFEL Science and Technology Center and the Compact
X-Ray Light Source facility at ASU’s Biodesign
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific research targets the general need
for measurement techniques that can reveal detailed three- dimensional
structures and functional dynamics of biomolecules such as proteins. It develops
x-ray scattering methods to determine structures without the need to grow
macroscopic protein crystals or to cryogenically freeze samples, both of which
are requirements of existing techniques that can limit their effectiveness for
dynamic molecules. X-ray free-electron lasers are used to produce snapshot
scattering patterns by outrunning atomic motions with intense ultrashort x-ray
pulses of just 10 femtoseconds (10-14 seconds). Unlike conventional x-ray
solution scattering, the analysis of two-point intensity correlations amongst
snapshot scattering patterns can directly yield three-dimensional structures,
and in favorable cases allows for chemically selective imaging of atomic sub-
structures embedded in complex environments. Structural changes may be sequenced
in time to form “molecular movies” by delaying snapshots until shortly after
reactions are triggered with light flashes, temperature jumps, or by other
mechanisms. These methods are applicable to a broad variety of biomolecular
systems which includes, among numerous examples, proteins that are involved in
photosynthesis, vision, viral infection, and signaling processes that regulate
nearly all vital processes in living cells and organisms. Model protein systems
studied in the course of this research will elucidate ultrafast dynamics of
light-activated protein motions. In addition to the publication of results in
peer-reviewed journals and presentations at scientific conferences, x-ray
scattering data and analysis software will be made publicly available and will
contribute to the general development of ultrafast x-ray imaging science.
Similarly, innovative hardware technologies developed in the course of the
research, such as micro-nozzle designs for the production of liquid
nanodroplets, will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.