* 1943127
* CAREER: Mechanistic Investigation of Chemical Photodegradation to Aid in Novel Pesticide Design
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Jakub Kostal, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2025
* USD 706,726.00

This CAREER award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Division of Chemistry supports Professor Jakub Kostal and his students and
postdoctoral associates for a computational study of the environmental fate of
pesticides. Crop protection is ever more important as global population grows.
It is estimated that over two million tons of active pesticide ingredients are
used annually. The environmental fate of these chemicals and their ability to
degrade after use are not well understood. Environmental concerns require
changes to the use of these chemicals in the environment. This research aims to
advance our understanding of light-initiated breakdown mechanisms of pesticides
in the air and in surface waters using computational techniques. This research
will inform the design of alternatives to existing commercial pesticides, which
will not persist in the environment. The students and postdocs participating in
this research will be trained in both environmental and computational chemistry.
Professor Kostal also leads an annual design challenge for chemistry students
hosted by the American Chemical Society Green Chemistry &amp; Engineering
Conferences. In this challenge, teams of chemistry students will apply
computational methods to the design of novel commercial chemicals that are both
high performing and non-persistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photochemical reactions
are the primary route for abiotic degradation of pesticides. Among those,
indirect reactions initiated by excited natural organic matter are the most
common. This work aims to improve our understanding of the reaction mechanisms
between common pesticides and natural organic matter. The goal is to develop
guidelines for the effective use of existing pesticides and to design novel
pesticides that will not persist in the environment after use. Computational
methods, notably time-independent and dependent density functional theory, are
used. The project develops a comprehensive database of photodegradation metrics,
which are made available to the scientific public. These metrics can, in turn,
be used to better understand structure-activity relationships for abiotic
transformations of pesticides by applying machine learning and pattern-
recognition methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.