* 1943992
* CAREER: Capacity Adequacy Options for Electricity Markets with Increasing Renewable Penetration: Equilibrium Models and Laboratory Experiments
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Chiara Lo Prete, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Organized wholesale electricity markets are complex institutions combining
economic principles with the physics of electric delivery. These markets
converged to a common framework that has been successful at promoting efficient
and reliable operations since the 1990s. However, the growth of intermittent
renewables poses challenges that were unknown, or less material, in the early
designs. As electricity markets evolve to integrate renewable generation into
power systems, there is a need for robust models and analysis tools to help
decision-makers in the design effort. Market complexity is often not adequately
represented in models aimed at informing design decisions, and comparisons
between electricity market structures are difficult. The research objective of
this CAREER proposal is to develop a unifying conceptual and computational
framework to compare wholesale electricity market designs on their ability to
provide efficient incentives for generation capacity investment under increasing
renewable penetration. Results will advance understanding of efficiency gains
associated with electricity market designs, contribute to sharper answers on the
most efficient path forward to integrate renewables, and help shape future
market design decisions. Ongoing collaboration with regional electricity markets
will facilitate dissemination of research findings and implementation of
promising market design innovations. The educational objective of this CAREER
proposal is to provide research opportunities that engage female undergraduate
students in the PI's research group and encourage their interest in pursuing
advanced degrees, and integrate science communication training into
undergraduate and graduate education. These objectives are well aligned with the
PI's long-term educational goals of broadening participation of women in
research careers in energy economics and engineering, and educating the next
generation of energy scholars and professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research examines a market design challenge associated with renewable
integration into electricity systems, using a unique approach that combines
equilibrium models and experimental economic methods. First, the PI will develop
multi-stage equilibrium models to simulate investment and operation decisions in
electricity markets under alternate designs for resource adequacy and revenue
sufficiency. Equilibrium models will: i) account for the impact of uncertainty
in renewable production, demand and fuel prices on investment decisions; ii)
span a multi-year time frame to consider investment and retirement decisions;
iii) incorporate risk-averse investment in generation capacity and imperfect
competition in energy markets. Models of the type discussed in this proposal are
characterized by non-convexities that pose challenges to established solution
techniques. To handle computational complexity, the PI will leverage recent
algorithmic advances for computing equilibria of non-cooperative games under
uncertainty. Second, the PI will design and conduct human subject experiments to
compare performance characteristics of market designs. The laboratory is an
ideal environment to evaluate market structures under controlled conditions,
providing an opportunity to gather evidence on the relative strengths and
weaknesses of each design, and examine human decisions in economic environments
that reflect salient features of the naturally occurring markets. Thus,
experiments may serve as a valuable complement to equilibrium models in the
design effort. Predictions from the equilibrium models will be compared to
outcomes from the experimental markets to provide insights into real-world
market design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.