* 1943999
* CAREER: Multiscale Simulations of Iron Oxide Nanoparticle-Protein Electron Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Tao Wei, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2025
* USD 579,997.00

Metal oxide nanoparticles coupled with metal-reducing bacteria can generate
reaction processes for applications in bio-remediation of contaminated soil and
water. The challenge is to increase the currently low efficiency of these
reactions, which critically depend on how nanoparticles interact with the outer
membrane proteins. This CAREER project will investigate iron oxide nanoparticle-
protein electron transfer reaction for the purpose of developing more efficient
technologies for environmental applications. The knowledge obtained from this
project is also highly desirable and applicable to technology development in
bioenergy, biocompatible materials and biosensors. This research will greatly
impact the scientific exploration in many disciplines, including chemical and
biomedical engineering, material science, chemistry and biology. Through
targeted efforts that integrate research and education, this project will
provide cutting-edge research opportunities to promote STEM education for
undergraduate and graduate students, particularly those from underrepresented
communities, and will offer education activities to broaden STEM experiences for
K-12 teachers and students as well as for the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research goal of this project is to
elucidate the mechanism of iron oxide nanoparticle-protein electron transfer and
redox, which is greatly needed for environmental applications utilizing coupled
iron oxide nanoparticle-dissimilatory metal-reducing bacteria. Due to the lack
of a proper simulation approach and parameters for nano-bio systems, there are
few synergistic theoretical studies in this area. To tackle computational
challenges at multiscale levels, involving protein conformation changes,
chemical reactions and electron transfer, this project will incorporate
multiscale simulations at the quantum, atomistic and molecular levels,
complemented by experiments of cyclic voltammogram and linear and nonlinear
vibrational spectroscopies as well as virtual visualization. Simulation
parameters of electron transfer and nanoparticle-protein interactions and
reactions will be developed based on theory and quantum computations. The
underlying mechanism of the abiotic-biotic interfacial electron transfer and the
associated molecular details of nanoparticle-protein's physical interactions and
chemical reactions at multiscales will be investigated. The effects of
lipopolysaccharide, phospholipids, outer membrane and properties of
nanoparticles on protein interfacial behavior and the interfacial electron
transfer will be studied. The simulation results of nanoparticle properties,
protein secondary structure, orientation on nanoparticle surfaces and electron
transfer properties will be verified by experimental measurements. Simulations
will also help interpret experimental cyclic voltammogram signals and linear and
nonlinear vibrational spectra. This work will provide valuable insights into
physics and chemistry regarding nano-bio interfacial phenomena and will promote
the development of efficient bio-nano technologies. The educational goal of this
project is to enhance STEM education for underrepresented minority students at
university and K-12 levels by providing world-class engineering education and
research opportunities. The research activities and results of this project will
be incorporated into new courses and student research opportunities to recruit
and retain minority students in STEM fields. This project will also offer STEM
teacher workshops, introduce high school students to research projects, and
promote the scientific literacy of the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.