* 1943079
* CAREER: Proactive Techniques for Enhancing Security and Resilience of Mobile Communication Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Guanhua Yan, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 398,124.00

The 5G networks currently being rolled out globally are expected to
revolutionize a wide spectrum of application domains, including, but not limited
to, automotive, healthcare, smart cities, factories, and first responders. This
project seeks to enhance the security and resilience of the next-generation
mobile communication networks against threats that may cause infrastructure-
level damages. First, the ease of distributing mobile applications from
marketplaces (e.g., Google Play and Apple App Store) and the growing popularity
of IoT (Internet-of-Things) devices have made it possible to construct large
botnets capable of attacking critical infrastructures. Second, both insider
threats (e.g., disgruntled former employees) and unintentional human errors
(e.g., network misconfiguration) can cause widespread cellular service failures.
Third, virtualization of 5G core network services makes them attractive targets
for APT (Advanced Persistent Threat) attackers who covet sensitive user data,
such as mobile users' account information, locations, and private keys. The
successful execution of this project will not only produce tools that can
protect the Nation's mobile communication infrastructures but also train
students from diverse backgrounds for jobs in critical infrastructure
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this CAREER project is to
develop three-layered, proactive defenses for the next-generation mobile
communication infrastructures. The first layer of defense will provide
infrastructure-level accountability support to deter potential attackers because
their attack origins can be traced from observable network events with high
accuracy. The second layer will use real-time machine learning techniques
enhanced with knowledge of communication protocol specifications to identify
anomalous activities. These anomaly detection methods will be designed with
robustness against adversarial manipulations such as model poisoning and evasion
attacks. The third layer of defense will focus on diverting attackers who have
successfully penetrated into the mobile communication infrastructures to
deceptive environments, where their attack capabilities, intentions, and origins
can be revealed. This CAREER project will engage 5G infrastructure stakeholders
in improving the security and resilience of their mobile network operations. Its
research activities will involve undergraduates and under-represented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.