* 1943748
* CAREER: Structural and mechanisctic studies of a novel group of oxygen-tolerant [FeFe] hydrogenases
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Alexey Silakov, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 05/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

Hydrogen gas (H2) is growing in demand as an energy resource. It is currently
produced from non-renewable sources, which is both costly and environmentally
harmful. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Alexey Silakov from Pennsylvania State
University at University Park to study a recently discovered bacterial enzyme
that contains two iron atoms. This [FeFe] hydrogenase molecule speeds up
chemical reactions so that they can efficiently produce H2 gas that can be used
as an energy resource. Current, [FeFe] hydrogenases lose their activity upon
exposure to even small amounts of oxygen (O2) from the air, hampering their
industrial use for energy production and utilization. The [FeFe] hydrogenase
employed by the Silakov group remains stable and active after O2 exposure. Dr.
Silakov will apply structural and computational approaches to help explain why
this [FeFe] hydrogenase is O2 tolerant, setting the stage for their use in
environment-friendly and renewable hydrogen production and energy generation.
This research project provides graduate and undergraduate students with
opportunities to develop experimental and theoretical skills that are critical
for their future careers in the sciences. In addition, Dr. Silakov develops
lectures and hands-on training in research methods used to study enzymes as a
part of the University’s biannual Bioinorganic Workshop. Finally, Dr. Silakov
engages high-school students from under-served communities by developing
curricular materials on the hydrogen-based economy and by providing laboratory
experiences to foster their interest in pursuing careers in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Dr. Silakov investigates a putative
subclass of highly O2-tolerant [FeFe] hydrogenases. The discovery these [FeFe]
hydrogenases sets a new paradigm for the stability of these highly efficient
enzymes in the presence of oxygen. By studying structures of the O2-tolerant
[FeFe] hydrogenases and physicochemical properties of the incorporated
metallocofactors, this project establishes the connection between the enzymatic
function, mechanisms of safe reaction with O2, and the structural determinants
of specific phenotypes. The multidisciplinary research plan encapsulates
advanced electron paramagnetic resonance and vibrational spectroscopies,
electrochemistry, X-ray crystallography, molecular dynamic simulations, and
quantum chemical calculations. This research formulates the structure-function
relationships that are instrumental for engineering hydrogenases to perform a
particular function and provides an in-depth understanding of how different
components of the metal-containing enzymes work together. This project builds a
rich platform to engage a diverse group of scientists from high-school to
graduate students in STEM activities through a series of outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.