* 1943722
* CAREER: Transforming Multiphase Flow in Porous Media from Passive Pore Fluids to Active Suspensions of Motile Bacteria
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Sheng Dai, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2025
* USD 540,362.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will promote the scientific
understanding of active particles at gas-liquid-mineral interfaces and use the
insights gained to shift the paradigm in adaptive control of multiphase flow in
porous media. Multiphase flow in porous media is mainly governed by the
rheological properties of pore fluids and the gas-fluid-mineral interactions.
These processes can be substantially altered by adding active suspensions, which
are self-propelling objects that can inject energy, generate mechanical stress,
or create flows within fluids. Active particles are revolutionizing many
industrial and scientific fields, such as ferromagnetic particles for dynamic
sealing, micro-robots for targeted delivery of drugs, molecular motors to
facilitate cell locomotion, and motile bacteria to tune water into superfluids.
Studying active fluids in porous media can renovate commercial techniques in
geosystems infrastructure and subsurface energy that will increase the economic
and technological competitiveness of the United States. Particularly,
translating the technology of using active suspensions into the practical
improvement of resource recovery and reliable waste disposal can transform and
benefit society. Knowledge gained from this award can also provide insights into
microbial infection, bio-microrobots design, and targeted delivery that are
relevant to many environmental and health issues pertaining to the well-being of
individuals in society. Research and education activities of this CAREER grant
will be integrated to foster a cross-disciplinary community in energy
geotechnics, inspire the interests of diverse student groups in geotechnics and
STEM subjects, and broaden dissemination to the public of the critical role of
geotechnical engineering in addressing global challenges related to
sustainability and energy. This grant will also facilitate long-term mentoring
relationships between the PI and participants, which will strengthen and
diversify the underrepresented minority STEM pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this CAREER grant is to understand and model the
interactions between motile bacteria and gas-liquid-mineral interfaces. Combined
experimental, numerical and analytical modeling will be performed to investigate
the effects of three strains of Escherichia coli with different motility (1) at
the gas-liquid interface, (2) in pendant and sessile droplets, (3) as bacteria-
laden interface migrating through pore space, and (4) during wetting and drying
processes in porous media. This research will ultimate (1) quantify the gas-
liquid interfacial tension with suspended active particles, (2) understand the
role of motility on the hydrodynamic dispersion of bacteria in a pendant
droplet, (3) evaluate bacteria motility to pin or depin sessile droplets on
hydrophobic and hydrophilic mineral surfaces, (4) measure the capillary
signature as active-particle-laden interfaces migrating through pore throats,
and (5) model the macroscopic spreading dynamics of motile and nonmotile
Escherichia coli during the wetting and drying processes in porous media. Active
pore fluids are non-equilibrium systems, present novel features that are
interesting scientifically in their own rights. This grant supports the
fundamental understanding of the non-linear behavior of active-particle-laden
interfaces, which exhibit unique capillarity signatures and buckling mechanisms
as they migrate through irregular pore spaces. Research findings of how
microbial motility alters multiphase flow patterns provide innovative approaches
to subsurface flow management, enhanced resource recovery, adaptive control and
targeted delivery of fluids (and associated heat, nutrients, and mass) transfer
in porous media. The new knowledge and techniques obtained through this project
can be used to develop disruptive technologies of using man-made active
particles to alter many fundamental soil phenomena, such as seepage, drainage,
consolidation, and liquefaction. Integrated educational objectives of this
CAREER grant are to engage a cross-disciplinary community in energy geotechnics
and generate greater awareness amongst the public about the geotechnical role in
addressing global challenges related to sustainable and energy-viable society.
To achieve these objectives, a Vertically Integrated Program on subsurface
energy involving K-12 STEM students (through the Research, Experiment, Analyze,
Learn REAL program), undergraduate and graduate research assistants, and high
school teachers (through the Georgia Intern Fellowship for Teacher GIFT program)
will be established to engage a cross-disciplinary community in active fluids
through porous media. The research and educational outcomes will be disseminated
through increasing scientific literacy, designing classroom challenge problems
related to subsurface flow for Atlanta K-12 schools and summer camps, and
developing a mobile app that students and public users can select different
natural or man-made porous materials to visualize the flow of various fluids and
the impacts of added active particles. These products will also be presented at
the Tellus Science Museum, Atlanta Science Festival, and Energy
Expo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.