* 1943123
* CAREER: Algorithms and Data Structures for Robust 3D Geometry Processing via Intrinsic Triangulations
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Keenan Crane, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2025
* USD 409,102.00

This project develops methods that make it possible for users of geometric
software to take advantage of a much larger fraction of available three-
dimensional geometric data. We are currently witnessing an explosion in the
availability of geometric data, driven by increasingly affordable and accessible
technologies for 3D acquisition and digital manufacturing. Yet this data remains
under-utilized across science, engineering, and medicine, since development of
geometric software still demands sophisticated understanding of difficult low-
level technical concepts (mesh generation, finite element methods, etc.). This
research instead provides a reliable "black box" interface to geometric data,
enabling non-expert users to focus their energy on higher-level application
goals. The algorithms developed in this project will be applicable to a broad
range of tasks ranging from structural engineering, to autonomous vehicle
navigation, to development of virtual 3D environments, to analysis of medical
data. The project will develop free and open source software that makes these
algorithms immediately and broadly accessible. The project will also engage with
both industry and the local "maker" community to evaluate the effectiveness of
the new technology and to facilitate transfer to a diverse set of real-world
users. Materials developed in this project will help to illuminate connections
between discrete computational algorithms and differential geometry, offering
rich opportunities for pedagogy and training of a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic technical approach is to replace the
standard notion of a surface or volume mesh with a so-called intrinsic
triangulation. Such a triangulation can connect any two vertices of a polyhedral
surface by an edge, whether or not they are connected via a straight line
through space. Algorithms based on intrinsic triangulations are far less prone
to failure, since they can freely adjust the triangulation to accommodate the
demands of a given algorithm. A good analogy from numerical linear algebra is
the use of matrix reordering to improve the numerical stability of linear
solvers. In the same way, intrinsic triangulations improve the numerical
stability of geometric algorithms. From a system-level point of view, intrinsic
triangulations provide a valuable "bridge" between a large class of existing
algorithms and challenging geometric data, enabling for instance 1) algorithms
that were not originally designed to be numerically robust to be successfully
run on extremely low-quality meshes; 2) algorithms that were originally
formulated only for the flat plane to be applied to curved surfaces; and 3)
algorithms designed for homogeneous, isotropic problems to be applied in more
general inhomogeneous, anisotropic settings. The intrinsic approach also side-
steps some fundamental, traditionally unavoidable challenges in geometric
computing, such as the need to juggle the quality of geometric approximation
with the quality of individual mesh elements. The project will specifically
develop new data structures for both surface and volume meshes, and algorithms
for geometric upsampling/downsampling, retriangulation, computing geodesic
paths, solving anisotropic partial differential equations, processing tangent
vector fields, and processing volumetric data. Methods developed in the project
will be evaluated via large-scale data sets arising from industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.