* 1943580
* CAREER: Integral Geometry: Theory, Implementations, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Francois Monard, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 364,798.00

A typical problem of integral geometry is to determine the distribution of some
physical quantity inside the body (say, density) from the known averages of this
quantity over a given family of curves (say, along straight rays of different
directions). Several problems in imaging sciences are modeled as integral
geometric problems like the one just mentioned. Examples include: the
X-ray/Radon transform used in Computerized Tomography, with applications to
medical imaging and homeland security; the travel-time tomography problem in
seismology or geophysical prospection; and more recently, the Neutron Spin
Tomography problem, where a magnetic field inside a material must be recovered
from its 'non-abelian' integrals. In this project, the Principal Investigator
will address core questions in integral geometry, on both theoretical and
applied levels. For such problems where the complexity lies in the geometry of
propagation, the representation of the unknown parameters, and sometimes the
non-linear aspects of the problem, the feasibility of reconstruction from
available data will be first assessed at the level of the continuous models. In
cases where inversion is possible, theoretical inversions will be validated by
proof-of-concept implementations which will address practical issues of noisy
data, sampling/resolution, regularization and Uncertainty Quantification. This
research project is integrated with opportunities for training, research
experience and career development for undergraduate and graduate students, as
well as for a postdoctoral researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the theoretical and applied analysis of integral geometric problems,
where unknowns are modeled as functions, tensors, connections over bundles, or
sections of these bundles. The measurements are linear or non-linear integral
functionals of said unknowns. In addition to the usual injectivity, stability
and inversion assessments, focus will be turned toward sharpening the mapping
properties of integral geometric operators and obtaining range characterizations
for certain non-linear operators. The proposed methods combine deep theoretical
tools (microlocal analysis, harmonic analysis, Clifford analysis and partial
differential equations on manifolds) with a concern to produce explicit routes
toward the reconstruction of the unknowns, some of which already exist in non-
explicit form. To complement this theoretical agenda, addressing practical
issues such as noisy data, sampling and Uncertainty Quantification will require
methods from theoretical statistics and signal processing. Numerical validations
will be provided to implement the theoretical derivations and uncover the next
challenges toward real-life applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.