* 1943801
* CAREER: Unifying Sensing, Machine Perception and Control for High-precision Micromanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Xiaoning Jin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant investigates machine
learning-based sensing and control methods to improve the efficiency and quality
of scalable and high-precision subtractive and additive micromanufacturing
processes. Machine learning-based methods take advantage of massive amounts of
data collected from sensors and actuators to discover patterns and draw
inference using mathematical algorithms and statistical models. This represents
a new avenue for innovation in process monitoring and control for emerging
micromanufacturing technologies (e.g., roll-to-roll printing of flexible
electronics) where prior knowledge is limited but sensor data is rich. By
leveraging advanced machine learning methods that are guided by physical
manufacturing knowledge, this research increases understanding of sensing-based
control, thus enabling significant enhancement in the process performance,
stability and adaptiveness required for high-precision and high-rate
manufacturing. Ultimately this work benefits society by enabling next-generation
manufacturing that is more precise, more reliable and that produces more complex
products with less material waste, lower defect rates, and higher efficiency.
The knowledge obtained from this research is used to support the education and
training of future manufacturing scientists and engineers recruited from a
diverse and dynamic group that includes underrepresented minorities and women in
this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance the
fundamental understanding of data-driven machine learning-based precision
control for micromanufacturing processes. The novel unified framework and
methods developed in this research transform state-of-the-art process control
from a model-based standard to a data-driven model-free paradigm, ultimately
pushing new levels of accuracy and precision of complex micromanufacturing
systems. The major innovation involves a novel sensing-perception-learning-
control framework that leads to meeting the following research objectives: 1)
create a low-dimensional and low-noise latent state representation from abundant
multimodal sensor data for process state estimation through probabilistic deep
learning methods, and provide fundamental knowledge required to realize high-
quality monitoring; 2) establish a novel Perception-based Iterative Learning
Control (PILC) method with controllers to achieve unprecedented accuracy in
precision process control, and 3) experimentally demonstrate and validate the
unified framework and a set of sensor-based deep inference and learning-based
control algorithms on two specific advanced micromanufacturing processes, ion-
mill etching (subtractive) and roll-to-roll gravure printing (additive). The
fundamental understandings directly advance the real-time control capability of
high-precision manufacturing processes with tighter tolerance, and guide
potential routes for achieving manufacturing capabilities augmented by sensing
technologies and advanced data analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.