* 1943155
* CAREER: Deciphering the mechanism of a broad-spectrum resistance gene against Fusarium gramin
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Nidhi Rawat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 03/31/2025
* USD 500,047.00

Plant diseases cause significant losses to global agricultural production.
Understanding the mechanism of resistance to major pathogens of crop plants is
essential to ensuring food security for the ever-increasing human population.
Fusarium graminearum, causing Fusarium Head Blight disease of wheat and barley,
is a serious threat to global food security, and food safety. The traditional
major resistance genes are not effective against F. graminearum, whereas the
molecular mechanisms of atypical host resistance proteins have not been studied
so far. Efforts in this project will be targeted to develop molecular
understanding of a novel resistance protein against F. graminearum. Research
will include characterizing the cellular and sub-cellular localization of the
protein, investigating the pathway of transport of the protein, and study of the
nature of interaction of the resistance protein with the pathogen. Long term
implications of the project will be the development of knowledge-base to design
broad-spectrum resistance against hemi-biotrophic and necrotrophic pathogens.
Synergistic educational activities planned in the proposal include summer
internship program for minority students from a local high school to motivate
them to pursue higher studies in STEM, and providing undergraduate students
positive hands-on experience in plant science research. Further educational
goals of the project will include raising awareness about plant sciences in the
general public, farmers and young children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular mechanisms of plant resistance
against necrotrophic and hemi-biotrophic pathogens are poorly understood. Using
a broad-spectrum plant resistance protein, this project seeks to investigate
molecular components of resistance against this category of pathogens.
Mechanistic investigations will be carried out on atypical resistance against F.
graminearum conferred by a ‘Pore-forming toxin-like’ (PFT) protein using
Arabidopsis, Nicotiana, and wheat plant systems. PFT lacks secretory peptide
signal and has an unconventional trafficking to the apoplast. The non-
traditional trafficking pathway of PFT will be characterized with fluorescent
tagging and microscopy. Temporal and spatial dimension of PFT- F. graminearum
interaction will be studied by analyzing the protein levels of PFT in various
developmental stages of wheat spikes: the infection court of F. graminearum.
Interaction of PFT with other pathogens will provide details about the
specificity of recognition of Fusarium spp by PFT. The advanced knowledge
generated in this CAREER proposal on the mechanism of a broad-spectrum
resistance gene will facilitate the development of resistance against fungal
pathogens in crop plants. Educational activities planned include conducting a
six-week summer internship program for minority students from a local high
school, as well as providing scientific incubation to undergraduate students in
plant science research. Additional broader impacts include informing farmers,
stakeholders and the general public about the importance of plant science
research in ensuring food security and food safety for
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.