* 1943269
* CAREER: Enabling Edge-hosted Private Services via Unikernel-based Lightweight Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Yifan Zhang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2025
* USD 328,481.00

In the era of Internet of Things (IoT), the existing mobile-cloud computing
frameworks suffer from significant limitations, such as long communication
latencies, unfriendly service deployment and communication interfaces for end
devices, difficulty to scale with exploding processing demands, and incapability
to enable large-scale personalized services. This CAREER project proposes Edge-
hosted Private Service (EPS) to address these limitations. The approach of EPS
is to deploy computation/communication middle points, each of which performs a
certain service or optimization for an individual mobile user, at network edge
between mobile devices and the cloud. Enabling EPSes in practice is challenging
because existing technologies cannot meet the runtime requirements of EPS. The
overarching goal of this project is to enable efficient EPS runtime through the
adoption of unikernel-based lightweight virtualization. This research will
advance the state of the art of unikernel-based virtualization and lay the
foundation for EPSes by (1) realizing a scalable and backward-compatible
unikernel-based embedded virtualization runtime framework, (2) providing real-
time support for unikernel-based embedded virtualization, (3) enabling intuitive
and EPS-friendly embedded unikernel development, and (4) supporting simple and
practical unikernel-based service management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has the potential to contribute to the advancement of unikernels, which
is a promising technology for resource-constrained embedded devices, by closing
the gap between the state of the art and the practical requirements of adopting
unikernels in real world. The research will achieve a series of novel and
effective techniques underpinning unikernel-based virtualization, which can
greatly benefit applications and services in the fields of edge computing and
IoT. This project has concrete plans to integrate the proposed research with
curriculum development, recruiting and supporting underrepresented students, as
well as K-12 outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.