* 1943737
* CAREER: CAS: Developing Gas Bubbles as a New Tool for Surface-Active Agent Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Long Luo, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Long Luo and his group at Wayne State University are
working to develop a powerful new approach for the identification and
quantitative analysis of an important class of chemical compounds. Specifically,
they are targeting molecules known as surfactants, which are widely used as
emulsifiers, detergents, fabric softeners, and wetting agents in many household
cleaners and industrial products and processes. Naturally occurring surfactants
such as glycolipids, lipopeptides, lipoproteins, fatty acids, neutral lipids,
and phospholipids are also essential to the functioning of biological systems.
Current methods for surfactant analysis do not detect specific products
(selectivity) and low concentrations (sensitivity). Professor Luo and his group
are developing new electrochemical approaches to address these challenges. They
are also working on applying the tools for on-site detection of polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS), a group of emerging surfactants that are contaminants of
concern in drinking water. The integrated educational aims of this work seek to
increase STEM awareness, interest, and career preparedness across a range of
ages, educational levels, and socioeconomic and cultural backgrounds by
performing science shows at public locations; developing STEM exposure programs
for middle and high school students; and establishing and running a student
chapter of the Electrochemical Society at Wayne State University. Notably, the
team will reach out to the public about the relevance of science in everyday
life by organizing and performing a science show at the Great Lakes Crossing
Outlets Mall and Detroit Zoo, the two largest family attractions in
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limited selectivity and sensitivity have been a
long-standing problem in surfactant analysis. To address these issues, the Luo
group is using the gas bubble-surfactant interaction to establish a selective
and sensitive detection method coupled with rapid and efficient
preconcentration. Specifically, the unique amphiphilic characteristics of
surfactants affect electrochemical gas bubble nucleation, which in turn impacts
an electrochemical signal used for the quantification of surfactants. An
approach mimicking sea-spray aerosol enrichment is used to preconcentrate the
surfactants. These features are being combined in a portable device to address
the unmet need for on-site detection of PFAS in drinking water, addressing
concerns arising from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency identification of
PFAS quantitation as a national priority. Broader impacts of the educational
plan include increasing public interest in science and technology, promoting
middle and high school students’ engagement in analytical chemistry activities,
and boosting undergraduate and graduate students’ interest in
electrochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.