* 1943986
* CAREER: Helical propulsion for tunneling through porous membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Bhuvnesh Bharti, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2024
* USD 454,960.00

In order for micro- and nano-scale robotic devices to carry out their functions,
they will have to be able to navigate complex spatial environments. These little
machines will encounter gravitational and thermal forces that can be significant
at very small length scales. As a result, their motion can be either confined to
two dimensions or completely randomized, which will limit their functions. This
CAREER award will study experimentally the motion of a specialized particle that
is capable of self propulsion as a model robotic device. The studies of these
particles will reveal principles that can be used to enable their spatial
navigation through porous matrices. The project will start by finding the
optimal particle shape and surface characteristics to direct the motion of the
particles in an external alternating current electric field. The resulting
particles will perform preprogrammed motions that mimick the trajectories of
natural active biological matter such as spermatozoid, microorganisms and motor
proteins. The correlation between the particle trajectories and their ability to
tunnel across porous membranes will be determined, and the results will form the
basis for designing autonomous particles to enhance transport through structured
environments, such as extracellular matrices and porous rocks. The research will
be enhanced by complementing it with educational efforts for graduate and
undergraduate students and outreach activities for visually impaired children.
The research will be incorporated into chemical engineering curricula through a
new section in an elective course entitled "Colloids and Interfacial
Engineering". The CAREER award will provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students at Baton Rouge Community College and outreach activities
for visually impaired students at the Louisiana School for the Visually
Impaired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award seeks to answer a fundamental
question in particle transport: What is the effect of a particle's motion on its
ability to navigate spatially through porous media? The project will address the
question by examining the motion of metal patched microspheres that are self-
propelled in aqueous media by AC-electric-field-driven induced charge
electrophoresis. The project aims to (1) Develop an understanding of the
structure-kinematic relationship for active colloids and elucidate the roles of
particle and patch symmetry on colloid trajectories; (2) Establish the basis for
guiding the directional propulsion of colloids and identify the relation between
the particle's spatial orientations and its trajectories; and (3) Develop new
principles for enhanced spatial navigation by understanding the relation between
particle trajectory and its tunneling efficiency through porous membranes. The
award will present new methods of guiding active particle kinematics in an AC
electric field and will apply this knowledge to navigate complex structured
environments. The principles of efficient spatial navigation using nonlinear
particle trajectories may not be limited to colloidal transport; they may also
to diverse problems, such as pedestrians navigating through
crowds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.