* 1943483
* CAREER: Understanding the role of sensory feedback in gait stability through neurorobotic modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Alexander Hunt, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 459,318.00

This project aims to construct a comprehensive model of locomotion that unifies
current theories, and to provide a more complete picture of how the neural
system, body, and external environment interact. The application of neuroscience
to robotics lags capabilities and knowledge in each field; this work remedies
this by unifying the state-of-the-art in both fields. Robotics will be advanced
through the development of neural controllers that copy the nature of what makes
animal locomotion robust and adaptive. Neuroscience will be advanced through the
embodiment of neural models on a physical system. These advances will lead to
improved treatment and rehabilitation methods for disorders that affect
locomotion, and robotic systems that can be used in unstructured environments
and assistive contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to build the
foundation of neural based control systems for use in quadrupedal legged robots
by identifying the minimal neural circuits required for stable locomotion.
Additionally, this work will provide insights into how these circuits provide
robust resistance to internal and external perturbations by investigating the
interplay between mechanics, sensory feedback, and spinal circuits. The approach
for this research is to encapsulate the latest neuroscience data of locomotion
circuits into comprehensive neural models that run on real-time computing
platforms, use them to control a biomimetic robot, and compare experimental
results with neural and biomechanical animal data. The specific goal is to test
computational neuroscience models of dynamic gait regulation and gait
transitions, and evaluate their ability to maintain stable locomotion in a robot
and explain animal behavior. Towards this goal, the objectives for this project
are to: 1) Quantify the impact of full-body mechanics on understanding neural
control by characterizing the differences between a neurorobot, neuromechanical
simulations, and pure neural models, 2) Establish how sensory feedback and
spinal circuits effect stability in response to different perturbations, and 3)
Discover what neural mechanisms are necessary to maintain stability and
guarantee successful gait transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.