* 1943740
* CAREER: Viral control of cell migration in diverse host-cell types
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Roy Dar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2025
* USD 575,186.00

Interactions between viruses and their hosts have evolved through fierce
competition over millions of years. For example, human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) forms pools of infected but dormant cells in patients. These can
spontaneously reactivate after treatment ends. This project will uncover viral-
host relationships that differ among different cell types within the body. Of
particular interest is the mobility of infected cells. Infected T-cells that are
reactivated from dormancy exhibit decreased mobility. This appears to give them
the ability to more robustly invade the lymph nodes they occupy. This project
will investigate whether reduced mobility is a general motif exhibited by 5
host-cell types infected with HIV. This project will help us to understand how
viruses exhibit pathogenicity. It will also deepen our understanding of gene
circuits and networks in different cell types. This project will also support
extensive outreach activities to educate the general public, and high school,
college and graduate school students regarding the mechanisms of HIV
transmission and pathogenicity. Students will also have numerous opportunities
to gain research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel viral-host
relationship has been recently reported in which infected T-cells reactivating
from latency internalize a migratory receptor, chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4),
from their cell surface. This results in HIV decreasing migration when
reactivating in latently infected cells. This research will investigate the
modularity of migratory control by the virus in 5 host-cell types with varying
molecular backgrounds while challenged by migratory factors. The study will also
elucidate how the reactivation-migration relationship depends on host cell state
(cell size and cell cycle) in individual single cells. The central hypothesis to
be tested is that control of migration by viral reactivation is conserved across
host-cell types. The study will investigate viral control of migration in
infected monocytes, monocyte derived macrophages, and macrophage polarizations
M1 and M2. In addition, the reactivation-migration relationship under treatment
by macrophage inhibitory factor (MIF), a secondary co-receptor of CXCR4, and its
dependence on host cell size and cell cycle will be tested. The project will use
live single-cell time-lapse imaging, flow cytometry, and microfluidics to
accomplish the following specific aims: (1) Test if host-cell migration
decreases with increasing viral reactivation in more than one cell type, (2)
Investigate reactivation dependent migration challenged by combinations of
migratory factors, and (3) Assess how reactivation dependent migration depends
on host-cell size and cell cycle. Expected outcomes include to (i) understand
modularity of viral migratory control in diverse host-cell type backgrounds, and
(ii) may elucidate strategies for therapeutic agents specifically designed for
cell type as well as spatial and temporal distributions throughout the
body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.