* 1943286
* CAREER: Persistent vertebrate communities in deep time and the great Triassic-Jurassic vertebrate transition
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Sterling Nesbitt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2025
* USD 484,948.00

A major goal in ecology is to understand how communities respond to minor and
major environmental changes over both short (seasons to decades) and long
(thousands to millions of years) timescales. It is clear that some communities
fair better than others, and it appears that some communities persist for
millions of years. This project combines ecological tools for studying living
communities with tools used to study extinct communities that can only be
reconstructed using the fossil record in order to understand if and how
communities persist over long timescales. This project aims to characterize and
reconstruct vertebrate communities in the last 20 million years of the Triassic
Period (252-200 million years ago) prior to the end-Triassic mass extinction.
Those Triassic vertebrate communities are important for understanding
communities of living vertebrates because they appear to be static during both
quick and gradual climatic changes. Studying these communities will help answer:
What makes a community successful during times of short and long-term
environmental changes? Are the survivors of great changes a product of those
earlier successful communities? These questions are being addressed through new
fossils and measurements of the geological data associated with them,
reanalyzing previously discovered fossils, and model-based approaches to
characterizing the interactions of community members over millions of years of
geologic time. Research is being integrated with educational activities at
local, regional, and national levels, and graduate and undergraduate students
and interested volunteers are being trained. An experiential K-12 teacher field
school is taking place in the National Park system, and teaching kits are being
built to demonstrate the importance of the fossil record to our understanding of
our natural world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;‘At what timescales do communities
remain similar or relatively unchanged?’ is a fundamental question that unites
biologists, ecologists, and paleontologists, but the varied approaches to
answering this question from each scientific community has limited our ability
to understand and predict the effect of disturbances on our living communities
in light of increasing species extinctions, climate change, and human
disturbance. The ultimate goal of this 5-year CAREER proposal is to develop an
innovative program that critically evaluates community persistence in the fossil
record by integrating quantitative measurements of communities derived from
neontological studies, ecological modeling, and paleontological studies. This
study provides an explicit framework for testing whether a paleocommunity
(=fossil assemblage) is persistent using taphonomic approaches, a suite of
quantitative characteristics, new analytical tools (e.g., modeling food webs,
likelihood models), and sensitivity and resampling techniques. The research team
is analyzing and assimilating taxonomic (e.g., clade-specific) and functional
(e.g., ecomorphology) diversity, diet, and phylogenetic community structure in
terrestrial vertebrate paleocommunities across 10s of millions of years from
localities that span the Triassic-Jurassic boundary. The outcomes of this study
include: 1) enhancement of our ability to understand the interplay of taxonomic
and functional diversity, macroevolution, and community structure; 2)
elucidation of the transformation of Triassic to Jurassic paleocommunities; and
3) insights into the functional roles of the survivors before and after a broad
scale perturbation. Macroevolution, ecology, and environmental change in deep
time are combined into teaching, student mentorship, and broad public programs
at local, regional, and national levels. An all-immersive Discoveries in
Geosciences (DIG) Field School is training K-12 teachers in the scientific
process of a historical science, and this program is producing paleontology-
inspired activities (e.g., 3D printable fossils) for K-12 students at the
national level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.