* 1943972
* CAREER: Understanding Multiscale Mass Transport in Organic Electrosynthesis: Towards a Sustainable Pathway to Nylon Precursors
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Miguel Modestino, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 03/31/2025
* USD 634,650.00

The increased generation capacity of renewable electricity from wind and solar
offer new industrial applications with reduced environmental footprints. This
CAREER project addresses key issues in the manufacture of common chemical
intermediates using electricity rather than thermochemical means. The project
will expand fundamental understanding of the multiscale processes in the design
and operation of high-performing electrochemical manufacturing processes. To
best achieve this goal, the project will focus on the largest organic
electrochemical reaction implemented in the chemical industry as a model
reaction: the synthesis of adiponitrile (ADN), a precursor to Nylon. By
exploring transport and chemical kinetic phenomena at multiple length-scales,
this project will identify key factors that limit the performance of
electrochemical reactors and derive design rules for optimal operation. The
project integrates an educational program with the primary objective of training
a future workforce for a sustainable electrochemical industry. This educational
program includes K-12 education of students from Hispanic background,
integration of electrochemical engineering education in undergraduate and
graduate chemical engineering curricula, entrepreneurship training activities,
and public engagement activities to promote sustainable chemical processes
through the influence of the fashion industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project presents an integrated research and education plan with the overarching
goal of understanding multiscale transport and kinetic phenomena in organic
electrosynthesis across the relevant reactor regions: the near-electrode region,
the bulk liquid electrolyte region and ion conductive membranes. Understanding
and controlling the coupled processes that take place at these three regions can
result in improvements in conversion, selectivity, and energy conversion
efficiency to ultimately enable the industrial large-scale deployment of organic
electrosynthetic reactors. To more effectively accomplish the project goals, the
electrochemical synthesis of adiponitrile via the electrohydrodimerization of
acrylonitrile, will be used as a model reaction. The project is organized in
three research thrusts. Thrust 1. Near-electrode processes: The goal of thrust 1
is to elucidate the molecular processes that drive selectivity by studying them
with in situ electrochemical spectroscopy techniques and then use this
understanding to control selectivity towards desired organic products. Thrust 2.
Liquid electrolyte processes: The goal of thrust 2 is to explore the interplay
between mass transport and kinetic processes in mesoscale (10's-1000's
micrometers) multiphase electrochemical flow reactors and then use the knowledge
gained to enhance performance of organic electrosynthesis reactors. Thrust 3.
Membrane processes: The goal of thrust 3 is to understand the effects of organic
electrolytes on the microstructure, permeability, and conductivity of ion-
conducting membranes and to derive design rules for membrane-separated organic
electrosynthesis reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.