* 1943696
* CAREER: Enhancing Stem Cell Differentiation with CRISPR Activators via Non-integrating Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Xiaojun Lian, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Regenerative medicine uses stem cells to replace damaged tissues, but this
approach requires therapeutic cells with known activity. There is currently no
method to generate such cells in large quantities. In developing tissues, cell
differentiation involves the appearance of growth factors at certain times to
orchestrate differentiation. This project proposes to evaluate the use of
viruses to activate genes in order to replicate that orchestration. Educational
activities and lab tours will be designed to engage undergraduate and graduate
students. A ‘‘Stem Cell and Art’’ showcase will highlight artistic, technical
and ethical aspects of stem cell research. It will be developed for K-12
students, their families, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) differentiation will be
enhanced. Genes specific to cell lineages will be manipulated epigenetically
using dCas9 activators. A Synergistic Activation Mediator (SAM) system will be
used to achieve target gene activation in iPSCs. Non-integrating Adeno-
associated virus 1 (AAV1) will deliver SAM activators to iPSCs. Genome-scale
activation screens to identify novel genes that facilitate endothelial
progenitor (EP) differentiation will also be performed. The positive candidates
will be used to enhance EP differentiation with AAV1-SAM. The investigators will
also use AAV-SAM to promote beta cell differentiation. These results may provide
compelling evidence that targeted gene activation using SAM could be employed to
enhance iPSC differentiation. This would introduce a novel technology (SAM
activators) to the stem cell differentiation toolkit in addition to small
molecules and growth factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.