* 1943599
* CAREER: Understanding the Process-Structure-Property Relationships in Polymer Nanocomposites Reinforced with Gas-Phase-Synthesized Graphene
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Albert Dato, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports fundamental
research on the scalable manufacturing of graphene-reinforced nanocomposites.
This class of nanocomposites are lightweight and high strength and they can
enable a diverse range of new applications, such as safer vehicles with
increased fuel efficiency, impact-resistant electronics with improved heat
dissipation, and lightweight wind turbine blades capable of generating larger
amounts of renewable energy. However, current manufacturing processes for
graphene-based nanocomposites use graphene obtained through the exfoliation of
graphite. Nanocomposites reinforced with exfoliated graphene exhibit three
fundamental challenges that limit enhancements in properties: defects,
dispersion and aggregation. Furthermore, producing exfoliated graphene requires
hazardous acids and purified water and generates toxic byproducts. Incorporating
gas-phase synthesized graphene into polymers can overcome these challenges. This
project aims to discover the relationships between the processing, structure and
properties of polymer-matrix nanocomposites reinforced with gas-phase
synthesized graphene. The research promotes the progress of science by revealing
new strengthening and thermal transport mechanisms, processing conditions, and
graphene-polymer interactions that advance the fundamental understanding of
composite materials. This multidisciplinary project integrates the fields of
manufacturing, materials science, and chemistry, and broadens the participation
of underrepresented groups through the inclusion of low income, potential first-
generation college students in the federally-funded Upward Bound Program at
Harvey Mudd College. The grant creates and freely disseminates a new
nanocomposites course that employs novel techniques that enhance student
learning, which improves education in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current understanding of graphene-based nanocomposites is largely based on
polymers containing exfoliated graphene because the chemical vapor deposition of
graphene on substrates is impractical for manufacturing nanocomposites. The
specific goal of this project is to transform understanding of graphene-based
nanocomposites by discovering the processing-structure-property relationships in
polymers reinforced with gas-phase synthesized graphene (GSG). GSGs are produced
through the decomposition of ethanol in atmospheric argon plasmas. The goal of
this research is achieved by (1) dispersing graphene in thermosetting resins and
fabricating nanocomposites by curing the dispersions in molds, (2) mixing
graphene with thermoplastics using scalable compounding processes and forming
nanocomposites by injection molding, (3) determining the strength and stiffness
of nanocomposites through tensile testing, (4) measuring the thermal
conductivity of nanocomposites using the transient plane source method, and (5)
correlating property enhancements with nanocomposite microstructures using
electron microscopy techniques. This project generates new knowledge that
advances the fields of composites, materials science, and chemistry, and enables
the environmentally friendly high-throughput manufacturing of graphene-based
nanocomposites. It establishes the PIâ€™s long-term career in the advanced
manufacturing of nanocomposites that provide solutions to challenges in
transportation, renewable energy, and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.