* 1943969
* CAREER: Combined land use of solar energy and agriculture for socioeconomic and environmental co-benefits
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Sujith Ravi, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2025
* USD 461,847.00

Competition for land and water resources between the energy and agriculture
sectors may undermine sustainable developmental goals including mitigating
climate change, controlling deforestation, and improving the quality of life.
Despite concerns of large solar photovoltaic (PV) deployment encroaching on
agricultural lands and natural areas in the United States, there are multiple
configurations where solar PV and vegetation can be co-located that may provide
mutual benefits. Moreover, in areas where geographic constraints render some of
the non-electrified regions in the world (e.g. in Indonesia) too remote and
costly to electrify by extension of electrical grids, small-scale co-located PV-
agriculture installations may have the potential to improve rural livelihoods
and to reduce emission from fossil fuels. However, the interactions between
solar panels and the underlying soil-vegetation system, and the techno-economic
feasibility of co-located systems could be better understood. The project will
investigate the synergies and tradeoffs of co-locating solar PV with carefully
selected agricultural crops or activities, using the combination of a life cycle
assessment (LCA) models and field experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
seeks to design sustainable engineering solutions to lower the environmental and
economic cost of solar energy development by providing effective analysis
methodologies and foundational data on solar PV - agriculture co-location
approaches. Further, the project will evaluate the economic feasibility of co-
located systems at different scales and the potential for improving rural
livelihoods. Improving quality of life through energy accessibility and
generating new income streams will decrease the need for additional land
transformation. Both the United States and Indonesia provide unique challenges
for solar energy development with minimal environmental impact. Therefore, the
anticipated outcome of this research is targeted to provide insights to decision
makers and prepare the way for smarter energy planning by optimizing the
efficiency of land use, by maintaining agricultural production, and by avoiding
additional land conversion. The modeling framework to be developed has the
potential to be applied elsewhere, in many regions of the world experiencing
land constraints resulting from rapidly increasing population and living
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.