* 1943528
* CAREER: Olfactory experience-dependent regulation of the neuron types born in the nose
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Stephen Santoro, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

Proper development and adaptation of the mammalian nervous system depend on
sensory experience and learning, but the scope and mechanisms of these changes
are only partially understood. The olfactory system exhibits a particularly high
capacity for experience-dependent change. While research has focused largely on
brain areas that process olfactory information, experience-dependent changes
occur even at the level of the odor-sensing neurons. These neurons are born
throughout life, a process presumed to function simply to replace damaged
neurons. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will explore the
possibility that olfactory sensory neurogenesis also plays an important adaptive
role. This concept was inspired by a recent discovery within the Principal
Investigator’s lab that, in mice, odor stimulation selectively promotes the
birth of neurons that display specific odorant receptors. To understand these
results, the investigators will explore the possibility that neuron receptor
fates begin to be determined much earlier during cell development than is
currently assumed and are selectively amplified through cell division. Further,
they will investigate the possibility that the amplification of specific stem
cells is driven by signals from mature daughter neurons whose signaling is
enabled by olfactory learning. The research objectives of this project will be
complemented by educational objectives, including the development, use, and
sharing of a virtual reality application for active learning of sensory biology.
This project is expected to enhance our understanding of fundamental aspects of
olfactory development and adaptation and may provide insights into the cause of
age-related olfactory dysfunction in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
persistence of olfactory sensory neurogenesis throughout life in mammals is
thought to function solely to replace neurons that become damaged due to
environmental exposure. The central hypothesis of this CAREER project is that
olfactory sensory neurogenesis also has an important adaptive function. This
hypothesis is based in part on recent findings from the PI's lab that, in mice,
olfactory stimulation selectively promotes the neurogenesis of a fraction of
olfactory neuron ‘subtypes,’ which are defined by the single odorant receptor
gene that each neuron ‘chooses’ to express out of ~1000 possibilities. As a
result, mature neurons of these subtypes are selectively increased in abundance
in the presence of olfactory stimulation. These findings challenge the current
model of olfactory sensory neurogenesis, which predicts that the relative birth
rates of distinct neuron subtypes are determined by the fixed probabilities with
which their receptor genes are stochastically chosen for expression. To explain
these findings, the investigators will first employ a fate-mapping approach to
test the hypothesis that receptor choice begins within stem cells, a much
earlier stage than is currently thought, and that specific receptor fate-
restricted stem cells are subject to selective proliferation. Second, the
investigators will use olfactory conditioning to test the hypothesis that the
neuron subtypes that undergo stimulation-dependent neurogenesis are specified by
olfactory learning. Third, the investigators will use a single-cell sequencing
approach to test the hypothesis that the selective birth of specific neuron
subtypes is promoted by signals emitted exclusively from mature neurons with the
same receptor identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.