* 1943641
* CAREER: Towards a New Synthesis of Statistical Learning and Logical Reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Guy Van den Broeck, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 12/31/2024
* USD 329,030.00

Over the past decade, the field of artificial intelligence (AI) has evolved
drastically, taking a more data-centric approach. The widespread success of
machine learning raises the question of which AI tasks are amenable to pure
learning, which tasks require classical symbolic reasoning, and whether we can
benefit from a tighter integration of both approaches. The project studies this
question, and concretely asks how ideas about automated reasoning and knowledge
representation studied in traditional artificial intelligence are relevant to
modern connectionist and statistical machine learning. It brings together
expertise, techniques, insights, and strengths from several disparate fields
that are usually studied in isolation: logical reasoning, probabilistic
reasoning, knowledge representation, statistical learning, and deep learning.
The unified perspective taken by this research has the potential to be
transformative for the broader AI field and have a lasting impact on how we
perceive the interaction between learning and reasoning. The research will make
AI more effective by allow it to address a larger class of problems. More
capable AI and machine learning methods will have significant scientific
consequences, and broad impact in all segments of society, including healthcare,
manufacturing, commerce, finance, entertainment, among others. The project helps
convey this new understanding through integrated research and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, current reasoning paradigms
are not able to fully exploit available data and are often brittle, while
learning paradigms are often incapable of answering questions beyond the one
task they were explicitly trained for. Finding a synthesis of learning and
reasoning allows for learned representations that can be reasoned about, and
even using reasoning and logic during learning, to enforce basic invariants and
knowledge of the world. This project is structured along three research thrusts.
The first thrust is to develop probabilistic and logistic circuits as a new
machine learning model that simultaneously easy to learn, expressive, and has
elegant properties that allow for tractable reasoning and learning. The second
thrust looks at more advanced reasoning tasks about classifiers and generative
world models, such as taking expected predictions when features are missing, or
reasoning about sufficient conditions to explain classifiers. The ability to
reason about classifiers, specifically, builds more trust in our AI systems as
they are deployed, and helps to better understand their limitations. The third
thrust studies how logical reasoning about continuous variables and arithmetic
is used for probabilistic reasoning and statistical
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.