* 1943860
* CAREER: Structure-property-processing Relationships for Waterborne Non-isocyanate Thermal Insulating Coating
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Qixin Zhou, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 416,281.00

This CAREER project is motivated by the need for developing environmentally-
friendly synthesis methods for next-generation multifunctional 'green' coatings.
This proposed research will integrate waterborne non-isocyanate polyurethanes
(WNIPUs) technology with functional inorganic pigments to achieve a waterborne
non-isocyanate thermal insulating uralkyd coating. Structure-property-processing
relationships will be investigated to understand the non-isocyanate approach,
coloration mechanism, and waterborne coating formation and pigmentation. The
research will be integrated with educational activities supporting the Corrosion
Engineering program at The University of Akron and outreach activities aimed at
attracting female students into STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research project will be focused on understanding the structure-property-
processing relationships of a WNPU thermal insulating coating. A waterborne non-
isocyanate uralkyd with tunable properties will be synthesized by using
vegetable oils as the feedstock. The objective of the study will be to gain new
insights into the polymerization reaction kinetics and structure-property
relationships. To develop coatings that can reflect near-infrared radiation
(NIR) and exhibit a variety of colors, three new types of NIR-reflective
inorganic pigments that are thermally- and UV-stable will be obtained by
doping/co-doping traditional inorganic pigments with metal ions. The structure-
property relationships of the doping elements and the pigment properties will be
studied to understand pigment coloration mechanisms. The property-processing
relationships will be established by studying the processes of pigment
dispersion and film formation to achieve desirable coating properties. An
application of the produced waterborne non-isocyanate thermal insulating uralkyd
coating will be evaluated through an undergraduate senior design project that
integrates research and education. The scientific understanding of the
polymerization process will lead to a framework for designing waterborne
coatings through a non-isocyanate approach that will facilitate the replacement
of isocyanate-based coatings. The results of this study can be potentially
transferred to other waterborne coating systems that use inorganic pigments. A
new course on sustainable coatings will be developed to enrich the curriculum of
the Corrosion Engineering program at The University of Akron, the first
undergraduate program of its kind in the US. Proposed educational and outreach
activities include a 'Green Coatings 101' workshop, women-in-engineering summer
camps, and summer research opportunities for high school students aimed at
attracting female students into STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.