* 1943497
* CAREER: Flexible and efficient mixed models to infer the genetic architecture of complex phenotypes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Sriram Sankararaman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 06/30/2025
* USD 556,172.00

Complex phenotypes, i.e., observable characteristics, are a central focus of
biology and medicine. Growing collections of data that survey how genes and
phenotypes vary across individuals present the tantalizing opportunity to
systematically understand the genetic architecture of complex phenotypes.
Drawing inferences about genetic architecture from these large collections of
high-dimensional genomic data will elucidate the sets of rules that predict an
organismâ€™s phenotype. Methods based on mixed models, that model the joint
effects of large numbers of genetic variants, have emerged as an important tool
in this endeavor. Mixed model methods, however, rely on a number of simplifying
modeling assumptions that can lead to biased inferences. Further, applying these
methods to large-scale genetic datasets is computationally impractical. The
project will develop novel, scalable methods that can characterize genetic
architecture of complex traits. The application of these methods to large
genetic datasets available will lead to novel insights into genes that underlie
variation in complex phenotypes, which leads to further uncover rules of life.
The inter-disciplinary aspect of the project will bring together researchers and
students from computer science, statistics, bioinformatics and human genetics
and will lead to cross-fertilization and closer interactions across these
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new computational
mixed model methods that are flexible and efficient and to apply these methods
to obtain novel insights into genetic architecture. Specifically, the project
will develop 1) linear mixed models that provide accurate estimates of
heritability across a wide range of genetic architectures, 2) non-linear mixed
models that estimate the contribution of gene-gene and gene-environment
interactions, and 3) multi-trait mixed models that estimate the genetic
component shared across traits. Importantly, the proposed methods are designed
to scale to datasets that contain millions of individuals. To demonstrate their
utility, we will apply these methods to large genetic datasets to obtain novel
insights into heritability, its distribution across the genome, its correlation
with other traits, the contribution of gene-gene and gene-environment
interactions, and the impact of natural selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.