* 1943715
* CAREER: Design and Processing of Multifunctional Shape Memory Alloy Microfiber Yarns and Textiles with Tailorable Mechanical Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Julianna Abel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,001.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant focuses on developing a
science-based manufacturing strategy that combines experiment, modeling, and
process development to create novel multifunctional yarns and textiles made from
shape memory alloy microfibers. Multifunctional yarns and textiles incorporate
active material microfibers in their structure to provide actuation, sensing,
energy harvesting, or communication, potentially revolutionizing medical
devices, rehabilitation equipment, and wearable technologies to deliver life-
saving and life-enhancing interventions. Shape memory alloys are a particularly
promising material system for multifunctional yarns and textiles because they
directly afford actuation through the shape memory effect and energy absorption
through the superelastic effect. It is hypothesized that the performance of the
yarns and textiles are a function of the material composition, heat treatment,
and processing parameters. This research seeks to understand the
interrelationships between processing, structure and properties, predict the
performance of the yarns and textiles through the creation of modeling
capabilities, and develop a manufacturing strategy to produce and implement
multifunctional textiles with tailorable mechanical performance. The research
advances are integrated into outreach, mentoring, artistic and coursework
activities to increase the recruitment and retention of underrepresented
minority and female students, grow the community of STEM literate citizens, and
develop the next generation of researchers and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to
understand the effects of material, yarn, and textile processing on the
properties and performance of shape memory alloy (SMA) yarns and textiles. SMAs
are temperature, path, and history-dependent materials. The manufacture of new
SMA architectures, such as microfiber yarns and textiles, must account for each
of these histories to achieve consistent mechanical performance. The research
objectives of this project are: 1) Experimentally demonstrate the
interrelationship between material, yarn, and textile processing and performance
of NiTi SMA yarns and textiles, 2) Derive a predictive model for NiTi yarns by
incorporating stresses in microfibers, a non-linear NiTi material model and
manufacturing boundary conditions, and 3) Establish a qualitative and
quantitative hierarchical manufacturing strategy for NiTi integrated textiles.
This project seeks to address the following fundamental questions at each length
scale: i) What processing parameters are required to achieve a desired
mechanical performance in fibers at the microscale? ii) What manufacturing
changes are necessary to create multifunctional fibers on a scale appropriate
for yarn spinning? and iii) How can existing textile manufacturing processes be
modified to create textiles with tunable kinematic and kinetic properties? This
project allows the PI to combine innovative design processes and advanced
manufacturing techniques with material and structural modeling to lay the
scientific foundation necessary for the rigorous design and manufacture of
multifunctional yarns and textiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.