* 1943072
* CAREER: Toward Proactive Assistive Robotics
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Henny Admoni, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2025
* USD 459,359.00

Assistive robots have the potential to increase human efficiency and quality of
life in many ways, such as enabling people with severe motor impairments to
independently complete activities of daily living (ADLs). However, most robots
designed for assistive human-robot interaction (HRI) are reactive, either
providing "always on" assistance or responding only to explicit requests, rather
than proactively taking initiative to help with their partner's goal. The next
major advance in HRI will involve robots that are able to proactively anticipate
and respond to people's needs, just as an experienced caregiver does. To do
this, robots must observe and reason about potentially subtle cues of context
and human behavior. For example, what someone is looking at can reveal their
next action or indicate that they need help with a task. This project
investigates how human behavior and context reveal task-relevant mental states,
and then develops assistive robots that provide support to people in a variety
of everyday situations. In the process of doing the research, this project will
also make an educational impact by developing HRI courses and texts that use
assistive robotics as an example of effective HRI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will first investigate how human eye gaze can reveal when and how people
need assistance in activities of daily living like food preparation and eating.
Assistance algorithms will then be developed that monitor eye gaze and
proactively respond with robot actions. These algorithms will be evaluated in
studies with users who have upper motor impairments and could benefit from the
new technology. To these ends, the project contributes: (1) Computational models
that use a human's eye gaze and task context to predict task-relevant human
mental states such as the target of the current action, the next action to be
selected, and whether someone is having difficulty with the task; (2) algorithms
that apply mental state models to enable proactive robot assistance in co-
manipulation, providing the right type of assistance at the right time; (3) an
evaluation of proactive robot assistance algorithms in real-world contexts with
users who have motor impairments; (4) a novel ontology of robot assistance
types, starting with initial definitions of first- and second-order assistance
and expanding outward through literature surveys and interviews; and (5) an
extension of shared autonomy algorithms from single-step tasks to multi-step
tasks, with a particular focus on ADLs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.