* 1943291
* CAREER: A Novel Bioinformatic Infrastructure for Metagenome Assembly and Functional Annotation
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Cuncong Zhong, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 06/30/2025
* USD 586,286.00

Understanding the behavior of microbes plays a crucial role in environmental
monitoring, renewable energy, agriculture, and medicine. Metagenomics sequences
the complete genomes of all microbes residing in an ecological niche as a whole,
allowing for a comprehensive and unbiased investigation into the community’s
function and taxonomy. However, the bioinformatic analysis of the resulted
sequence data remains challenging due to its high volume and complexity. The
main goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to
develop efficient and accurate computational methods for the analysis of
metagenomics data and to develop the corresponding bioinformatics sections for
the University of Kansas’s STEM outreach programs. The project will provide a
new bioinformatic infrastructure for metagenomic sequencing data analysis. It
will also stimulate the interest and improve the retention of younger generation
and underrepresented minorities in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reconstructing the
complete microbial genomes from the fragmented metagenomic sequencing data
(i.e., metagenome assembly) is a fundamental step towards understanding the
function and taxonomy of the metagenome. The existing assembly algorithms are
primarily based on two types of graph data structures, namely the string graph
(which extends the overlap graph) and de Bruijn graph. The string graph has a
higher accuracy but a lower sensitivity and contiguity compared to the de Bruijn
graph. The Specific Aim 1 of this project will improve the sensitivity and
contiguity of the string graph approach through an earlier consideration of the
paired-end information and an adaptive overlap length threshold that accounts
for the uneven coverage of metagenomics data. Specific Aim 2 of this project
will leverage the read connectivity information from the assembly graph to
improve the discovery, classification, and quantification of functional genes.
The software products and scientific findings resulted from this project will be
disseminated to the public for free through
https://cbb.ittc.ku.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.