* 1943438
* CAREER: Product-line Design Optimization with Strategic Differentiation: Empirical Evidence and Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Kate Whitefoot, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will advance the
theory, quantitative modeling, and education of product-line design using
optimal strategic "differentiation": how different a product is from others in
terms of attributes consumers consider. Anticipating interactions among product
variants to better meet overall product-line marketing and regulatory goals is
challenging for manufacturers. For example, to help comply with fuel economy
regulations, automotive manufacturers have introduced new sets of vehicles. To
do so in a commercially successful way, the manufacturers need to differentiate
them from other vehicles in the company's product line and their competitors'.
Historically, when manufacturers have failed to differentiate, the sales of
fuel-efficient vehicles have been lower than expected, and some companies have
had to pay penalties for not meeting the fuel economy regulations. If companies
could strategically differentiate their cars--for example by making them
relatively smaller, with better acceleration, than both their larger, more
luxurious vehicles, as well as their competitors' cheaper and more-efficient
small cars, they might have increased sales and averted the penalties.
Unfortunately, existing product-line design models used by engineers are limited
in their ability to support strategic differentiation decisions, because the
models' properties are not well understood, there is not enough evidence that
they predict real-world behavior adequately, and organizations often do not have
in-house expertise to use and adapt them for the appropriate contexts. The
research outcomes will enable manufacturers to systematically optimize product-
line designs, reaching solutions to firm objectives while meeting regulatory
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals of this research, the
work will derive and empirically test new hypotheses about strategic
differentiation under sets of market and regulatory conditions and identify
classes of product-line optimization models capable of representing this
behavior. The research approach combines product-line optimization modeling with
econometric analysis. New analyses of industry product-line data will explain
systematic properties of strategic differentiation found in industry. The
project outcomes will enable the development of (1) a theory that parsimoniously
yet credibly explains fundamental properties of optimal strategic
differentiation (e.g., clustering, fracturing, and divergent positioning) under
different characteristics of design decisions, consumer preference
distributions, and regulatory constraints; and (2) empirically-supported
product-line design models that optimize engineering design variables
considering how adjustments to one product variant's attributes will affect
market and regulatory goals of other variants in the line. An integrated
research and education plan will enhance undergraduate education and establish a
practitioner education program and online portal to scale-up collaborative
learning and model transfer between academia, industry, and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.