* 1943945
* CAREER: Engineering genome topology to attenuate pathologic short tandem repeat instability
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Jennifer Phillips-Cremins, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2025
* USD 537,061.00

DNA sequences store information, and access to this information is controlled at
many levels. Scattered across DNA are random, repeated sequences referred to as
short tandem repeats (STRs). STRs help regulate gene expression and can also
expand and contract in length. Overexpansion of STR's can lead to a number of
diseases, including ALS (Lou Gehrig’s disease), Alzheimer’s, and Huntington’s.
This project will focus on what causes STR expansion that leads to disease. The
proper application of statistics and computational tools are key to making
progress in this effort. A training program will provide students with the
opportunity to learn those techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much is already
known regarding how transcription factors and epigenetic marks work in the
context of the linear genome to regulate neural synapses in the brain. Yet,
severe limitations still exist in our ability to understand the mechanisms by
which synapses are severely disrupted in neurological disorders such as fragile
X syndrome (FXS), Huntington’s disease, and Alzheimer’s disease. Recently, the
Cremins lab discovered that nearly all disease-associated STRs (daSTRs) are
located at boundaries demarcating a genome folding pattern termed the
topologically associating domain (TAD). The lab went on to discover that TAD
boundaries are severely disrupted in FXS, thus revealing higher-order folding of
the genetic sequence as a new dimension in understanding neurological disorders
with synaptic defects. A fundamental unresolved question is why some STRs are
susceptible to pathologic expansion, whereas hundreds of thousands of repeat
tracts across the human genome are relatively stable. The overall objective of
this project is to understand the mechanistic link between occupancy of the
architectural protein CTCF and STR instability at TAD boundaries. Our central
hypothesis is that TAD boundaries with ultra-high CTCF density represent
hotspots in the human genome susceptible to instability. To test this
hypothesis, we propose experimental and computational studies to (1)
quantitatively measure the role for CTCF density and double strand breaks on STR
instability and (2) engineer CTCF occupancy to induce a functional change in STR
expansion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.