* 1943732
* CAREER: CAS: Understanding and Tuning the Electrohydrogenation Mechanisms for Ambient Nitrogen Fixation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Xiaofeng Feng, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 636,144.00

As the industrial production of chemicals relies on the consumption of fossil
fuels it is critical to develop technologies for their sustainable production.
Ammonia is a key ingredient in agricultural fertilizers. Ammonia manufacture
consumes 3-5% of the world’s natural gas output and generates 1-2% of global
carbon dioxide emissions. An alternative approach is to make ammonia from
nitrogen and water using electricity generated from renewable sources such as
solar or wind. To date, however, this process suffers from low yields and slow
reactions. In this project, Dr. Xiaofeng Feng of the University of Central
Florida is developing fundamental understanding of the reaction chemistry and
improving the electrocatalysts needed to improve yields and reaction rates. The
science and the methods developed in this project will help advance the
development of ammonia electrosynthesis technologies that will benefit global
sustainability while maintaining or improving current levels of food production.
Dr. Feng and his team are increasing the awareness and knowledge of renewable
energy technologies for students at the university and K-12 levels through
interdisciplinary education and outreach activities. Dr. Feng is developing
interdisciplinary education modules and outreach activities with a focus on
universities and high schools with high minority
enrollment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Xiaofeng Feng of the University of
Central Florida is investigating the fundamental mechanisms for the
electrochemical reduction of nitrogen to ammonia. The research group is also
developing efficient electrocatalysts for the process. To date, the nitrogen
reduction reaction (NRR) suffers from low reaction rates and selectivity due to
the competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in aqueous electrolyte. This
project is elucidating the competition between the NRR and the HER as well as
the impact of competition on the electrokinetics of NRR. Strategies are
developed to control the electrode-electrolyte interface so that the competition
from the HER can be mitigated to improve the NRR activity and selectivity. Also
under investigation are the pathways for the hydrogenation of nitrogen molecules
adsorbed on electrocatalysts, which are used to further guide the development of
metal-based catalysts for NRR. Both ex situ and operando characterizations are
performed to confirm the atomic structure and chemical state of the developed
catalysts, establishing structure-activity relationships. The understandings and
catalysts developed in this project can improve the production rates and
selectivity of ammonia electrosynthesis, which will advance the development of
renewable energy technologies for a sustainable
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.