* 1943886
* CAREER: The Mechanics of Tunable Exoskeleton Structures: Interactions of Rigid Scales with Deformable Substrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Ranajay Ghosh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 01/31/2025
* USD 511,515.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will discover the
fundamentals of the complex mechanical behavior of bioinspired exoskeleton
structures. Breakthroughs in the understanding of behavior and design of
exoskeletons are needed to fulfill the growing industrial needs of human-
integrated robotics, inspection of aging infrastructure, injury rehabilitation,
etc. The most elementary of exoskeleton structures consists of a relatively soft
base and an array of stiffer, protruding scales from the base serving as the
exoskeleton. As the base deforms, so do these embedded scales, which collide and
slide against each other leading to the emergence of nonlinear mechanical
response and multi-functionality, not typically possible in traditional
materials. This research project aims to understand and quantify this structure-
property interplay with the help of analytical techniques, multi-scale
computational modeling, and experimental validation. Additionally, the education
and outreach plan includes several efforts: inclusion of underrepresented
students via an institutional STEM center, a unique technology-science fiction
event named RoboTales as part of university’s STEM day, and participation in
public education via the ‘modern machines’ night event at the Metropolitan
Science Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
quantify the structure-property relationships operative in a representative
class of exoskeletal structures and discover universal and emergent extreme
behavior. Prior work has shown that the rigid biomimetic scales on soft,
initially flat substrates give rise to strain stiffening in both bending and
twisting modes until a rigid ‘locking’ state is reached. However, little is
known about the generality of these results beyond beam like substrates,
limiting their application. Therefore, the PI has two hypotheses: (a) existence
of universal kinematic locking–rigid locking behavior across geometry,
deformation modes, and sequence and (b) extreme emergent behavior–emergence of
multiaxial nonlinear response, broken symmetry with evolution of chirality and
anisotropy, and localized locked modes. Testing of these hypotheses will be
achieved via development of new capabilities: (i) geometrically exact nonlinear
elasticity models, (ii) multi-scale finite element models, including
homogenization models, spanning the exoskeleton scales (micro) and the substrate
deformation (macro), and (iii) mechanics of active externally architected multi-
material systems. Selected experiments with 3D digital image correlation will
provide further data for understanding and validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.