* 1943479
* CAREER: Synergistic Design, Analysis and Learning of Intensified Process Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* M. M. Faruque Hasan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 04/30/2025
* USD 451,045.00

In this new era of highly dispersed and unconventional feedstocks and volatile
prices, the Chemical Process Industry will likely evolve to include distributed
chemical manufacturing performed in small-scale, modular systems. This CAREER
project is motivated by the need for developing a methodology to expose and
exploit synergy in the multiple steps of a complex chemical process. The
ultimate purpose is to design intensified chemical processes that combine tasks
into fewer units, resulting in higher product yields, higher energy efficiency
and lest waste. This new methodology will be applied to design intensified
processes for unconventional methane-to-chemicals conversions in remote
locations for the production of high-value liquid chemicals using local sources
of shale gas, biogas, or landfill gas. The research results will be integrated
into educational and outreach activities, including a citizen science project
focusing on intensification of shale gas activities in Texas and recruiting of
underrepresented minorities into STEM careers through K-12 demonstrations of
process design concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will employ
theoretical analysis and computer simulations to systematically locate
intensification hotspots in complex chemical processes and re-orient the
underlying physical and chemical phenomena while striking a balance between
modularity and intensification within the overall design. Systematic methods and
algorithms will be formulated for synergistic design and operation of
intensified systems that are amenable to both centralized and distributed
chemical manufacturing. Identification of hidden synergies will transform many
chemical processes, especially where intensification is not obvious or deemed to
be disadvantageous. Scaling down/out conventional processes without
intensification could lead to poor economies-of-scale and high capital
intensity. To this end, synergistic analysis provides a natural framework for
studying the level of intensification of process designs. A graph theoretical
representation of chemical processes is proposed based on phenomena-phenomena
interactions (PPI) as new way to design processes with greater synergy. The PPI-
based analysis can lead to innovative pathways and drastic improvements in
energy, cost, emissions and waste to achieve sustainability in a resource-
constrained environment. The change from the classic unit-operation-based
representation into an interaction-based building block representation of
chemical processes sets will enable design and intensification of complex
processes without prior postulation of all plausible flowsheets. The generic
block superstructure will essentially eliminate the need for problem specific
designs and allow process synthesis, integration, and intensification in a
single framework. The integration of research and education involves an
assessment of chemical engineering curricula using a course-course interaction
(CCI) graph to enhance synergistic learning and development of a new graduate
course. The proposed project also includes a citizen science project to engage
volunteers with diverse backgrounds in the intensification of a statewide
Material and Process (MaP) network for shale gas utilization in Texas. The MaP
project will provide an informal science education opportunity with a
synergistic impact on participant knowledge. Women and minority students will be
recruited through the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
program and a building-block-based design concept will be included in projects
designed for grades 1 to 4 to attract students into STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.