* 1943791
* CAREER: Bio-inspired design methods for distributed electromechanical actuators
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Arijit Banerjee, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Title: CAREER: Bio-inspired design methods for distributed electromechanical
actuators&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: The project objective is to create a
class of modular and distributed electromechanical actuators and their power
network that will enable robots to be agile, efficient, and capable of
reproducing biological motions that today are impossible. Animals have the
innate capability to move and maneuver effectively in complex and unstructured
environments. Recent advances in bio-inspired robots have conceptualized
collaborative robots or "cobots", which will interact with humans in multiple
settings. Although state-of-the-art bio-inspired robots have achieved exquisite
maneuvers, such systems have yet to closely replicate the grace, fluidity, and
agility of their biological counterparts. There is a critical need to re-imagine
these robots not only as an embodiment of mechanical linkages and artificial
intelligence but also as a complex network of electromechanical actuators. The
project aims to emulate a biological spine. A distributed actuator mimicking the
spine mechanism will improve mobility, efficiency, and stability of robots in
search, rescue, and recovery making them the first line of defense for disaster
relief as well as surveillance reconnaissance, inspection, and exploration
applications. The proposed research trajectory will catapult hardware advances
in these robots to converge with the exploding capability of artificial
intelligence and autonomous control, saving human lives and enhancing national
security. Further, an active synthetic spine opens up opportunities to design a
life-like exoskeleton, arrest spine deformities in children, augment upper-body
rehabilitation therapy for stroke patients, perform whole-body robotic
teleoperation, and add non-verbal capability in social robots. The integrated
education and outreach plan aims to ignite curiosity in K-12 students about
electromechanics and power electronics--foundations of our modern civilization--
by using robotics as the catalyst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A spine is fundamental
to providing flexibility and balance in animals while allowing efficient
locomotion. Construction of a synthetic spine is remarkably different from other
standard robotic mechanisms, such as arms and legs, due to the presence of
multiple single-joint segments, each with a limited range of motion. The design
strategy will take advantage of the limited displacement requirement to increase
the actuator's torque-to-weight ratio. Instead of employing conventional
electric motors that utilizes shear stress to generate motion, the proposed
gearless design will use normal stress. Integrated design of mechanical springs
and electromagnetics will enable a customized torque-displacement characteristic
to achieve compliance and high efficiency--similar to muscles. Deployment of
appropriate control and estimation techniques is proposed to vary output torque
and compliance. The design methodology will be validated by constructing a
hardware prototype of a synthetic spine. The project plans to construct
demonstration kits using research results that connect math and theory to the
craft of real-world systems such as robots and automated systems. These demo
kits will attract and inspire K-12 students, underrepresented groups, and a
broader audience about electrical power and energy processing. The demo kits
blueprint will also be shared with K-12 educators to help them teach their STEM
clubs. In summary, the proposed framework is the basis to build a multi-
disciplinary understanding of distributed actuators and their power network in
robots and automated systems and to advance the robotics workforce through
educational pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.