* 1943379
* CAREER: Accessible Accelerators: Leveraging Productive Software on Efficient Hardware
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Timothy Rogers, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2025
* USD 425,710.00

The economy of the future relies on software, the people who will write it, and
the hardware that will run it. The last several decades have given rise to two
opposing trends in the computing industry. At the software level, a desire for
simplicity, reusability, and programmer productivity has pushed the level of
abstraction in software to higher levels, removing most programmers from the
burden of understanding the underlying machine. At the hardware level, the
demand for both performance and energy-efficiency has led to the development of
programmable hardware accelerators. However, the effort required to port
abstract programs to accelerators is a significant barrier to their adoption,
particularly for generalist programmers that have little desire to create un-
portable, accelerator-specific code. This project aims to address these
challenges in tandem by developing novel cross-stack techniques to accelerate
productive software on efficient hardware. The project aims to increase the
number of individuals and problems that can benefit from energy-efficient,
accelerated computing. An integrated education plan introduces K-12 students to
acceleration through graphics accelerators and video games while teaching
college undergraduates and graduates to think about how problems map to
accelerators by thinking spatially.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concretely, this
project focuses on ameliorating the overheads associated with well-established
software principles that increase programmer productivity and finding innovative
ways to improve hardware accelerators to support productive practices. The
project first explores new optimization opportunities in massively parallel,
object-oriented code where object data layout and the high cost of invoking
virtual functions degrade performance. The project will develop lightweight,
virtual function elision mechanisms, parallelism-aware compilation passes, an
accelerator-aware virtual memory system, and a coordinated cross-stack effort to
reduce memory pressure. Finally, the project will explore a full-system solution
for productive languages on accelerators, aggregate the project's innovations,
and provide an open-source platform to ease accelerator software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.