* 1943710
* Plasticity, Phase Transformations, and their Interaction under High Pressure in Silicon
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Valery Levitas, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2024
* USD 626,000.00

The interaction between crystalline phase transformations and permanent plastic
deformation under high pressure in materials is broadly found in several
technological applications; however, knowledge of this phenomenon is scarce
because of the specialized equipment needed to observe it. This award fills the
gap by supporting an integrated experimental, theoretical, and computational
study of this interaction in silicon. Silicon is chosen as a representative
material because it exhibits numerous types of phase transformations and is
widely used in electronics and micro-electromechanical systems, as well as solar
cells. The knowledge gained on the fundamental aspects of phase transformation-
plasticity interaction under high pressure will also have broader implications
on the quantitative modeling and optimization of surface processes, such as
polishing, turning, and scratching, for brittle semiconductors and ceramics. As
part of the project, there will be opportunities to educate and train graduate
and undergraduate students through special courses and research, parts of which
will be conducted at the Argonne National Laboratory, with an emphasis on
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to investigate the effect of plastic flow on phase transformation under high
pressure in silicon. Coupled in situ high-throughput experiments and modeling
will yield quantitative characterization and understanding of how plastic
straining drastically reduces the transformation pressure, promotes the
formation of novel phases, retains high-pressure phases at ambient pressure, and
changes transformation paths between different phases. Silicon samples will be
compressed and sheared in a rotational diamond anvil cell. Synchrotron X-ray
diffraction and absorption, Raman spectroscopy, and displacement measurements
will be used for in-situ diagnostics of the deformation and transformation
processes. A microscale phase field approach for coupled phase transformations
and localized shear bands (e.g., due to dislocation pileups) will be developed
and used to study the interplay between multiple phase transformations and
mechanisms of plasticity in single grains and polycrystalline aggregates. Phase
transformation criteria, strain-controlled kinetic equations, and the pressure-
and plastic strain-dependent yield strengths of all phases and phase mixtures
will be obtained from the experiments and incorporated in a macroscale
phenomenological model. This model will be used in the finite element
simulations of deformation-transformation processes in diamond anvils. A search
for new phases will also be performed as an application of the computational
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.