* 1943759
* CAREER: Unveiling the Stability, Rheology, and Topology of Active Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Tong Gao, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2025
* USD 415,415.00

This CAREER award involves emerging field of active fluids, which are a new
class of liquid materials made up of densely packed suspensions of particles
that can propel themselves by converting energy from locally available fuel into
locomotion. Active fluids hold great potential for the development of new
materials and products, but realizing this potential requires a quantitative
understanding of the unusual material properties and transport mechanisms that
these fluids exhibit, which can be much different than the properties of
suspensions of inert particles. This project will combine theoretical analysis
and numerical simulations to build a holistic computation framework for
modeling, analysis, and control of active fluids in complex microfluidic
environments. The project will provide undergraduate and graduate student
training, create K-12 outreach opportunities, and support the development of a
Virtual Reality package that will help interpret research results and enrich
classroom teaching. The Virtual Reality package and demos will be available
online to the general public, along with some of the open-source computation
codes developed in the project, which will benefit both students and researchers
in applied science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical properties
of active fluids are fundamentally different from those of classical equilibrium
systems. When suspended in a liquid, motile microparticles exert stresses on the
ambient flows, which acts as a coupling medium for generating large-scale,
unsteady collective dynamics. These concentrated systems often show common
features, including ordering transition, fluctuating density, and force
generation. The research in this project will take the next engineering step of
learning how to manipulate active fluids by taking full advantage of their
collective behaviors. The project consists of four research thrusts: (1) Develop
a hybrid algorithm that combines penetration-free Stokesian dynamics particle
simulations and coarse-grained active liquid crystal models; (2) Study the
hydrodynamic instabilities and coherent flows; (3) Investigate non-equilibrium
rheological properties and topological structures; and (4) Design active-liquid
metamaterials for novel engineering applications. The hybrid algorithm will
follow a bottom-up multiscale approach. The microscale discrete particle
dynamics will be used to construct continuum kinetic models and new "polar"
active liquid crystal models. The computational framework will permit
researchers and practitioners to control active fluids by adjusting particle
activity and interactions at the microscale, and by controlling and guiding
constrained coherent flows at the macroscale. The numerical studies, together
with supporting experimental verifications, will lead to quantitative
understandings of the linkages between dynamics across scales, and possibly to
new engineering devices for transporting fluids and
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.