* 1943896
* CAREER: Phonetic and Phonological Structure in Musical Surrogate Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2025
* Laura McPherson, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 11/30/2025
* USD 431,074.00

Language and music are both inherently human systems of expression. At the
intersection of the two are "musical surrogate languages" - the encoding of
speech onto musical instruments such as xylophone, flutes, or drums (often
referred to as "talking drums"). Found all over the world, these surrogate
systems allow people to communicate without ever opening their mouths by
transposing linguistic elements such as pitch or speech rhythm onto the notes
and rhythms of a musical instrument. Very little is known about the rules of how
language is mapped to music in this way, how much these rules vary by language,
instrument, or tradition, or how people can comprehend this musical code.
Answering these questions will shed light on the nuances of language sound
structures, which elements are most salient and accessible to speakers and
musicians, and the immense overlap in the organization and processing of
language and music. With the majority of musical surrogate languages critically
endangered, it is essential that these linguistic traditions be captured and
analyzed as they push the boundaries of human communication and can enhance
language infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a comparative
study of musical surrogate languages grounded in detailed phonetic and
phonological documentation of the spoken languages on which they are based. The
research will target several surrogate systems on different instruments and in
different language groups, gathering experimental data to determine the rules of
surrogate encoding while building a multi-use archive of high-quality
audiovisual materials. A streamlined methodology will be developed, including
automated recording and transcription systems and a standardized annotation
format that can be integrated with best practice tools for linguistic
transcription. This methodology will be disseminated to students and other
scholars to build a community of researchers who can help tackle the enormous
task of documenting the world's surrogate languages. Resulting analyses will
contribute to the development of a typology of surrogate speech, which can be
used to identify correlations between linguistic features, musical constraints,
and social uses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.