* 1943287
* CAREER: Multiscale Mechanical Characterization of Bone Fracture Healing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Hannah Dailey, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2025
* USD 519,699.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will address an important
unsolved biomechanical problem: there is no non-invasive technique to measure
bone fracture healing in living animals and humans. This research program will
use computed tomography (CT) scans to create anatomically accurate 3D models of
healing bones. These models will be used to measure how much healing has
occurred. The models can also detect if healing has failed. This approach uses
engineering simulation tools to carry out virtual mechanical tests, which will
measure the mechanical strength of the healing bone. This will assess healing
without the need for direct physical interaction with an animal or human
patient. The bone models will adapt to load-bearing just like bones behave in
the body - a novel feature of this work. These results will advance a new
paradigm of non-invasive biomechanics-driven methods for measuring bone fracture
healing and have impact on both science and society. The long-term benefit to
society will be to develop similar tools to detect problems with bone healing
much earlier than is currently possible, which may ultimately lead to better
care at lower cost. The research is closely integrated with an educational
outreach plan. Outreach activities are aimed at improving the retention of women
in mechanical engineering, both locally and nationally. The combined outcomes of
the research and education plans will support the investigator's career in non-
invasive mechanical properties measurement of bone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of this research is to characterize the structural mechanics
of bone fracture callus, an important but under-studied musculoskeletal tissue.
The specific technical objectives are: (1) define and validate a scaling law for
modeling the density-dependent mechanical properties of fracture callus, (2)
develop a collection of multiaxial virtual mechanical tests for detecting failed
bone healing (nonunion) based on organ-level rigidity and tissue-level stress
concentrations, and (3) characterize the structural organization of fracture
callus and measure remodeling at the bone-callus boundary as quantitative
indicators of healing speed. This work will be accomplished using new image
analysis algorithms, structural finite-element modeling, and high-performance
computing (HPC) enabled optimization methods. In this project, we will show how
routine clinical imaging can be used to quantify the mechanics, organization,
and remodeling stage of a healing fracture. The methods developed through this
program will have a transformative impact on the interdisciplinary community of
researchers studying bone healing by enabling quantitative in vivo assessment of
structural healing and definitive diagnosis of failed healing when it occurs.
Through associated outreach activities, this award will also address evidence-
based drivers of female under-representation in mechanical engineering, both
within the PIâ€™s institution and nationally in partnership with the Perry
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.