* 1943712
* CAREER: Neuromechanics of human-robot interaction via robot-assisted in-vivo imaging of neuromuscular function
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Fabrizio Sergi, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2024
* USD 397,484.00

Robots are used more and more to support human motor function in
neurorehabilitation, performance augmentation, robot-assisted manufacturing, and
powered prosthetics. While improvement in technological capabilities has been
impressive during the last 20 years, progress has been limited by poor
fundamental understanding of the human component during human-robot-assisted
motor function. This CAREER project will address this limitation by
noninvasively measuring brain function and muscle force and stiffness while a
subject interacts with a robot to perform wrist tasks within a magnetic
resonance scanner. This framework will be used to study how neuromotor
impairment affects muscle coordination, paving the way for refined
neuromusculoskeletal models of robot-assisted motor function and for
personalized human-robot interaction strategies for performance augmentation and
neurorehabilitation. This project will provide training for graduate and
undergraduate students in problems at the intersection between biomechanics,
neuroscience, and robotics, helping create a multidisciplinary workforce ready
to tackle the complex challenges of rehabilitation engineering research in both
academia and industry. The computational model developed will form the basis of
a new outreach program that introduces gaming within the context of
neuromuscular modeling, which will be administered to middle and high school
students to raise interest in pursuing STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator’s long-term research goal is to develop novel neuroscience-grounded
interventions for movement rehabilitation after neuromotor disorders. Toward
this goal, the investigator’s current research is focused on 1) developing and
validating robotic technologies for human assistance and rehabilitation and on
2) using such novel technologies in experimental studies modeling the healthy
and impaired human motor control. This CAREER project seeks to use MRI-
compatible robots to non-invasively measure brain function via functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and muscle function via magnetic resonance
elastography(MRE) during motor tasks that require subjects to perform dynamic
point-to-point and isometric wrist tasks in an MR scanner. Combining
neuromechanical modeling with advanced experimental methods and with hypothesis-
driven experiments, this framework will be used to quantify how the intrinsic
neuromuscular dynamics of the human body affect physical human-interaction and
to study optimal control policies for human-robot interaction in the presence of
realistic neuromuscular dynamics. The project builds on the investigator’s
success in developing a family of MRI-compatible robotic devices and a multi-
muscle magnetic resonance elastography (MM-MRE) imaging technique for
identifying fundamental criteria of muscle-coordination. The research plan is
divided into two thrusts. The FIRST thrust focuses on studying the neural
mechanisms underscoring force and impedance control using a multifaceted
approach that combines modeling, behavioral experiments, and neuroimaging. A
computational framework will be developed for analyzing force and impedance
control for wrist pointing movements that includes accurate musculoskeletal
dynamics. This framework will be validated in experiments conducted on healthy
subjects that learn to control force or impedance in stable or unstable tasks.
Brain regions involved in learning to generate proper force and impedance
required for task execution will be identified. A neuroimaging experiment that
uses fMRI and an MRI-compatible wrist robot will be used to test hypotheses on
the neural representation of force and impedance during dynamic tasks,
specifically that "force and impedance are controlled in different cortical
regions" and that "the representation of muscle co-activation overlaps with the
representation of the fast learning state." The SECOND thrust focuses on using
MM-MRE to estimate the mechanical properties of multiple muscles in the forearm.
The new technique integrates muscle-specific MRE measurements with measurements
of joint torque obtained via an MRI-compatible instrumented handle. This
technique will be used to identify criteria of muscle coordination that apply
for tasks of the hand and wrist and to quantify how these criteria change in
post-stroke individuals. Based on the unique measurements obtained, the
currently accepted short-range stiffness model, not yet directly validated in-
vivo and in-humans, will be tested using robotic perturbations applied by a high
power MRI-compatible robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.