* 1943085
* CAREER: Rational Design of Defect-Ordered Architectures in Oxygen-Deficient Perovskites to Control the Oxygen-Evolution Activity
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Farshid Ramezanipour, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/28/2025
* USD 571,435.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Discovery of new materials that can be used in
energy-related processes and devices has a major impact on the future of global
energy landscape, prosperity and welfare. For example, new materials with
specific properties are needed to better facilitate splitting of water into its
basic components, which is important for the generation of hydrogen and oxygen
from renewable sources. A similarly important property is the conduction of
charges in certain solid materials, a phenomenon that is essential to many
energy devices such as batteries and fuel cells. Studying fundamental aspects of
these properties is at the center of this CAREER award. The award is jointly
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry. Under
this award the research group of Prof. Ramezanipour develops guidelines for
rational design of functional materials, where important energy-related
properties are controlled and modified by changing the arrangements of atoms
within the compounds. This project advances fundamental understanding of
functional materials and results in discovery of novel compounds that contribute
to the progress of science and technology in the field of energy-related
applications. In addition, as part of this award an educational plan helps
students to enhance their laboratory skills, facilitates their academic success,
and prepares them for potential careers in areas that require expertise in a
laboratory setting. Furthermore, outreach activities for underrepresented
minority students introduce these students to basic research, increase the
scientific literacy, and spark interest in chemistry. These outreach activities,
and an internship program for female students to participate in hands-on
research, broaden the impact of the project and help increase diversity in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With this
CAREER award, jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Chemical Catalysis Program in
the Division of Chemistry, researchers work to uncover the fundamental
parameters that allow for rational design and synthesis of defect-ordered
architectures and the impact of defect-arrangement on functional properties, in
particular the charge-transport and oxygen-evolution activity. The specific
focus is on design and synthesis of defect-ordered oxygen-deficient perovskites,
which have recently shown outstanding electrocatalytic activity for oxygen-
evolution reaction (OER) of water splitting. Until now the fundamental
structure-property relationships that control their OER activity have remained
largely unexplored. The key characteristic of this class of materials is the
presence of defects, created due to oxygen-deficiency. Various arrangements of
defects lead to different types of ordered structures. Here Prof. Ramezanipour
and his group investigate how the arrangement and ordering of defects can be
controlled and explore the role of defect-arrangement in directing the OER
activity of oxygen-deficient perovskites. In addition, they investigate the
relationship between defect-arrangement and charge-transport, which is another
property that affects the OER activity. Overall, the multifaceted and
comprehensive approach involves material design, synthesis and study of the
changes in structural order, valence-state, electronic structure, charge-
transport, and the impact these parameters have on OER
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.