* 1943064
* CAREER: Submodular Optimization in Complex Environments: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Hamed Hassani, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 05/31/2025
* USD 237,807.00

Discrete optimization is an inherent challenge in algorithm design arising in
various domains such as artificial intelligence, robotics, and smart cities.
Even though discrete optimization problems are hard in general, prior work has
shown that many real-world instances satisfy a natural diminishing property
called submodularity. Playing an analogous role as convexity does for continuous
optimization, submodularity has been transformational for algorithm design,
leading to efficient optimization methods with strong theoretical guarantees.
Despite this progress, the existing methodologies suffer known limitations and
can benefit from a reexamination inspired by the challenges set forth by today's
technological advances. This project aims to develop a research plan that builds
the foundations of discrete and submodular optimization in complex, dynamic
environments, addressing the challenges of scalability and uncertainty, and
facilitating distributed and sequential learning in much broader settings. This
project is interdisciplinary, featuring a synergistic education plan that
incorporates development of both graduate and undergraduate courses at the
University of Pennsylvania with the specific goal of identifying gaps in
educational training and enriching the curriculum for teaching data science to
engineers. It also aims to use available public education platforms to build a
pipeline for STEM majors entering college, advance public communication around
data science, and disseminate research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the proposed research program is to develop novel and
foundational frameworks for submodular optimization in (i) stochastic,
uncertain, dynamically evolving, and adversarially changing environments; (ii)
distributed and multi-agent systems; and (iii) adaptive scenarios enabling
sequential selection of data and observations. The project seeks to establish
fundamental trade-offs between the best attainable solution quality and various
types of complexities (specifically, computation, communication, and sample
complexities), and devise algorithmic frameworks that meet such trade-offs. The
resultant theory and algorithms will be applied to real-world
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.