* 1943467
* CAREER: Elucidating principles of cortical computation with recurrent neural networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Jonathan Kao, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 440,902.00

The goal of this project is to develop a machine learning based modeling
framework to discover new mechanisms of brain function, with a focus on how the
brain supports decision-making and movement. Understanding the brain's inner
workings, including how circuits of neurons compute and give rise to these
behaviors, is critical for better diagnosing and treating cognitive and motor
disorders. A challenge to studying brain function is its complexity: billions of
neurons across multiple brain areas interact in coordinated ways. This project
gains new insight into brain function by modeling these coordinated and multi-
area computations with deep neural networks. These networks, unlike the brain,
are fully observed: all artificial neurons, their activity, and their
connections are known. As such, neural networks that are trained to compute like
the brain can be analyzed to discover new mechanistic insights for brain
function. This project will also use these insights to develop higher
performance brain-computer interfaces that help the paralyzed by decoding
thoughts into actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use recurrent
neural networks as in silico models of brain areas. New neural network
architectures will be trained to do the same tasks and behaviors that animals
perform in experimental labs. Critically, these neural networks will be trained
to harness information from basic neuroscience including anatomy and neuron
recordings, so that its artificial neurons resemble real neurons. After
training, neural networks will be analyzed to propose new computational
mechanisms for how populations of neurons compute to produce behaviors. New
hypotheses of brain function from these networks will be tested in collaboration
with experimental labs. These insights and models will be incorporated into new
algorithms for brain-computer interfaces that aim to better decode one's
intentions from his or her neural activity. The outcomes of this project will
also be translated into educational and outreach materials to reach a broad
audience, contributing to the training of a next generation of computational
neuroscientists and neural engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.