* 1943098
* CAREER: Engineering Pathways for Appalachian Youth: Design Principles and Long-term Impacts of School-Industry Partnerships
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Jacob Grohs, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 01/31/2025
* USD 572,132.00

Engineering-related industries can be vital to rural communities, yet many youth
in these communities do not commonly have educational experiences that introduce
them to locally relevant engineering career pathways. In this project, engineers
from local manufacturing companies will partner with educators to co-design
learning innovations—spanning in-school and out-of-school settings—for over
2,500 high school youth from Appalachian counties. As part of these learning
innovations, industry partners will introduce youth to the many applications of
engineering that are present in their communities. Across a range of formal and
informal spaces, such as schools and libraries, the youth will then have
opportunities to use engineering practices and computer programming skills to
address local issues of their choosing. Longitudinal research will determine
whether and how different groups of rural youth develop and maintain interest in
engineering career pathways over a sustained duration of time, from middle
school through the period after high school graduation. This project will
advance knowledge and practice by generating empirically-based findings that
illuminate the features of innovative and responsive approaches for broadening
participation in engineering careers among youth from rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, submitted to the Faculty Early
Career Development Program (CAREER), will generate knowledge regarding how rural
youth develop, maintain, or shift engineering interest pathways in the context
of sustained engineering activities provided across formal and informal
settings. A steering group comprised of industry representatives and formal and
informal educators will plan and implement educational innovations in which
rural youth have opportunities to use engineering and computer programming
skills throughout their middle and high school years. In this longitudinal
design-based research, cluster analyses will be conducted to determine how the
youth research participants cluster relative to aspects of engineering interest
over time. This research will advance knowledge by characterizing how youth with
varying levels of interest in engineering may experience different engineering
interest pathways. Qualitative methods, such as analyses of interviews with
purposively selected youth from each of the clusters, will provide insights as
to why shifts in engineering interest occurred at different points in the
youths’ trajectories along engineering interest pathways. In order to build
capacity among the next generation of researchers in engineering education, this
CAREER project will also result in the formation of new content modules for core
research methods courses in engineering education doctoral programs as well as
curriculum materials for a full special topics course on design-based research
methods in engineering education. Content from these modules and the new course
will be openly shared with other doctoral programs. This project is funded by
the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.