* 1943816
* EAGER:  Genetically Encoded Crosslinking Reagents to Map Protein Interaction Surfaces In Planta
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Michael Sussman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project involves the development of a new method for identifying proteins
that allow plant cells to grow and thrive. The technology used in this project
exploits a novel way to expand the 'genetic code' of plant cells so that they
incorporate an unnatural amino acid building block that can chemically link one
protein to another one that is nearby. Such linkages will allow researchers to
identify how each of the plant's 25,000 different proteins interact with each
other as the plant seeds germinate, grow and mature into a flowering plant. This
knowledge is key for efforts to apply basic research to discovering real-world
agricultural problems, such as creating crops with higher yields or stress
tolerance. Another important part of this project is to demystify a key
sophisticated analytical field known as 'mass spectrometry', which is used to
identify which proteins interact with partner proteins. Despite the fact that
mass spectrometer instruments are fundamental to all chemical analyses performed
at airports, hospitals and even on Mars, many scientists do not have a clear
understanding of this technology. This project will develop workshops to teach
mass spectrometry to scientists at all levels, including undergraduate and
graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop a new technology for
identifying protein-protein interactions by using genetic engineering to
incorporate into plant proteins a genetically encoded unnatural amino acid,
called bezoylphenylalanine, which acts as a photoaffinity reagent. In the
presence of long wavelength UV light, the engineered amino acid in these
proteins forms a covalent crosslink with specific amino acids that lie nearby in
three-dimensional space, either within that protein itself, or in other protein
partners that interact with it. Using the model higher plant, Arabidopsis
thaliana, transgenic plants expressing a tRNA and its tRNA synthase cognate will
be generated, such that benzoylphenylalanine can be incorporated into any
position within a protein of interest. By photo-activated crosslinking and mass
spectrometry, the 'interactome' can be defined. This method has several
advantages over those currently in place, in that it can be performed in planta,
it can be used to determine which specific amino acids are present at the
interacting surface of the two protein partners, and it is not limited to the
reactivity of any specific amino acid side chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.