* 1943316
* CAREER: Mechanisms and costs of temperature adaptation along a latitudinal cline for the coastal copepod, Acartia tonsa
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Melissa Pespeni, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,250,197.00

Organisms that live in environments that vary across space or time may have
greater capacity to acclimate or adapt to rapid changes in environmental
conditions. However, little is known about the mechanisms or capacities for
rapid adaptation among populations or the extent of costs associated with rapid
evolution. This project will characterize the mechanisms and costs of natural
and experimental temperature adaptation using multiple populations along the
broad latitudinal distribution of the foundational coastal copepod, Acartia
tonsa. This work will also greatly advance our general understanding of
variation in capacity to adapt for many other ecologically and economically
critical species. To carry out this work, the principal investigator will lead
100 undergraduates, over the five-year period, through an integrative teaching-
research asset-based training program that connects a colloquium, summer
research internship, and research course. In addition, two PhD students, one
postdoctoral scientist, and one research technician will develop diverse
skillsets in asset-based mentoring, genetics, genomics, evolution, computational
and marine biology, and how to be a member of an inclusive, supportive STEM
community. In addition to improving the well-being of participants and growing a
more diverse STEM workforce, results from the research will benefit society by
improving the ability to predict species persistence in future conditions and
improving understanding of the scope of the threat of changing global conditions
on ocean ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Populations respond to environmental
conditions that vary across space and time through genetic adaptation or
physiologically plasticity, however, a comprehensive understanding of how these
mechanisms vary across populations or contribute to future resilience is
lacking. In addition, temperature adaptation is a complex physiological trait,
thus rapid temperature adaptation could take multiple paths depending on the
genomic background of a population and could yield unintended costs. In the
project, the principal investigator will lead students in work to test the
hypotheses that variation in genomic backgrounds affects capacity to adapt and
that rapid adaptation to one stressor comes with costs to survive other
stressors. The project will capitalize on the broad latitudinal distribution and
experimental tractability of the ecologically foundational coastal copepod,
Acartia tonsa. The researchers will 1) Link genotype to temperature adaptive
phenotype using ecological genomics and genome-wide association studies in
populations along the environmental gradient of the U.S. East Coast, 2) Reveal
the transcriptional bases of differences in thermal tolerance among populations
and life-history stages, 3) Characterize variation in temperature adaptation
trajectories in multiple experimentally evolved populations and measure the
costs of adaptation. Integration of results across these aims will lead to
insights to the molecular bases of complex traits, the repeatability of
evolutionary trajectories in lab- and field-based studies, and the relationship
between plastic and genetic response mechanisms in temperature adaptation.
Lastly, this work will be performed through the development of an integrated
teaching-research training program that will increase diversity and inclusion in
a STEM research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant was cofunded by the
Integrative Ecological Physiology Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biological Science, The Biological
Oceanography Program in the Division of Ocean Sciences in the Directorate for
Geosciences, and The EPSCoR Program in the Office of Integrative
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.