* 1943761
* New Perspectives on Configuration Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Benjamin Knudsen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 159,696.00

This project is part of the mathematical inquiry into the nature of space known
as topology. More specifically, it is situated within the methodological
tradition of algebraic topology, in which varying concepts of space are compared
and contrasted through a battery of "invariants," which take the form of numbers
and generalizations thereof. This project is primarily concerned with one of the
oldest of these invariants, namely singular homology, which is fundamentally a
matter of counting holes---the hole through the center of a rubber tire, for
example, which distinguishes it from a basketball. Rather than applying this
tool directly to the space of primary interest, which would yield rather coarse
information, we apply it here to a family of spaces derived therefrom, called
configuration spaces. These spaces measure the possibility of multiple occupancy
without collision; for example, there is a configuration space parametrizing all
possible positions of five ants on the surface of the tire or that of the ball.
The study of configuration spaces is fundamental science contributing to the
continued vitality of topology and mathematics as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to study configuration spaces as
structured local-to-global invariants of the background space, combining themes
from the theories of factorization homology and representation stability. We
propose the following specific projects, extending the current and past research
of the PI and his collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Study the homology of
the ordered and unordered configuration spaces of graphs. Understand stability
and asymptotic behavior of Betti numbers. Interpret homology in terms of graph
invariants. Perform explicit computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Exploit a
connection to Lie algebras and the theory of factorization homology to study
configuration spaces of manifolds. Compute positive characteristic homology and
Morava E-theory using Lie algebra homology for spectral Lie algebras. Strengthen
the connection between coalgebra structures and stability phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Compute (stable) multiplicities of irreducible
symmetric group representations in the homology of the ordered configuration
spaces of the torus using the representation theory of combinatorial categories.
Extend knowledge of this theory into higher dimensions and study other product
manifolds. Study configuration spaces of fiber bundles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The (co)homology of configuration spaces is a classical
topic of perennial interest in a diverse array of subfields of mathematics. New
points of view on this old subject are possible in light of the geometric,
categorical, homotopical, and algebraic insights and advances emerging from the
recent development of factorization homology and the flowering of the study of
stability phenomena. This work will turn these new points of view into
substantive theoretical and computational advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.