* 1943811
* CAREER: Responsive Support Structures for Marginalized Students: A Critical Interrogation of Navigational Strategies
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Walter Lee, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2025
* USD 599,944.00

Fostering educational environments that empower every student to access
available and necessary resources in their pursuit of undergraduate engineering
degrees is a national imperative. To support this goal, colleges and
universities provide numerous forms of student support intended to increase the
retention and graduation rates of its undergraduate engineering students (e.g.,
peer mentoring programs). Because of the current lack of diversity in
engineering, support often focuses on marginalized groups, such as Black and
Latinx students. However, student outcomes and previous research reveals the
need for more responsive student support tailored to individual students’ needs.
Accordingly, the aim of this CAREER project is to advance the extent to which
the engineering education community understands how marginalized students 1)
navigate undergraduate engineering programs, and 2) make decisions with respect
to seeking help. The study will provide information directly to student support
services. By understanding the experiences and decision-making of Black and
Latinx students, colleges and universities can support educational environments
that are more responsive to the potential diversity of the student populations.
The impact of this work will be the more intentional use of university
investments and resources focused on broadening participation in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is a multi-case study which
seeks to: (1) compare the support systems and navigational strategies across
four universities of undergraduate engineering students’ responses to
challenging situations (e.g., receiving poor grades, needing a recommendation
letter), and (2) critically interrogate the effectiveness and appropriateness of
different navigational strategies as defined by the students themselves. Primary
data sources include institutional documents (e.g., program descriptions) from
academic units and interviews with marginalized students. Data analysis is
informed by person-environment fit theory. This project will introduce person-
environment fit theory to scholars and practitioners who focus on marginalized
students in engineering, and significantly advance fundamental knowledge of the
strengths and deficiencies within university support structures and processes.
The results of the study will inform the development of Situational Judgement
Inventories for undergraduate engineering students, which will be openly shared,
and seminars and workshops for educators and
administrators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.