* 1943852
* CAREER: The next generation intracellular delivery device for immunotherapy: The integration between ultrasonic transducer and microfluidic chip (UXuChip)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Sangpil Yoon, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2023
* USD 550,000.00

Immunotherapy, a broad category of therapies designed to stimulate the body’s
own immune system to better recognize and fight cancer, has opened an exciting
new avenue for cancer therapy. One category of immunotherapy involves
engineering T Cells, key cells in our immune systems, to better recognize cancer
cells. As each patient has a unique response to treatment, and success can be
improved using a personalized immunotherapy called adoptive cell transfer (ACT)
therapy. ACT involves extraction of T Cells from a patient’s own blood,
engineering and growing them in large numbers in vitro (outside the body), then
reinfusing the engineered T Cells back into the patient. To supply engineered T
Cells for ACT therapy, a reliable high-throughput technique is needed to deliver
molecules into cells in order to control gene and protein expression. The
research goal of this CAREER project is to overcome the limitations of existing
delivery techniques by integrating ultrasonic transducers to deliver molecules
into cells in a microfluidic system. The proposed intracellular delivery device,
called the UXuChip, will improve the molecule delivery efficiency while
maintaining T Cell antitumor activity. Success will help translate immunotherapy
from bench to bedside. The primary goal of this project’s education initiative
is to integrate the proposed research and educational activities by broadening
the education of high school students and the greater community and mentoring at
all levels from undergraduate students to post-graduate researchers. The
research will be integrated with the development of exciting new educational
opportunities on ultrasound imaging, microfluidic chip development, and cancer
therapy. Engineering expertise and knowledge will be disseminated to high school
students to promote their interest in engineering and biomedical sciences via
10-week research internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's long-term
research goal is to utilize engineering principles to develop novel technologies
and approaches for cancer diagnosis and therapy. Towards this goal, the research
aim of this CAREER project is to develop the next generation intracellular
delivery technique to realize in vitro cell-based therapy to revolutionize
therapeutic strategies. While many immunotherapy treatment plans have shown
promising results, a growing number of treated patients experience recurrence
and relapse because each patient has a unique response to the same drugs due to
cancer heterogeneity and phenotypic diversity. Failure has been attributed to
unwanted genomic and phenotypic alterations, uncontrollable cytokine secretion
of engineered T cells, and attacking normal cells by engineered T cells in
patients after the intracellular delivery. To address these unfavorable
outcomes, the project will leverage T cell engineering-based immunotherapy by
providing a novel intracellular delivery technique with genetic, phenotypic, and
functional stability as well as high cell viability and delivery efficiency. The
Research Plan is organized under three objectives. The FIRST Objective is
development of an integrated device (UXuChip) using an ultrasonic transducer
(UX) and microlens complex and a microfluidic chip (uChip) for cell
manipulation. Ultrasound (2 MHz to 200 MHz) generated by a single lithium
niobite (LNB) crystal and cylindrically focused by the microlens will push cells
to pass through a constriction channel vertically to disrupt the cell plasma
membrane to increase permeability for intracellular delivery of macromolecules.
The SECOND Objective is investigation of in vitro cell-level influence of the
UXuChip on gene and protein expressions and cytokine secretion, which will be
compared with electroporation. Parameters of electroporation and UXuChip will be
optimized to achieve cell viability and delivery efficiency over 85% using human
/ mouse primary T cells. At the same time, CRISPR-Cas9 ribonucleoprotein (RNP)
will be developed to ablate PD-1, a receptor/checkpoint protein on the surface
of T-Cells that limits antitumor activity. After treatment with electroporation
and UXuChip, genome-wide microarray will be performed after 3 and 24 hours.
Findings will be used to determine the number of genes that were misexpressed
after electroporation and UXuChip treatment and if the effect is prolonged or
not. Studies will be designed to test the working hypothesis that the changes in
genetic level expression may affect cytokine secretion. The THIRD Objective is
investigation of in vivo effects and assessing the therapeutic potential of
engineered T cells by UXuChip by ablating PD-1 using RNPs delivered by UXuChip
and electroporation and injecting the engineered T-cells into tumors created in
congenic mice. Studies are designed to test the hypothesis that ablated PD-1
will not be conjugated with PD-L1 on tumor cells, resulting in increased T-cell
antitumor activity. The killing potential of T cells treated by UXuChip and
electroporation will be compared by monitoring the size of the tumor
mass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.