* 1943649
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an automated, cost-effective bat activity and mortality monitoring system
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2021
* Brogan Morton, WILDLIFE IMAGING SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 224,617.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to facilitate the use of wind energy. While wind turbines are a
carbon-free energy source, they may impact the habitats of birds and bats;
recently, bats have emerged as a critical focus for the wind industry since
there are several threatened and endangered North American bat species whose
territories overlap with existing and planned wind development sites. The
current method of determining an onshore wind turbine’s impact on wildlife
requires biologists to walk transects in cleared plots around the turbines
looking for carcasses. This method is not only expensive, it also leads to
uncertain impact estimates. For offshore wind turbines there is currently no
method for determining impacts, which may hinder the ability to permit projects.
This project will provide a tool for automatically assessing bat mortality
around industrial wind turbines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project will use structured light imaging and
advanced computer vision to detect bat mortality around utility-scale wind
turbines. The concept is to mount near-infrared (NIR) cameras and illuminators
to the turbine and continuously record images at night during bat activity.
Image processing techniques will be used to identify bat activity along so-
called "tracks" as two-dimensional flight paths. Projecting a known NIR source
into the image field in a structured light imaging process generates a reference
for depth calculations, allowing the measurement of the heading and range of a
carcass. These measurements will enable the development of systems to prevent
wildlife injuries in the future. During this Phase I project a prototype system
will be built and tested at an operational wind
turbine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.