* 1943319
* CAREER: Compilation Processes to Enhance Dataflow Optimizations
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Catherine Olschanowsky, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2025
* USD 316,345.00

Supercomputing drives advances in many areas of science and engineering.
Challenges ranging from understanding climate change, to discovering new
materials for solar cells, to curing cancer, depend on the power of leadership-
class supercomputing resources. Resources of this class cost tens of millions to
set up and operate, so the scientific applications using them should produce the
largest scientific advancement possible, in the shortest amount of time, using
the least amount of energy. However, scientific applications operate
inefficiently in that they typically perform operations at less than 30 percent
of the potential maximum rate, and often further less than that. Hand-optimizing
scientific applications by rewriting the code can increase the operation rate,
but also introduces code complexities that make code difficult to understand and
maintain, impeding scientific progress. Automated code optimization preserves
code maintainability and has the potential to significantly increase operation
rates. However, there are obstacles, such as the use of shared mathematical
libraries that block automated optimization. This project seeks to overcome key
obstacles to automated code optimization for scientific applications. An
integrated education plan will engage at-risk youth from local Idaho high
schools in computer science, building on a successful pilot program that brought
pregnant and parenting teens together with computer science
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to unblock
memory optimizations that depend on a code transformation performed by compilers
called function inlining that is crucial to subsequent code transformation.
Interactions with memory are expensive and application designers depend on them
to support software design patterns. Application designers often use library
calls or function pointers to break software into small, reusable modular
components. However, doing so prevents inlining and limits the efficacy of
transformations contributing to memory optimizations. In response to this
problem, the project will make function bodies available earlier and in a form
that is amenable to transformations. To accomplish this, the project will
develop a new early linking stage using a high-level compiler internal
representation, resulting in large regions of application code expressed in a
structure ideal for transformation. This approach allows for inlining and
subsequent loop transformations, thus removing the barrier resulting from using
precompiled libraries, and some of the barriers from function pointer use.
Project objectives are to: (1) enable inlining of precompiled libraries, (2)
enable inlining over function pointers, and (3) provide customized optimization
planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CCF Division
Software and Hardware Foundations Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.