* 1943805
* CAREER:  Developing Divergent Thinking throughout Engineering Education and Practice
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Shanna Daly, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2025
* USD 583,179.00

Numerous professional reports cite the strong technical skills of engineering
graduates, but also point to their lack of creative thinking. Creative
approaches to engineering problems require divergent thinking to explore a wide
range of possible solutions. Divergent thinking allows engineers to consider
alternatives at every stage during problem solving; for example, in the ways
they define the problem, differing approaches they consider, and the range of
potential solutions devised. Without divergent thinking, engineers frequently
apply the usual approaches without considering ways to change or innovate.
Studies show that the key to creativity is learning to move easily back and
forth between divergent thinking about alternatives and convergent decision
making. While engineering education excels in training on convergent technical
skills, there is widespread agreement that engineering educators struggle with
teaching about the divergent thinking skills required for creativity. Developing
training on divergent thinking within the engineering curricula will transform
engineering education by embedding creativity within engineering cultures.
Further, by supporting engineers in divergent thinking to explore ideas,
innovative approaches and solutions can successfully address the complex
engineering problems they face. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project identifies
divergent thinking practices in engineering contexts and develops empirically-
based methods for training engineering students in divergent processes to foster
flexible and creative solutions for engineering problems. Guided by two key
frameworks (Search Spaces and Social Cognitive Theory) the research will
leverage interviews about engineering experiences and scenario-based experiments
to answer the following research questions: 1) How do engineering students and
practitioners bound and explore problems and solutions? 2) How do engineering
students and practitioners self-assess their process, progress, and outcomes? 3)
What cognitive and perceived environmental factors impact bounding and
exploration of alternatives? This work will also produce empirically-based
educational tools including a divergent thinking guide, a divergent thinking
self-assessment tool, a repository of engineering stories about divergent
thinking, and a hybrid learning module. These educational deliverables will
serve as a foundation for curricular reform in high school and undergraduate
engineering education, and leverage training experiences in professional
engineering practice to integrate divergent thinking within core engineering
skills. Further, as engineering students become increasingly aware of the high
value placed on divergent thinking within engineering, students interested in
creative contributions to engineering will find more ways to engage with and
contribute to the field, supporting their choice to enter and stay in
engineering by building their feelings of connection, support, and belonging in
the field. Building divergent skills to think differently is a touchstone for
the field: Diverse ideas from diverse contributors strengthen education and
practice in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.