* 1943988
* CAREER: Controlling Nonlinear Flow Interactions to Suppress Transition to Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Maziar Hemati, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In a wide range of engineering systems (e.g., airplanes, cars, pipelines, and
wind turbines), delaying transition of flow from laminar to turbulent can lead
to reduced drag and improved efficiency. The research will study complex
(nonlinear) flow interactions that will suppress laminar transition to
turbulence and achieve drag reduction. Computer simulations of a channel flow
incorporating only wall-based sensing and actuation of the flow will be used to
demonstrate the delays in transition. The effort closely integrates education
and outreach with foundational research that enhances interdisciplinary fluid
dynamics, systems modeling, and control theory. The multidisciplinary work will
be disseminated to the fluids, dynamical systems, and controls communities to
enhance communication between these disciplines. Newly developed courses and
undergraduate research initiatives will promote higher education in engineering.
A new outreach program will help elementary school teachers introduce
engineering into K-6 classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear flow
interactions are at the heart of the transition process. Yet, previous studies
on transition control have focused on the pre-nonlinear interaction stage and
have not exploited a complete description of these interactions for controller
synthesis. The proposed effort hinges on the fact that nonlinear flow
interactions are dynamically constrained by the Navier-Stokes equations, both at
a given time instant and across time instances. Mathematically, these physical
constraints can be expressed as a set of integral quadratic constraints,
providing a convenient framework for modeling nonlinear flow interactions for
transition control synthesis. This project seeks to determine how such
representations of nonlinear flow interactions can be exploited to suppress
transition within direct numerical simulations of a channel flow, using only
wall-based sensing and actuation. The outcomes of this project will provide
guidance on how to formally account for nonlinear flow interactions to perform
flow control, sensor selection, and model-order reduction in a manner that can
be generalized to many complex flow configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.