* 1943900
* CAREER: Structure and Control of Systems with Contact Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Aaron Johnson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 674,394.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will create new ways to
understand and control robots that walk, jump, or grasp. Specifically, the
project will study robots that repeatedly make and break contact with the ground
or some other surface. Planning and controlling motion involving contact is
particularly challenging, because very small changes in, for example, the
friction between the two surfaces or the points at which the contact occurs, may
cause large changes in the robot's overall motion. For example, small changes in
where a robot hand touches a tool may cause the tool to slip from the robot's
grasp. Or small differences in where a robot places its foot on rocky ground may
cause the robot to trip and fall. Robots are most successful when their
workspace is carefully monitored and maintained. For robots to be equally
successful in unstructured and unpredictable real-world settings requires new
motion planning and control methods, such as this project will develop. These
new capabilities promise benefits in applications ranging from home healthcare,
to environmental monitoring, to manufacturing. The project also features robot
activities for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will model and analyze the
structure of systems that have uncertainty in their contact conditions. In
particular, this work considers both local stability properties around uncertain
contact timing and event sequences, as well as the global topological structure
of the system. This project will discover properties of the dynamics and contact
conditions that predict successful behaviors by extending notions of contraction
or convergence to discontinuous contact systems as well as finding persistent
topological features. The second part of this project will then use these
properties to find new control generation strategies that are robust to
uncertainty in the timing of planned contact events as well as anticipate and
possibly avoid unplanned contact events. While many ad hoc solutions have been
researched for different settings, this research will unify and extend these
point solutions by leveraging these common structural properties. The result
will be a set of methods for generating controllers that avoid problematic
behavior when contact modes change unexpectedly, for example when feet scuff or
slip on a surface, but still allow for rich changing contact
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.