* 1943509
* CAREER: Leveraging Context-Aware Sensing to Enhance QoE for Mobile Users: A Practical Framework Design
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Ming Li, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 415,058.00

Due to the proliferation of powerful mobile terminals, resource-demanding
multimedia applications, such as video streaming, video calls, and online
gaming, have been surging during the past decade. How to improve the
satisfaction of these applications as perceived subjectively by end-users,
widely interpreted as the quality of experience (QoE), is critical to the
operators of wireless networks. Prevailing QoE enhancement methods are mostly
operator-oriented, while users play somewhat limited roles. On the other hand,
mobile devices are equipped with multiple embedded sensors that enable the
collection and inference of rich contextual information. Motivated by these
observations, this project aims to leverage user-centric context sensing to
enhance QoE in wireless networks. The proposed user-assisted QoE enhancement, if
successful, has the potential to serve as a promising complement to the existing
centralized QoE management framework. Besides, it will open up new opportunities
that incorporate mobile users for network measurement and management that has
been mostly conducted by network operators alone. The project plans to engage
female and under-represented minority students in the research activities and
actively outreach to middle and high school students. The scholarly discovery
will be disseminated broadly to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
intends to develop a practical framework to leverage context sensing for QoE
enhancement and address critical challenges involved therein. More specifically,
the proposed research will be carried out through three closely related research
thrusts. The first thrust studies fine-granular user context prediction based on
historical records harvested from mobile devices. As another key ingredient, it
further investigates how to utilize the prediction results to assist with
resource provisioning and QoE improvement in wireless networks. Realizing that
context sensing may incur extra communication and energy overhead, the second
thrust intends to reduce the cost by developing cost-efficient context sampling
and accurate reconstruction that adapt to context dynamics. The third thrust
addresses the privacy concern during context sensing. A flexible context trading
framework will be developed to allow individual users to decide how much privacy
to disclose in the trade of QoE improvement. The proposed research is inter-
disciplinary, which spans resource management, learning techniques, compressive
sensing, differential privacy, and economic theories. The proposed mechanisms
and designs will be thoroughly evaluated via a combination of measurement
campaigns, simulations, and experimental studies. A medium-scale prototype of
off-the-shelf mobile devices, routers, servers, and cloud will be
implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.