* 1943630
* CAREER: Broadening Perspectives of Science, Technology, and Culture Through Community-Driven Design of Place-Based Storytelling Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Breanne Litts, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 938,301.00

As new technologies continue to dominate the world, access to and participation
in science, technology, engineering, mathematics (STEM), and computing has
become a critical focus of education research, practice, and policy. This issue
is exceptionally relevant for American Indians, who remain underrepresented as
only 0.2% of the STEM workforce, even though they make up 2% of the U.S.
population. In response to this need, this Faculty Early Career Development
Program (CAREER) project takes a community-driven design approach, a
collaborative design process in which Indigenous partners maintain sovereignty
as designers, to collaboratively create three place-based storytelling
experiences, stories told in historical and cultural places through location-
based media. The place-based storytelling experiences will be digital
installations at three culturally, politically, and historically significant
sites in the local community where the public can engage with Indigenous
science. The work is being done in partnership with the Northwestern Band of the
Shoshone Nation (NWBSN).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator and the
NWBSN will investigate: (a) what are effective strategies and processes to
conduct community-driven design with Indigenous partners?; (b) how does
designing place-based storytelling experiences develop tribal members’ design,
technical, and computational skills?; (c) how does designing these experiences
impact tribal members’ scientific, technological, and cultural identities? The
goals are to establish a process of community-driven design, build
infrastructure to support this process, and understand how this methodological
approach can result in culturally-appropriate ways to engage with science
through technology. The principal investigator will work with the tribe to
complete three intergenerational design cycles (a design cycle is made up of
multiple design iterations). Each design cycle will result in one place-based
storytelling experience. The goal is to include roughly 15 youth (ages 6-18), 10
Elders, and 10 other community members (i.e. members ages 18-50, likely parents)
in each design cycle (35 tribal members total). Some designers are likely to
participate in multiple design cycles. The tribe currently has 84 youth ages
6-18 and the project aims to engage at least 30 across all three design cycles.
Over four years of designing three different experiences, the NWBSN aims to
recruit at least 100 tribal members (just under 20% of the tribe) to make
contributions (as designers, storytellers, or to provide cultural artifacts or
design feedback).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.