* 1943629
* CAREER: Linking the stable isotope record of Earth's surface and interior across the Great Oxidation Event
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Claire Bucholz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2025
* USD 664,500.00

Oxygen levels in Earth’s atmosphere have risen throughout its ~4.5 billion-year
history in two major transitions. The first, known as the Great Oxidation Event
(GOE), occurred circa 2.3-2.4 billion years ago when atmospheric oxygen levels
increased to 1-10% of present day levels. This rise in oxygen levels left an
indelible imprint on the sedimentary rock record through the onset of oxidative
weathering and shifts in stable isotope compositions. During this same time
interval, the igneous (or magmatic) rock record underwent significant chemical
and isotopic changes. The proposed research will investigate whether the changes
in the sedimentary and igneous rock records are linked through studying the
stable isotopes of a unique suite of igneous rocks known as strongly
peraluminous granites (SPGs). SPGs form when sedimentary rocks are metamorphosed
and partially melted to form granitic melts. SPGs therefore represent an
endmember igneous archive of a pure sedimentary contribution (through partial
melting and assimilation) to the igneous rock record. Through analyzing the
isotopes of SPGs on either side of the GOE, this study will determine if and how
changing sedimentary compositions affected the igneous rock record across this
critical transition in Earth’s history. The PI will lead an integrated research
and education plan designed to encourage participation and retention of under-
represented minorities in OFW-based research through a multi-tiered mentoring
system. This project supports one female or minority graduate student at
Caltech, 3 undergraduate summer fellows, 3 high-school student and teacher
interns from the Pasadena Unified School District (PUSD), and annual classroom
lessons and field trips for PUSD middle schoolers to the local San Gabriel
Mountains. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research in this CAREER project
will explore how the GOE influenced the O, S, and Fe isotope record of igneous
rocks through partial melting or assimilation of sediments. The research
examines Archean and Proterozoic strongly peraluminous granites, which represent
pure partial melts of metasedimentary rocks. This research has three main
objectives. First, it will shed light on the underlying causes for shifts
observed in the stable isotope record of igneous rocks across the GOE. For
example, the increase in O isotope ratios in magmatic zircon has been variably
ascribed to the onset of plate tectonics and recycling of sedimentary rocks or
to the rise of oxidative, subaerial weathering generating heavier O isotope
ratios in sediments. If the latter is true, a shift in the oxygen isotope ratios
of zircon from Archean and Proterozoic SPGs should be observed. Second, this
research will explore in detail how Fe and S isotopes are transferred from
sediments to igneous rocks through detailed field studies of two “focus”
localities which preserved representative source metasedimentary rocks, as well
as, the derivative SPG. Third, the SPGs provide an alternative archive to the
sedimentary record in that they homogenize large volumes of sedimentary rocks
and thus can yield information on average sedimentary compositions. Importantly,
this work will establish a “reference collection” of SPGs, which will be curated
at Caltech and made available to external researchers to investigate other
aspects of their chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.