* 1943499
* CAREER: Composable Programming Abstractions for Secure Distributed Computing and Blockchain Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Andrew Miller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 412,424.00

Secure distributed systems are showing great promise for digitizing and
increasing information sharing in several industries. For example, the financial
industry is now experimenting with blockchains and smart contract protocols to
improve efficiency and combat fraud in digital asset markets. However, state-of-
the-art systems require increasingly complex designs to meet performance and
security requirements. For example, they incorporate parallel or partitioned
architectures for better performance, as well as cryptographic techniques like
zero knowledge proofs to mitigate privacy risks. Furthermore, some of the most
successful distributed systems are platforms that can be extended by non-expert
application developers writing customized “smart contract” programs. All of
these complicate the task of defining security, let alone proving it, and as a
result most distributed systems are still deployed without any rigorous security
model at all. This project will address the above challenges by designing new
programming language abstractions for defining and analyzing the security of
distributed protocols.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is organized along two
research directions. The first goal is to bridge the field of programming
language design and the widely-used Universal Composability (UC) theory from
cryptography. UC a popular standard because of its modularity and strong
guarantees, and is widely used for on-paper analysis of blockchain protocols;
integrating this into a programming framework will enable application developers
to benefit from this modular design approach. The second research thrust aims to
explore a new distributed system architecture, called “robust sharded MPC,"
aimed at providing better scalability and security than existing designs.
Combining robust multiparty computation (MPC) together with zero knowledge
proofs (ZKP) will be able to overcome the expressiveness limitations of the
current state-of-the-art, where ZKP is used alone. By bridging distributed
systems and applied cryptography, the approach is unique in using robust sharded
MPC to overcome limitations of the state-of-the-art based on zero knowledge
proofs alone. The project will release open source software and to help validate
the security of blockchain protocols deployed or in development today, and to
support courses and curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.