* 1943114
* CAREER: Dynamic Management of Compressed Arrays for High-Performance Computing Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Jon Calhoun, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2025
* USD 427,922.00

High-performance computing (HPC) has enabled significant advancements across all
fields of science and engineering by allowing researchers to simulate complex
phenomena that are difficult, if not impossible, in a normal laboratory setting.
As new HPC systems come online, computational speed far exceeds the speed of
data movement. Thus, data movement can limit application performance and system
throughput. However, the disparity allows the expenditure of computational time
to lower the bandwidth requirements to move data in HPC applications, mitigating
performance bottlenecks. This project investigates the performance and utility
of data compression and aggregation techniques to reduce the volume of data
communicated, computed on, and stored by large-scale scientific applications. An
outcome of this project is a transformative data management runtime that allows
science and engineering applications that require large amounts of memory
enables them to be run on cheaper and more common systems with less memory.
Thus, the throughput of workloads can be greatly improved, facilitating research
progress in their respected areas. Furthermore, reducing the amount of memory
required by the application allows the application to run larger and more
detailed problems, allowing scientists and engineers to run and analyze
previously intractable experiments. Finally, this project seeks to broaden
undergraduates' use and understanding of HPC by creating a multi-semester hands-
on research course. This course engages STEM students to build/design/use the
next generation of HPC systems and applications and prepares them with the
cross-disciplinary skills needed to succeed in on-campus research opportunities,
graduate school, and the modern workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
improves current state-of-the-art lossy and lossless data compression by adding
logic to dynamically manage compressed data; reducing the performance impact of
high-cost compression and decompression times. The data management runtime
allows application users/developers to select a subset of variables to register.
Data, from the point of allocation, resides compressed in main memory and
remains compressed during all inter/intra-process data motion. For inter-node
communication, the runtime aggregates messages with the same destination node
before transmission. Data that are needed for computation are decompressed just
before use and are placed in a reconfigurable software-managed cache that
utilizes a prefetcher to decompress data prior to use, limiting delays on the
critical path of the application. For variables that use lossy compression, the
runtime seeks to mitigate the accumulation of error beyond what the application
can tolerate by dynamically altering the lossy compression error bound. This
project evaluates the data management runtime on a diverse set of proxy
application and production-level applications with varying memory requirements,
communication computation ratios, communication patterns, and data access
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CCF Division
Software and Hardware Foundations Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.