* 1943506
* CAREER: Transforming Online Scholarly Communication with Networked Crowd Computation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Emoke-Agnes Horvat, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2025
* USD 444,490.00

Online platforms, such as social media and open repositories, increase access to
high quality scientific papers, but also challenge users to identify reliable
and trustworthy information. Scholars are adopting popular online means for
disseminating their work. What can ensure that the highest quality science
receives the most attention? This research develops new tools to increase
confidence in the quality of the science, to help experts, journalists, and the
public. These investigations have the potential to increase the impact of the
best scientific research through computationally enhanced article filtering.
Integrated educational and outreach objectives include: (1) develop course
modules on networks in science communication, for diverse students; (2) conduct
workshops for underrepresented minorities in science providing personalized
strategies for increasing the online visibility of their scholarship; and (3)
webinars to train science journalists to use the new filtering
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates how scientific
publications spread on online platforms. It will derive measures of how scholars
and members of the public share scientific publications. Characteristics of
publication-sharing networks will be used to develop novel tools in order to
filter papers in the pre-peer review stage. Patterns of uneven coverage of
scholarship, not justified by differences in quality, will be identified. To
address the inequalities, the project will develop computational tools for
improving scientists' dissemination strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.