* 1943742
* CAREER: Investigating the Relationship between Fault Damage Zones and Earthquakes through Seismic Observations and Earthquake Cycle Simulations
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Yihe Huang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2025
* USD 482,709.00

Instead of single planes, faults are volumes of rocks containing centimeters-
thick fault cores surrounded by hundreds-meter-thick fractured rocks, called
fault damage zones. As discovered worldwide, fault damage zones around major
faults accommodate a significant portion of plate motion through seismic and
aseismic deformation. However, the poorly understood link between fault damage
zones and earthquake source processes remains a fundamental issue that hinders
the advancement of earthquake physics research and seismic hazard mitigation.
Using a combination of new fault zone imaging methods and fully dynamic
earthquake cycle models, the project aims to understand how fault damage zones
impact the generation of earthquakes that occur within seconds and how the
structure of fault damage zones involves over hundreds of years under the
influence of earthquakes and interseismic slip. The project will also promote
and enrich the learning experiences of a wide range of students and increase the
diversity of students majoring in geophysics. The research lies on the interface
of seismic data analysis, earthquake modeling, and fault zone geology, providing
a unique opportunity to synergize various research facets and promote
communication between different research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current understanding of earthquake source physics is limited by the lack of
constraints on the spatial distribution of fault damage zones and their effects
on seismicity and interseismic deformation. Previous fault zone studies have
relied on near-fault seismic arrays to obtain a cross-sectional view at the
array location. The project will image the along-strike variation of fault
damage zones and characterize site effects using broadband seismic networks to
investigate whether fault damage zones strongly affect seismicity patterns. The
project will also improve the understanding of stress drop variation by
considering the effects of fault zone waves on earthquake source spectra.
Moreover, previous simulations of earthquakes in fault zones have modeled either
single earthquakes using arbitrary stress conditions or earthquake cycles
without dynamic waves. The project will model earthquakes and interseismic
deformation by considering damage rheology and dynamic effects of the fault zone
wavefield. The seismic observations and earthquake cycle simulations together
will unveil how fault damage zones influence earthquake source processes and how
earthquakes and interseismic deformation contribute to the formation of fault
damage zones. Additionally, the project will involve graduate students to design
and lead hands-on geophysical activities related to the research for Earth Camp,
a UM outreach program that provides week-long experiences to educate
underrepresented high school students. It will promote the communication between
non-science majors and graduate students by introducing poster fairs in a first-
year undergraduate seminar course, and strengthen the research skills of
students by developing research projects in upper-level undergraduate and
graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.