* 1943857
* CAREER:Hybrid Data-driven Synthesis by Design of Atomically Thin Quantum Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,09/30/2020
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2020
* USD 509,509.00

Two-dimensional (2D) crystalline materials consisting of a single atomic layer
have unique quantum mechanical properties that are critical for several advanced
technological applications such as photovoltaic and electronic devices. However,
the synthesis of 2D materials is generally accomplished through exhaustive
trial-and-error experimentation that hinders their commercial exploitation. The
main impeding factors are the lack of a comprehensive understanding of the
underlying growth mechanisms and the lack of real-time measurement of growth
states for implementing feedback process control. The research goals of this
CAREER project are to (i) develop a computational model to understand the
mechanisms governing the growth of 2D materials, (ii) build a database relating
the synthesis process to the properties of these materials, and (iii) use
artificial intelligence to find the optimum synthesis conditions. The proposed
integration of research and education includes course development and laboratory
modules for undergraduate and graduate students and research internships for
undergraduate students. The outreach program will engage K-12 students and
teachers as well as faculty and minority students from a local minority-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on developing a
unified design multiscale framework addressing the growth of 2D materials using
the more complex chemical vapor deposition-variant techniques that involve
reactive flows of precursors. The objective is to understand the growth
mechanisms, such as growth chemistry, and effect of different growth parameters,
such as carrier gas flow rates, on the morphology and characteristics of the
synthesized 2D materials. This multiscale framework will also be used to build a
database of synthesis-morphology conditions to guide the design of new 2D
materials. The developed synthesis-morphology database will be used in
combination with the ML models, specifically Generative adversarial networks, to
predict the morphology and properties of 2D materials significantly faster than
the multiscale model. The objective is to develop a model that can be used as an
observer with small enough response time that can be useful for real-time
control of the synthesis process. The project will also focus on addressing the
inverse problem of finding the optimal conditions for growing 2D quantum
materials with desired properties. This problem will be first transformed into a
classification problem using the synthesis-morphology database, which will be
solved utilizing the ML models, and specifically Convolutional Neural Networks.
Collaboration with industrial partners is planned through the I/UCRC Center for
Atomically Thin Multifunctional Coatings (ATOMIC). The research results will be
integrated into a new technical elective course and an existing undergraduate
course on engineering materials. A light web-based version of the simulation
software will be used for outreach activities and will be made available
publicly through the website of the NSF-funded 2D Crystal Consortium - Materials
Innovation Platform (2DCC). The outreach program will focus on engaging (1) K-12
students and teachers through STEM training camps and (2) faculty and students
belonging to underrepresented minority groups in STEM from a local HBCU,
Grambling State University, through computational teaching modules related to
the Materials Genome initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Process Systems, Reaction Engineering, and Molecular
Thermodynamics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.