* 1943758
* CAREER: Machine learning, Mapping Spaces, and Obstruction Theoretic Methods in Topological Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Jose Perea, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 04/30/2025
* USD 367,026.00

Data analysis can be described as the dual process of extracting information
from observations, and of understanding patterns in a principled manner. This
process and the deployment of data-centric technologies have recently brought
unprecedented advances in many scientific fields, as well as increased global
prosperity with the advent of knowledge-based economies and systems. At a high
level, this revolution is driven by two thrusts: the modern technologies which
allow for the collection of complex data sets, and the theories and algorithms
we use to make sense of them. That said, and for all its benefits, extracting
actionable knowledge from data is difficult. Observations gathered in
uncontrolled environments are often high-dimensional, complex and noisy; and
even when controlled experiments are used, the intricate systems that underlie
them --- like those from meteorology, chemistry, medicine and biology --- can
yield data sets with highly nontrivial underlying topology. This refers to
properties such as the number of disconnected pieces (i.e., clusters), the
existence of holes or the orientability of the data space. The research funded
through this CAREER award will leverage ideas from algebraic topology to address
data science questions like visualization and representation of complex data
sets, as well as the challenges posed by nontrivial topology when designing
learning systems for prediction and classification. This work will be integrated
into the educational program of the PI through the creation of an online TDA
(Topological Data Analysis) academy, with the dual purpose of lowering the
barrier of entry into the field for data scientists and academics, as well as
increasing the representation of underserved communities in the field of
computational mathematics. The project provides research training opportunities
for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the set of maps
between topological spaces has led to rich and sophisticated mathematics, for it
subsumes algebraic invariants like homotopy groups and generalized (co)homology
theories. And while several data science questions are discrete versions of
mapping space problems --- including nonlinear dimensionality reduction and
supervised learning --- the corresponding theoretical and algorithm treatment is
currently lacking. This CAREER award will contribute towards remedying this
situation. The research program articulated here seeks to launch a novel
research program addressing the theory and algorithms of how the underlying
topology of a data set can be leveraged for data modeling (e.g., in
dimensionality reduction) as well as when learning maps between complex data
spaces (e.g., in supervised learning). This work will yield methodologies for
the computation of topology-aware and robust multiscale coordinatizations for
data via classifying spaces, a computational theory of topological obstructions
to the robust extension of maps between data sets, as well as the introduction
of modern deep learning paradigms in order to learn maps between non-Euclidean
data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.