* 1943767
* CAREER: Role of attention in reward learning
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Alireza Soltani, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 04/30/2025
* USD 812,991.00

Learning from the consequences and outcomes of the choices we make is crucial
for our well-being and survival. However, how we learn in natural settings where
multiple options or actions, each with many features and attributes, lead to a
single reward feedback is poorly understood (e.g., feeling good or bad after
consuming a few foods). The proposed research will use a combination of novel
experimental and computational approaches to investigate the role of attention
in reward learning in settings that better resemble the real world. It will also
contribute to the development of a powerful and coherent computational framework
for understanding this unexplored role of attention. The outcomes of this
research will be of interest to multiple fields in psychological, cognitive, and
social sciences as well as to the artificial intelligence community. This
project will include direct mentoring of female undergraduate and graduate
students working on research and teaching. The outreach program will introduce
the tasks used in the experiments as games to high school students in order to
teach them about attention, learning, and the brain through an engaging method.
Overall, research activities focus on advancing basic science, on inspiration,
recruitment, and retention of the next generation of STEM students, and on
bringing brain-inspired ideas to engineering. This project is jointly funded by
Perception Action Cognition (PAC), the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and Science of Learning and Augmented
Intelligence (SL).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers hypothesize that in a
complex, multi-dimensional environment, learning from reward feedback is
strongly influenced by features or attributes of choice options that are
attended to and used for making decisions, and subsequently shapes future
deployments of attention. The major goal of the proposed research is to use a
combination of novel experimental and computational approaches to study how
attention influences reward learning in settings that better resemble the real
world in two ways: 1) having more than one cue preceding an outcome, and 2)
using choice options with multiple features. Experimentally, the team will
investigate how exogenous and endogenous attention influence decision making and
learning at different points in time (relative to reward feedback), and
moreover, how endogenous attention is shaped by the properties of the decision
makerâ€™s environment and influences learning strategies. The team will also
develop computational models to reveal plausible mechanisms for how exogenous
and endogenous attention exert their influence on reward learning in particular,
and for interactions between attention, learning, and decision making more
generally. The results will provide insights into neural mechanisms of adaptive
learning in more naturalistic settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.