* 1943813
* CAREER: Pushing the Lower Limit of Thermal Conductivity in Layered Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Jun Liu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2025
* USD 518,777.00

Identifying effective strategies to achieve exceptionally low thermal
conductivity in solid-state materials can potentially push the extremes in heat
conduction. The proposed project seeks to enable novel thermal control
functionalities in disordered, layered materials to be applied in sustainable
energy infrastructure, such as energy savings by thermal insulation, energy
storage in batteries, energy conversion in thermoelectrics, and thermal
management in electronics. The integration of research, education, and outreach
programs aims to raise the public awareness of challenges in sustainable energy,
and motivate students to pursue appropriate education pathways to STEM
occupations. Cinematic 360 Virtual Reality lab tours will be developed to
"teleport" online K-12 students into the lab to visualize thermal transport
research and its applications in sustainable energy. Teachers will be invited to
collaborate and pilot educational activities promoting the importance and
challenges in sustainable energy infrastructure. The enhancement of students'
preparation for a STEM career will be achieved by a summer program with a
particular emphasis on reaching out to female and African-American
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this CAREER project is to
understand how to suppress vibrational energy transport in anisotropic layered
materials by disorder. Precise and reversible control of the degree and
inhomogeneity of disorder and thus interlayer spacing are achieved by an
electrochemistry process, which inserts ions or molecular chains into the van
der Waals gaps of layered crystals. The investigations will focus on a model
transition metal dichalcogenide crystal, using complementary state-of-the-art
theoretical and experimental approaches. The thermal conductivity of bulk
crystals with a controllable amount and type of ions or molecular chains
inserted into the gaps will be measured by the time-domain thermoreflectance
method. The contribution from different types of vibrational modes to the
microscopic thermal transport in these disordered crystals will then be analyzed
using a combination of lattice dynamics and molecular dynamics methods. The
success of this project will enable the first set of experimental and
theoretical studies to elucidate the roles of interlayer spacing and bonding
environment on suppressing vibrational energy transport, thereby advancing the
current understanding on the microscopic thermal transport mechanisms in
anisotropic disordered, layered materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.