* 1943310
* CAREER: Dissecting a Metabolically Versatile Non-Model Bacterium's Lignin-Derived Compound Catabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Rajib Saha, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2025
* USD 747,855.00

This project investigates the potential causal factors behind a microbe’s
ability to adapt to a wide range of conditions (e.g., presence/absence of
oxygen) and carbon sources (e.g., compounds derived from lignin). If an enzyme
involved in breaking down a carbon source is efficient but expensive to
synthesize, in terms of energy, the reaction step it catalyzes may be rate
limiting. This rate limiting step may dictate if or to what extent the microbe
is able to live on the specific carbon source or whether it needs to have a
secondary carbon source to survive. The project reveals the specific metabolic
pathways (i.e., genes and enzymes) involved in breaking down a specific carbon
source in the presence or absence of oxygen. A computer model is generated to
predict the rate limiting step(s) in this process. These predictions are
experimentally investigated to probe the role of specific genes under optimal
growth conditions. The results of this project will enable biotechnologists to
predictably and efficiently convert one of the most abundant waste products
(i.e., lignin) to useful bioproducts (e.g., a biodegradable polymer). In
addition, a major goal of this project is to improve the public perception of
science literacy through a well-developed education platform targeting all
audiences (from preschoolers to retired adults). The education activities
include designing a series of biology books as well as interactive activities
for preschoolers and mentoring middle/high school and undergraduate students to
advance STEM education. Graduate students are trained broadly in the integrated
nature of computation-driven experimentation to address relevant biological
questions. In order to improve support and awareness for science, public
lectures and interactive activities/demonstrations are also organized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses how a metabolically versatile
purple non-sulfur bacterium, Rhodopseudomonas palustris, controls the catabolic
pathways of lignin-derived compounds and connects these pathways with other
biological processes. Although existing literature shows it has five annotated
pathways (comprising of enzymes of broad substrate specificities) for
catabolizing these compounds, how or if the bacterium is able to catabolize some
of the major lignin-derived compounds or even polymeric lignin is unknown. There
is also a lack of understanding of how sensitive the enzymes are in the
presence/absence of oxygen and if there is a need for complementation by a
secondary carbon source. The goal of this project is to integrate computational
modeling with experimental approaches to address these critical gaps, and
consequently unlocking the fundamental rules that allow the bacterium to adapt
to a wide range of conditions and substrates. Relative contributions of
catabolic reactions and associated genes/proteins are determined through a
metabolism and expression (ME) model. This model is developed from available
genome annotations and information derived from transcriptomics and quantitative
proteomics data that will be obtained in this project. A synthetic biology
toolbox, including inducible promoters, will be used to probe the role of
key/limiting genes in pathways of interest. Findings from this project
contribute to iterative ME model improvement through design-build-test-refine
cycles for a more quantitative and mechanistic understanding of lignin-derived
compound catabolism in microbes. In addition the project will be the vehicle for
improving the public perception of science literacy, and developing education
platform targeting to a wide range of audiences, from preschoolers to retired
adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.