* 1943917
* CAREER: Mitigation of Seismic Risk to Critical Building Contents via Optimum Nonlinear 3D Isolation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Philip Harvey, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will advance the design,
analysis, and implementation of seismic isolation solutions for buildings,
overcoming existing limitations to ensure post-earthquake functionality of
mission-critical equipment in essential facilities. Essential facilities, such
as emergency response centers and hospitals, must remain operational during and
after an earthquake for the public welfare and safety. Seismic isolation
systems, such as rolling isolation platforms, are a viable means of protecting
individual components or groups of equipment within such facilities. These
systems, however, presently suffer from limited displacement capacity and no
protection from vertical excitations, diminishing their performance under strong
tri-directional earthquake-induced floor motions. This research project will
develop a multi-objective, risk-informed framework to optimize 3D isolation
systems, advance the mathematical modeling of passive 3D isolation systems
designed using the framework, and experimentally verify the predicted
performance under tri-directional seismic loading. This new knowledge, coupled
with improved design tools, will allow practicing engineers to better understand
the behavior of these systems and to pursue innovative strategies to mitigate
damage to vital equipment, thus reducing the vulnerability of the nation's
essential facilities. The research plan will be woven into educational
activities aimed at promoting diversity in engineering and creating hands-on
educational opportunities for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students through
a low-cost, educational shake table module. Project data will be archived and
made publicly available in the Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). This project
contributes to the National Science Foundation role the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of
this research is to advance 3D seismic isolation strategies through a deeper
understanding of their underlying physics and to optimize, evaluate, and
validate their performance. This research will answer fundamental questions
related to (a) how the uninterrupted operation of essential facilities and their
contents can be reliably ensured under tri-directional earthquake excitations of
various intensities from frequent to rare events, and (b) how the performance
capacity inherent to equipment isolation systems can be augmented with
innovative materials and optimization approaches. The specific tasks of the
project are aimed at: (1) characterizing 3D seismic hazards to critical building
contents and defining risk-based performance objectives for these components;
(2) discovering and realizing optimum nonlinear restoring and damping forces for
passive 3D isolation systems composed of rolling pendulum bearings and quasi-
zero stiffness isolators that exhibit response-based adaptation; (3)
experimentally validating physics-based mathematical models of these protective
systems for use in design to capture the complex behavior that occurs under
seismic loading; and (4) establishing a design framework to facilitate the
direct transfer of this concept to engineering
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.