* 1943658
* CAREER: Harnessing long-lived acoustic waves for microwave and quantum photonic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* William Renninger, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Acoustic waves are a powerful resource for radio frequency and photonic
technologies. Cellular phones, for example, require a number of precisely
designed filters based off of acoustic waves. In addition to traditional
applications such as filters, recently emerging quantum technologies are also
seeing a steady increase in tasks that benefit from acoustic waves. However, in
general, photonic devices based off of acoustic waves are limited in performance
by the qualities of the acoustic waves that can be accessed. The objective of
this research is to significantly improve the performance of such devices by
engineering optical access to a much wider range of acoustic waves, with
properties that are particularly beneficial for applications. By the specific
design of novel waveguides and geometries for supporting the optical and
acoustic waves, new physics and application performance regimes become
available. The proposed research is expected to improve the coherence,
resolution, and sensitivity of optically mediated acoustic wave technologies
including filters, lasers, and quantum information devices. Beyond these
technical advances, this program focuses on several advances for education,
diversity, and society. In addition to graduate student research support and
mentorship, this program will enable advanced material for a research techniques
course. Finally, it will broaden access to advanced laser sources for smaller
research groups and expand undergraduate research opportunities for students
from first-generation college, low-income, and underrepresented minority
backgrounds, in collaboration with the University of Rochester’s Kearns Center
for Leadership and Diversity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to optically
control acoustic waves with frequencies and dissipation levels spanning several
orders of magnitude, demonstrating new physical phenomena and enabling important
performance advances for microwave and quantum photonic devices. Current
optomechanical devices are limited in coherence, resolution, transduction, and
sensitivity by the restricted lifetime, frequency, and character of the
participating acoustic waves. This research focuses on engineering optical
access to frequency and lifetime-agile acoustic waves for advanced
optomechanical devices. State-of-the-art optomechanical spectroscopy techniques
will be developed to optically probe and control guided and bulk acoustic waves
with frequencies spanning several orders of magnitude, with femtowatt
sensitivity. This program expands on optomechanical interactions known as
Brillouin interactions, which enable important capabilities for beam cleaning,
narrowband and high-power lasers, microwave photonic filters, optical delay
lines, sensors, and imaging. The new types of interactions developed through
this program are anticipated to enhance the performance of these devices as well
as enable new research pathways, such as for quantum information science. Beyond
direct research impact, this proposal focuses on activities that will broaden
access to advanced resources and opportunities in the optical sciences. In
addition to mentoring graduate students and developing a research skills course,
this program will broaden access to advanced femtosecond laser sources for
smaller research groups and expand undergraduate research opportunities for
students from first-generation college, low-income, and underrepresented
minority backgrounds, in collaboration with the University of Rochester’s Kearns
Center for Leadership and Diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.