* 1943365
* Workshops on NASA Apollo Mission Audio as a Community Research Resource
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,04/30/2020
* John H. L. Hansen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2020
* USD 30,906.00

The ability for human teams to work collaboratively together to solve complex
problems relies on effective communications, typically relying on vocal
communications. Unfortunately, the availability of naturalistic team/task-
oriented communications for research in speech and language processing, as well
as human factors and psychology for problem solving and team dynamics does not
exist today. This project will involve the organization of a series of mini-
workshops to advance the development of a future community resource based on the
first massively large corpus of naturalistic data spanning years from hundreds
of individuals working on Apollo missions, which solved one of humanity's
greatest challenges -- placing a man on the moon and returning him to Earth
safely. This future community resource will benefit research communities
spanning technology, science, education, and history of technology. A clear
added benefit is the preservation of the voices of 1000's of scientists,
engineers, and technicians who made one of humanity's greatest technical
achievements possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct mini-
workshops to collect research community input for the development of the first
massively large community resource of naturalistic audio data spanning years
from hundreds of individuals working on Apollo missions. This corpus, called
FEARLESS STEPS, was created as a result of a previous NSF award and represents a
real-world, multi-subject, problem-solving communications corpus that is real
and not simulated. The collected feedback from these mini-workshops will inform
the team that created the original corpus of the community users' current needs
and requirements for the future community resource. These mini-workshops would
include events organized at: (i) ISCA INTERSPEECH-19, (ii) U.S. Library of
Congress (Audio Preservation Day), (iii) ASA-19 Acoustical Society, (iv) NASA
Human Performance Meeting, and (v) Education/Historian visits. The technical
goals of the mini-workshops are: (i) conducting community outreach mini-
workshops to collect feedback from the science and technology communities, as
well as those in historical and educational domains; (ii) developing a platform
for collecting and analyzing feedback from the research community; and (iii)
providing infrastructure support to develop example FEARLESS STEPS Apollo audio
sets to be shared at workshop/meetings for continued community outreach.
Research advancements today in speech and language technology rest on advanced
machine learning concepts, which require extensive audio data for training
effective models, and it is imperative that the academic community have access
to massive audio data which is naturalistic, real-world, multi-speaker, task
directed, and freely available to all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.