* 1943606
* CAREER: Developmental origins of the shell gland and genetic networks for biomineralization in the mollusk Crepidula atrasolea
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Deirdre Lyons, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/28/2026
* USD 850,000.00

Biomineralization is the process by which living organisms produce minerals.
Although it occurs in every kingdom of life, one of the most familiar and
beautiful examples is the snail shell. The diversification of the snail shell is
thought to be related to the abundance and success of this group of animals (the
second largest phylum in terms of species number, after arthropods). With ocean
temperatures increasing worldwide, there is also an urgent need to understand
how shells form and grow to protect aquaculture species like oysters, clams, and
mussels. Shells begin forming during development, when shell gland cells express
a suite of transcription factor proteins that in turn regulate shell matrix
proteins; matrix proteins form a scaffold that controls calcium carbonate
crystalization. This project examines shell matrix formation using a well-
studied marine snail, Crepidula. Taking advantage of tools to modify the genome
of this species, this project examines which specific transcription factors
control matrix protein production, and how they influence shell structure and
growth. These studies will be the first of their kind among molluscs. Another
innovative aspect of this project is that matrix proteins will be studied in the
living animal. The research will be brought into the classroom as part of an
inquiry-based laboratory course where undergraduates, graduate students, and
high school students can study mollusc shell development and test their own
hypotheses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although much is known about the biomaterial
properties, micro-structure, and evolution of molluscan shells, major questions
remain about how they are made during the process of development. The
overarching goal of this project is to make the first comprehensive study of the
expression and function of extracellular matrix proteins embedded in the shell
of the marine snail Crepidula atrasolea. Aim 1 will uncover the spatiotemporal
expression patterns of shell gland-expressed regulatory genes and mantle tissue-
expressed matrix genes, using scRNAseq, in situ hybridization, and proteomics.
Aim 2 will use lineage tracing to show how the shell gland cells mature into the
adult mantle tissue, and use CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to make matrix protein-
GFP fusions to study shell formation in vivo. Aim 3 will identify the upstream
regulators of matrix proteins, and knock them down to test their function. This
work will lead to the first bona fide gene regulatory network (GRN) for
biomineralization in a mollusc. Aim 4 integrates this research into a new cell
and developmental biology CURE lab class for undergraduates, graduate students,
and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.