* 1943692
* Workshop: Research Needs in Machining and Machine Tools; National Science Foundation; Alexandria, Virginia; March 5-6, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Tony Schmitz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2020
* USD 20,378.00

This award supports a workshop on machining and machine tool research, to be
held at the National Science Foundation (NSF), Alexandria, Virginia, March 5-6,
2018. Machining is a critical approach for the production of high-technology and
high value-added products that impact most industries. However, the machine tool
industry is under significant international pressure; the hollowing out of
machining capability represents a direct threat to national security as well as
economic well-being of the United States. The purpose of this workshop is to
identify fundamental research needs that will support a resurgence of the US
machine tool and expansion of domestic machining capacity. The workshop will
bring together key thought leaders from academia, industry, government agencies,
trade organizations, and national laboratories for an intensive meeting to
identify and prioritize research needs in machining and machine tools.

The workshop will last 1.5 days, and will include thought leaders from industry,
government and academe to address the future of machining and machine tools as
well as the research accomplishments to date and the basic research needs.
Invited speakers will make presentations regarding the future needs for
machining capabilities and capacities. Further invited speakers will address
funding perspectives, both in terms of needs and the prognosis for funding
support. Speakers will be recruited from industry, academe, and government in
order to obtain a broad perspective. The objectives of the workshop are to: (1)
review the state-of-the-art in basic research in machining; (2) examine future
prospects of machine tools and machining; (3) share perspectives on machining
from funding agencies such as Department of Defense (DoD), National Institutes
of Health (NIH), National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and NSF;
(4) identify needs, gaps, and challenges facing the machining and machine tools
topic areas, for both existing products and new enabled technologies; and (5)
formulate recommendations for basic research initiatives.