* 1943697
* CAREER: CAS: Ultrafast Electron and Molecular Dynamics Investigations on 2D Nanostructured Photocatalytic Materials for the Generation of Fuels from Renewable Sources
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Mihai Vaida, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 544,735.00

The need to produce fuels from sunlight, similar to photosynthesis used by green
plants, is the result of increasing global energy demand. The decomposition of
water into hydrogen and oxygen and the generation of fuels from carbon dioxide
(CO2) using visible light are important goals. Although a great deal of research
has been performed to produce fuels from sunlight, currently there are no
effective methods to produce solar fuels at large scale. Using a novel
experimental technique, Dr. Mihai Vaida of the University of Central Florida is
monitoring the ultrafast reactions of molecules at surfaces, producing real-time
movies of atoms and molecules during light-driven reactions. This research is
providing unique insights into photocatalytic processes and helping the
development of new, highly efficient photocatalysts to speed up solar fuel
generation. The research is integrated with an educational program to
communicate the importance of clean fuels from renewable sources at the K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate levels. This program is recruiting and mentoring
women and underrepresented minority students in STEM
(science/technology/engineering/mathematics) disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Vaida of the University of Central Florida is developing
the experimental and educational tools required to investigate, understand, and
disseminate results of 2D nanostructured photocatalytic materials and reaction
mechanisms that lead to the generation of solar fuels from renewable sources.
Employing pump probe photoemission spectroscopy in conjunction with extreme
ultraviolet (XUV) laser pulses, this project investigates the charge carrier
dynamics at the photocatalyst surface with femtosecond resolution, surface
sensitivity, and element specificity. Moreover, pump-probe femtosecond-laser
mass spectrometry in conjunction with XUV soft ionization at the surface is
employed to decipher the reaction mechanisms through the detection of
intermediate species and final products with time-, mass-, and energy
resolution. The water-splitting reaction as well as reactions that lead to the
formation of fuel molecules via CO2 reduction are studied on 2D transition metal
dichalcogenides decorated with metal particles. To support the broader impacts
of the project, Dr. Vaida is actively engaged in outreach activities and is
working with high school teachers to develop teaching modules focused on
renewable energy. In addition, workshops are organized to train undergraduate
and graduate students in the field of nanomaterials for renewable energy
production and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.