* 1943201
* CAREER: Nonlinear Models and Regularization for Infinite-Dimensional Inverse Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Kiryung Lee, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2025
* USD 417,968.00

In recent years, numerous data-driven applications have produced significant
improvements in the quality of life across society. The resulting deluge of big
data has given rise to computational and algorithmic challenges that are not
addressed by traditional statistical paradigms. Data science is now providing
new perspectives on how to tackle these challenges, particularly with respect to
model-based inference and data acquisition. Yet, in many applications, there
exists a nontrivial gap between the mathematical modeling of a physical
phenomenon and the model approximation used to facilitate computations. This
research project seeks to narrow this gap through a disciplined approach that
combines new signal models and new optimization problem formulations that would
lead to improved numerical algorithms. The project is expected to have an impact
on many applications in signal processing, imaging science, and statistics. The
principal investigator will mentor students at all levels through various
outreach activities, and will proactively encourage participation from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses
fundamental questions in important data science applications which are described
by infinite-dimensional models, such as in super-resolution imaging and non-
parametric density estimation. In the first phase, a sampling theory will be
developed together with provably robust and efficient algorithms for a class of
piecewise polynomials, such a framework being sufficiently flexible to cover a
variety of practical applications. Learning this model from limited observations
will be formulated as a regularized optimization problem; its non-asymptotic
theory will be established by leveraging insights from geometric functional
analysis, high-dimensional probability, and convex optimization. In the second
phase, by leveraging these piecewise polynomial models, an optimization theory
will be established to solve a set of selected infinite-dimensional inverse
problems without incurring the distortion traditionaly due to discretization.
The effectiveness of the developed methods will be demonstrated over a set of
imaging data measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.