* 1943591
* CAREER: Decoding differential protein phosphorylation patterns at the nexus between biotic and abiotic stress responses
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Alisa Huffaker, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 03/31/2025
* USD 250,001.00

Food stability is essential to societal stability, and to successfully provide
for projected global food demands, increased crop production will be required.
Reduction of crop losses to disease and pests is critical to this effort, with
the challenge potentiated by environmental stresses. Sustaining a secure food
supply will require integrated approaches, with strategic and robust enhancement
of crop plant resistance playing an important role. To address this societal
need of durable improvement of plant resistance to pests and pathogens this
project will contribute to our (1) fundamental knowledge of conserved regulatory
mechanisms controlling disease resistance across crop species, and an
understanding of how these processes impact crop responses to other
environmental stresses. To increase scientific accessibility to the larger
community, research activities are integrated with an extensive educational plan
designed to meet the needs of first-generation college transfer students and to
promote awareness and excitement surrounding opportunities in the plant sciences
and biology. This plan includes (1) Creation of the Research Opportunities and
Orientation for Transfer Students (ROOTS) program to enhance transfer student
retention in the sciences by training them in basic laboratory techniques and
connecting them with research lab positions, (2) Expansion of a research-
integrated undergraduate laboratory course to actively engage students in
publishable research and (3) Partnership with a local community leader to
support an elementary school community garden with plant-based educational
enrichment activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the surface, pattern-triggered
immunity is deceptively simple: recognition of foreign molecules by pattern
recognition receptors activates signaling to modulate transcription and induce
immune responses. In reality, the signaling network is exceedingly complex, with
dynamic interconnected regulatory layers that cause broad reconfiguration of
plant cellular processes. Understanding how this dynamic regulation of plant
immune components occurs and intersects with other signaling pathways is
essential for formulating strategies to enhance biotic resistance. Furthermore,
transfer of strategies from model plants to crop species generates an additional
layer of complexity, as not all regulatory mechanisms are conserved,
particularly between dicot and monocot species. To meet these challenges, a
screen for early regulators of immune signaling in both maize and Arabidopsis
was performed, identifying two conserved nucleic acid-binding proteins serving
as bifunctional regulators of biotic and abiotic stresses with phosphorylation-
mediated functional switching. Through integrated biochemical and genetic
approaches applied to both maize and Arabidopsis, these insights will be
leveraged to define global mechanisms by which these newly discovered proteins
modulate biotic and abiotic stresses, test strategies for targeted enhancement
of resistance, and expand annotation of phosphorylation-dependent
immunoregulators. Upon completion, this work will contribute to foundational
understanding of layered mechanisms of immune signaling that reconfigure
phenotypes, and illuminate targeted strategies for improving plant resistance.
These activities will also support long-term integration of research with
education and outreach, strengthening the scientific and larger community by
providing opportunity and increasing awareness of plant
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.