* 1943442
* CAREER:  Developing Novel Models of Sequence Evolution for Protein Design and Molecular Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Faruck Morcos, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 11/30/2024
* USD 679,600.00

This project aims to improve our understanding of the process of molecular
evolution by studying how biomolecules, like proteins and RNA, interact with one
another to produce functional complexes. This is a challenging task, given that
the number of possible molecular interactions that disrupt function vastly
exceeds the number that preserves or enhances function. To overcome this
challenge, computational methods will be implemented to draw conclusions from
known protein and RNA sequence data. The results from this research should allow
us to predict the rules that lead to functional molecular interactions. In turn,
the discovered rules should reveal evolutionary insights of how history shaped
the function of such molecules and how new molecules could be engineered with
desired properties. The project will involve undergraduate and graduate students
in creating new tools to promote the understanding of biomolecules and their
functions. 3D printing technologies and interactive software will be developed
to engage general audiences in building and manipulating models of real
biological molecules. This kind of interactive, hands-on strategy is expected to
serve as an effective mechanism for teaching the fundamental principles of
biomolecular interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this research, tools from
different disciplines, including biological physics, information theory,
computational and evolutionary biology as well as sequencing technologies, will
be implemented to study evolutionary effects on molecular interactions. A key
approach is to develop novel evolutionary models that use statistical inference
to help unify properties of existing sequence-based models and at the same time
provide a framework to understand functional change and molecular design. The
premise is that incorporating epistatic contributions in a novel evolutionary
model might improve agreement with properties of natural sequences as well as
help engineer functional proteins outside of the extant set of family members.
The project will expand hypotheses for protein-protein interactions to those
between proteins and nucleic acids. Integrating sequencing technology and
computational approaches will enable inference of mutational landscapes of
protein-nucleotide recognition. The inferred landscapes will then be used to
develop a framework to predict and encode specific recognition, and the
predictions will be tested experimentally in relevant RNA- and DNA-binding
proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms and Molecular Biophysics Programs in the Division of Molecular
Biosciences in the Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.