* 1943807
* CAREER:  Machine Learning Enabled Study of Thermal Transport in Polycrystalline Materials from First Principles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Sangyeop Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The development of new materials with ultrahigh, ultralow, or anisotropic
thermal conductivity can potentially enable novel energy storage and conversion
devices, and effective thermal management of electronics. Grain boundaries,
which commonly exist in solid materials, significantly affect thermal transport,
and thus engineering grain boundaries is crucial in developing novel materials
of desired thermal properties. Due to challenges in obtaining experimental data
and limitations in simulation studies that rely on employing empirical
potentials, thermal transport across grain boundaries is not well understood.
The proposed research will develop a new multiscale simulation framework that
combines machine learning techniques and first-principles calculations. The new
framework has a high accuracy comparable to direct first-principles calculations
and is computationally feasible, enabling the discovery of the underlying
physics of thermal transport processes across grain boundaries. Several
educational activities are also proposed to increase public awareness,
particularly about how machine learning techniques transform the basic science
and engineering research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project
is to establish a quantitative understanding of thermal transport across various
types of grain boundaries with the high predictive power of first principles.
The new multiscale simulation framework has the potential to keep the
computational cost several orders-of-magnitude cheaper than the direct first-
principles calculation. This is made possible by integrating (i) machine
learning of interatomic potentials for local atomic potential landscape at ~ 1
nm scale, (ii) atomistic Green's function method for phonon scattering by grain
boundaries at 10 to 100 nm scale, and (ii) the Peierls-Boltzmann transport
theory for overall phonon transport at sub-mm scale. Using this new simulation
framework, this project will seek to obtain a conclusive understanding of phonon
transport in several practically relevant 2D and 3D semiconductor
polycrystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.