* 1943428
* CAREER: Predictive Estimation for Managing Water Distribution Systems and Applications of Distributed Sensing Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Polina Sela, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 522,992.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support decision-
making processes by water system managers to advance and promote intelligent and
resilient water systems. Water distribution systems are critical components of
our urban environments providing safe drinking water to our homes and
businesses. This research will develop computational methods and tools for using
data collected by new sensing devices placed throughout a water system’s
distribution network. These tools will better estimate current system’s
operation given current demands and necessary modifications given changing
demands and uncertain hazards. The primary impact of this research is to bridge
knowledge gaps toward intelligent water systems through dissemination of new
scientific tools, training future engineers, and integrating research into
education. This scientific research contributes to NSF’s mission to promote the
progress of science, to advance national welfare, and to secure public water
provisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has a research and education plan
that focuses on creating new models for predictive state estimation under
limited observability through parameter identification, uncertainty
quantification, and model reduction for large-scale intelligent water systems.
Research activities include: (1) creating new state estimation models that
seamlessly integrate heterogeneous measurements from distributed sensing
devices; (2) generating flexible alternatives for reducing the dimensionality of
the state estimation and uncertainty propagation problems by reducing the
hydraulic models through structured elimination of nodes, demand aggregation,
and identification of influential parameters; (3) creating new sensor placement
strategies for best selection and location of heterogeneous metering instruments
providing maximal information gain; and (4) estimating prediction bounds and
quantifying prediction sensitivity to measurement, demand, and topology
uncertainties. Outreach activities include stakeholders’ workshop that will
engage water utilities and local agencies, tech and consulting companies to
identify and present practical solutions for technology adoption; open-source
toolkit and repository for reproducibility and dissemination of research
outcomes and technical workshop for training future engineers in advanced
modeling tools and increasing minority participation; battle of algorithms for
sensor networks for state estimation as a mechanism to challenge and train
researchers, create and share new scientific tools; water competition to get
young people excited about engineering through fun, hands-on activity; and
revamping engineering curriculum to adapt to the advances in sensing and
computational technologies and integrate research into
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.