* 1943695
* CAREER: Programmable synthetic microbial consortia for complex multicellular functions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Lauren Andrews, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2025
* USD 589,060.00

Engineered mixed cell populations have potential application in
biomanufacturing, cell-based therapies, and diagnostics. Bacterial metabolism is
a highly reactive network, and different reactions occur at different times.
They are turned on and off by signals generated internally and externally. In
this way the cell can make effective decisions regarding the flow of carbon
sources and other materials through specific reaction pathways. Attempts to
engineer cell populations have not achieved comparable control. This project
will focus on developing a protocol for the design of control systems for
mixtures of microbes. The protocol will guide the construction of genetic
components that can help implement the control system. These components will be
evaluated in a variety of organisms. A core objective of this project is to
educate and mentor a diverse future workforce. Programs for K-12 STEM education
and to broaden research opportunities for underrepresented groups will be
developed and implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Similar to naturally-occurring
dynamic pathway expression, computational dynamic metabolic modeling predicts
optimized bioproduction by discrete metabolic states and temporal enzyme
activation. This has not been achievable within bioproduction microbial
consortia. The goal of the proposed research is to establish a generalizable
platform for the automated design of bacterial consortia. Users will be able to
dynamically control metabolism and specify coordinated multicellular responses
to user-defined temporal signals. This project will develop genetic circuit
components and a circuit design algorithm for partitioning sequential logic
circuits within engineered bacterial communities, and identify design principles
for biological sequential logic programming in synthetic microbial consortia.
The proposed research will produce circuit components that are compatible with
automated design algorithms and physical plasmids for bacterial intercellular
signaling. This will enable researchers to utilize off-the-shelf parts for a
priori design of multicellular genetic circuits that implement temporal
transcription control in microbial consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.