* 1943925
* CAREER: Applications of equivariant  homotopy theory to manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Mona Merling, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2025
* USD 355,234.00

A powerful idea in many areas of mathematics has been that of studying a
geometric object such as a polygon by associating it with an algebraic
invariant, for example a number that does not change under continuous
deformation. An early instance of this is Euler who noted that for a polygonal
surface the number of vertices minus edges plus faces is always two, which
allowed him to prove that there are only five platonic solids. In the 1920s,
Emmy Noether shifted the focus from numerical invariants to the algebraic
structures underlying them, such as sets with algebraic operations. In Homotopy
Theory, the focus is extended further to more advanced mathematical notions of
infinite-dimensional spaces whose number of connected components recover the
underlying numerical invariant. The projects funded by this CAREER award aim to
lift classical algebraic invariants of geometric objects to the higher
homotopical world and study them from this richer perspective. The educational
part of the project consists in expanding access to mathematics not only within
the academic world via conferences, but also beyond the usual academic settings
to incarcerated individuals: the PI will introduce and teach an inquiry-based
learning college level mathematics elective in the B.A. program offered at South
Woods Prison. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal of the project is
to use new results in equivariant stable homotopy theory to study manifolds with
group actions and their equivariant diffeomorphisms. Stable homotopy theory, the
study of spectra, has played a crucial role in the longstanding program to
classify manifolds; however, the classification of G-manifolds for a group G is
far less understood than the classical nonequivariant story. Building in part on
prior work of the PI on equivariant algebraic K-theory and her collaborative
foundational work on equivariant infinite loop space theory, the machinery that
turns suitable G-categories into G-spectra, the PI and Malkiewich were have
built an equivariant generalization of Waldhausen's algebraic K-theory of
spaces. Inspired by Goodwillie’s vision, they conjecture that, for a compact
smooth G-manifold M, equivariant A-theory splits off a stable space of
equivariant h-cobordisms. This project involves a significant extension of these
efforts focused on proving this conjecture and exploiting it to further our
understanding of equivariant h-cobordisms and diffeomorphisms of G-manifolds.
The second research goal is to apply stable homotopy techniques to study
classical invariants by deriving these, i.e., lifting them to spectra. The PI
will pursue two projects of this flavor. First, together with Malkiewich and
Moi, the PI will study a derived version of the classical character map from
representation theory that they have defined. The second, which is a project
that the PI is co-leading with Rovi for the Women in Topology Workshop, is to
apply and extend recent work of Zakharevich and Campbell on scissors congruence
K-theory spectra to manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.