* 1943224
* CAREER: Investigating the Impact of Device Aging on the Security of Cryptographic Chips
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Naghmeh Karimi, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2025
* USD 291,706.00

Cryptographic chips implement cryptographic functions in hardware for better
performance. Despite the significant performance benefits, cryptographic chips
can be compromised by the adversaries via monitoring their power-consumption,
tampering their logic or placing the chips under stress to generate erroneous
outputs to infer sensitive data. The current protections against such attacks do
not consider aging of the devices that can cause parametric shift of device
parameters over time. Device aging may potentially compromise device security.
This project will investigate the the effects of device aging on the security of
cryptographic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
understand the aging-related risks that compromise security of cryptographic
devices, particularly those with protection against physical attacks and develop
solutions to ensure security when device aging comes into account. This project
will focus on the following threats and investigate how aging can affect them:
(i) The state-of-the-art side-channel analysis attacks; (ii) The state-of-the-
art fault-injection attacks; and (iii) Hardware Trojans whose activation can be
facilitated/hardened due to aging. It will target the shortcomings of these
schemes and develop aging-resilient countermeasures to circumvent side-channel
and fault-injection attacks. This project will also investigate aging-aware
Trojan detection solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project
will enable the development of long-lasting security for trusted hardware
platforms, and result in aging-resistant security solutions that benefit the
society via devices that remain secure over their lifetime. To attract graduate,
undergraduate, and underrepresented students to hardware security and
cryptography research and education, this project will develop a new course on
cryptography, hardware security, and testing. Tutorials will be conducted and
internships on hardware security will be offered to undergraduate students. This
project will also seek to attract underrepresented minorities. Lectures on
hardware security will be organized for Cristo Rey Jesuit high-school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project repository will be stored electronically and
made available through the website hosted by the University of Maryland
Baltimore County, department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
(https://www.csee.umbc.edu/~nkarimi/). The data will be retained for a period of
at least five years following the end of the grant
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.