* 1943120
* CAREER: Understanding the function and regulation of amino acid transporters in plant innate immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Cristian Danna, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2025
* USD 840,237.00

Plants are remarkably resilient organisms that perceive and adaptively respond
to challenges, including a broad range of microbes that constantly attempt to
use the resources they hold. Understanding how plants achieve long-lasting and
broad-range resistance to microbial infection promises to reveal new ways to
enhance resistance to microbial disease in crops as well as in ecologically
important plant species, a critical challenge in view of the projected 9 billion
people that will need food and healthy habitats by the year 2050. The current
research aims to understand how plants respond to microbial invaders to restrict
infections. Bacterial microbes that multiply in the interstitial space of the
leaf obtain all the metabolites and nutrients that they need from their plant
hosts. Thus, understanding how plants regulate the composition of the leaf
interstitial space will allow for a broader understanding – and potential
discovery – of way that plants resist infection. In addition, the research
proposed will provide K-12 teachers-in-training with research experience,
thereby fostering long-term research collaborations to extend from the
University to Virginia to area public schools. Through this, the research
presented will expose hundreds of high-school students to inquiry-based, open-
ended experimentation that promotes high-order thinking skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although a small number of well-adapted microbial species
are able to infect target plant species and cause disease, most plants are
resistant to most pathogens. This broad-spectrum resistance is in part
attributed to the perception of Microbe-Associated Molecular Patterns (MAMPs)
and the subsequent elicitation of MAMP-Triggered Immunity (MTI) that suppresses
microbial growth. While the MAMP-activated plant signaling programs are
increasingly well understood, the mechanisms by which plants restrict microbial
growth remain elusive. PI Danna discovered that MTI leads to changes in the
concentrations of amino acids (AAs) in the leaf apoplast that alter bacterial
growth. The PI’s research focuses on understanding how AAs transporters (AATs)
modify AA concentrations that restrict of P. syringae’s growth in Arabidopsis.
Part of this response is coordinated by salicylic acid (SA) mediated
transcriptional regulation of AATs. The PI hypothesizes that: 1) AATs alter the
concentration of AAs in the leaf apoplasm during MTI, and 2) SA coordinates AATs
expression and/or activity during MTI. The proposed experiments aim to: 1)
Biochemically and spatio-temporally characterize the AATs that contribute to
MTI; 2) Investigate the role of SA in the regulation of AATs; 3) Assess the role
of AATs in modulating P. syringae’s growth. The PI’s long-term research goal is
to understand the mechanisms that provide plants with long lasting resistance to
infections. The PI’s long-term educational goal is to improve K-12 STEM
education through providing cutting-edge research training and fostering long-
term collaborations with pre-service science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.