* 1943985
* CAREER: Enhancing Environmental and Economic Sustainability of Additive Manufacturing-based Remanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Yisha Xiang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2022
* USD 508,805.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will contribute to the
advancement of national prosperity and economic welfare by enhancing the
environmental and economic sustainability of additive manufacturing-based
remanufacturing. Additive manufacturing methods comprise such processes as
welding, plating and surface reconstruction, as well as 3-D printing.
Remanufacturing has emerged as a critical element for realizing a sustainable
manufacturing industry in the past decade. Recent progress in additive
manufacturing (AM) provides enhanced capabilities for remanufacturing that
cannot be achieved with traditional manufacturing processes. However,
remanufacturing with AM (RwAM) is accompanied by challenges to ensure that
supply chains supporting RwAM operate effectively and economically. Current RwAM
practices mainly concern end-of-life products, many of which are no longer
remanufacturable due to severe damage. Large uncertainties in environmental
impacts are often ignored when determining whether it is worth remanufacturing,
resulting in the robustness of the decisions in question. This project will
investigate methods to support proactive maintenance to avoid catastrophic, end-
of-life failures. Educational opportunities for students, including outreach to
underrepresented minorities, are supported by the award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award aims to improve the environmental and economic
sustainability of RwAM by innovative proactive remanufacturing and resource-
sharing. Three specific objectives are pursued: (1) assess and predict the
damage condition of a post-RwAM product through data-driven and physics-based
models to capture the inherent latent damage process evolution; (2) develop a
distributionally-robust proactive RwAM decision framework to hedge against large
uncertainties in environmental impacts; (3) create a novel RwAM resource-sharing
system based on two-sided matching models to match the unused RwAM resources
with demand and examine the impact of flexibility in the RwAM resource-sharing
system. Successful development of these models will lead to fundamentally new
perspectives on RwAM and accelerate its expansion. The education and outreach
plan supports hands-on activities with 3D printers at the university and to
rural areas of the state through a traveling
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.