* 1943730
* CAREER: The Intersection of Spatial Statistics and Differential Privacy
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Harrison Quick, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2025
* USD 337,544.00

This CAREER award will develop methods for generating high-quality, spatially
referenced public-use data while addressing data confidentiality concerns.
Access to high-quality public-use data is critical for many research
disciplines. However, analyses of fine-scale geographic regions with small
population sizes (e.g., census tracts) often yield statistically unreliable
inference. Small areas also may contain few study participants, thus increasing
the risk of disclosure of sensitive information about a participant, such as an
individual's disease or employment status. This project will create a unifying
framework between the formal privacy literature and the spatial statistics
literature that gives equal weight to privacy considerations and the utility of
the resulting data. The results of this research will be of value both to
academic researchers and staff at the Federal statistical agencies. The
investigator will collaborate with researchers at the Centers of Disease Control
and Prevention and the National Center for Health Statistics. Workshops and
short courses will be developed by the investigator on spatial statistics and
data privacy for staff at the Federal statistical agencies. The project also
will create undergraduate research opportunities in Bayesian inference and
statistical computing and provide educational opportunities related to spatial
statistics and data privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
Bayesian statistical methods for generating spatially referenced synthetic data
that achieve or exceed the privacy protections currently implemented by U.S.
Federal statistical agencies. Small area estimation methods from the spatial
statistics literature provide a framework to leverage complex dependencies in
the data to improve the precision of an estimate. Emerging methods from the data
privacy literature may be used to mask or otherwise conceal information from
these areas to protect the privacy guarantees made to the data subjects in
exchange for their participation. Taken together, these two approaches present
an analytic tension between providing accurate and reliable local estimates and
the need to obscure detailed linkage between small area estimates and the data
subjects residing therein. This project will tackle the following issues. First,
the project will devise a statistical framework for producing massive,
differentially private public-use data repositories comprised of spatially
referenced synthetic aggregate count data. A key aspect of this work will be to
strike a balance between computational efficiency and data utility. Second, the
project will establish criteria for synthetic data from a broad class of spatial
models to satisfy formal privacy protections. The result of this work will be
methods that provide substantial gains in utility and help combine the tasks of
data analysis and the generation of synthetic data to avoid
redundancies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.