* 1943870
* CAREER: Understanding the Role of Cu-Containing Secondary Phase Particles in Enhancing the Resistance to the Environmental Acceleration to Fatigue in Age-Hardenable Al Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Jenifer Locke, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2025
* USD 427,611.00

Non-Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;In order to address the existential crisis of
global climate change and our aging infrastructure, dramatically improving the
sustainable use of metals utilized in our infrastructure (examples include
aluminum used for aircraft, automobiles, and bridges and steels used for ships,
automobiles, bridges, and nuclear waste storage) is required. A major problem
when considering the sustainable use of metals is environmental degradation
through corrosion processes and the need for engineers educated in both
environmental degradation (specifically corrosion and related cracking) and
materials science. In everyday life, corrosion is most easily seen as rust; but
in aging infrastructure it can go unseen and cause catastrophic failures that
severely limit sustainable long-term use of engineered metal structures. This
research pushes to understand why some aluminum based metals have inherently
better resistance to the environmental acceleration of cracking and associated
failures than others. Knowledge that could be utilized to improve the
performance and the long term sustainable use of metals that have lower
environmental resistance to cracking. Through these research endeavors, a
graduate student and 5 years of REU (Research Experience of Undergraduates) and
RET (Research Experience for Teachers) participants are being introduced to and
trained in corrosion and materials science. Additionally, a wide range of
students and future engineers are being exposed to materials science and
corrosion as the research team develops corrosion related demos and social media
videos. Finally, this research is establishing bonds between the PI’s research
lab at The Ohio State University, a local Columbus K-12 school, and an education
focused university in Ohio, Wittenberg University, which will go far beyond the
short-term goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;Corrosion
and environment assisted cracking (EAC) play critical roles in sustainability.
Research and education in corrosion and EAC is critical to ensuring our society
addresses the sustainable use of metals to save energy and reduce consumption.
Research has established that some age-hardenable aluminum alloys have better
resistance to EAC than others, but an underlying mechanism for this has yet to
be confirmed. Specifically, Al-Cu based Al alloys are inherently more resistant
to the environmental acceleration of fatigue crack growth than Al-Zn based Al
alloys. This research tests the hypothesis that age-hardenable Al alloys with
metallurgical secondary phases that promote Cu re-depostion during corrosion
(Al-Cu based Al alloys) have an intrinsic resistance to the environmental
acceleration to fatigue crack growth as a result of crack wake surface Cu
enrichment catalyzing cathodic reaction(s) within the crack environment. This
self-mitigates the adverse acidic environment established to drive EAC in 7xxx
age-hardenable Al alloys, which are of higher susceptibility. The less acidic
crack solution pH reduces environmental sensitivity and corrosion fatigue
susceptibility by reducing crack tip H uptake through the stabilization of a
crack tip passive film. The following approaches are being used to test this
hypothesis. First, fracture mechanics approaches are being utilized to probe
corrosion fatigue sensitivity of Al alloys with specific Zn, Mg, and Cu
concentrations as a function of fatigue loading frequency and load waveform. In
addition, near crack tip pH is being directly probed utilizing mini-flexible pH
electrodes inserted into the fracture mechanics samples. Finally, crack tip pH
is being altered to either promote or mitigate corrosion fatigue as a final
confirmation. This research is being performed by a team that includes the
principal investigator, a sponsored graduate student, and RET and REU
participants with the goal of training and engaging a diverse team throughout
the research program. Together this research team is also collaboratively
developing corrosion related materials science demos that will be deployed at
the REU’s and RET’s home institutions and in the Introduction to Materials
Science course at The Ohio State University. Social media videos are also being
created to showcase the developed demos and the diverse research team with the
mission of educating on the science of corrosion and how it impacts
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.