* 1943305
* CAREER: Automated, Portable, and Effective Application Guidance for Complex Memory Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Michael Jantz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 05/31/2025
* USD 340,308.00

Computer systems with multiple tiers of heterogeneous memory devices with
different performance and different capabilities have begun to emerge.
Conventional data management strategies will need to be altered to take
advantage of the different types of memory in each tier, but doing so faces a
number of challenges. The primary goal of this project is to develop software
systems and tools that enable better performance and efficiency for emerging
memory systems while also reducing barriers that could limit their adoption.
This research will develop insights into how to collect and analyze memory
behavior, how typical computer applications use memory resources, and how
systems with complex memory hardware should manage application data. This will
allow other researchers to create and explore new techniques to manage memory
more effectively, and has the potential to significantly improve both
performance and energy efficiency in these emerging systems. Additionally, this
work promises to generate new knowledge in the areas of static analysis, program
profiling, and feedback-directed optimization for the purposes of predicting and
guiding memory management. The results of this research will also be integrated
into undergraduate and graduate coursework to advance curriculum and student
knowledge of the latest software systems and memory technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key concept driving this research is that the
distribution and usage of memory resources depend upon activities that occur in
different layers of the vertical execution stack, including the applications,
operating system, and hardware. By increasing coordination among these
activities, this research will reduce inefficiencies that arise from making data
management decisions with limited information and enable fine-grained, flexible,
and efficient data management. To achieve this objective, a collaborative data
management framework will be created where: 1) the application runtime will use
automated program profiling and analysis to partition data objects into separate
heap regions according to their expected usage behavior and will convey this
information to the OS, and 2) the OS will incorporate and use this information
to direct physical memory allocation and recycling across the memory tier
hierarchy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the generated data, code, and results
related to this project will be made available through public git repositories.
Links to the relevant repositories will be posted on the PIâ€™s website:
http://web.eecs.utk.edu/~mrjantz/software.html. All code and data related to the
project will be stored and archived using the central file system at the
University of Tennessee. This system is backed up regularly on-site following a
defined schedule and continuously mirrored off-site. Project data will be
maintained and made available throughout the duration of the project and for at
least five years beyond the end date of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.