* 1943302
* CAREER: Nano-Plasmon Ruler Imaging for Direct Visualization of How Cells "Talk"
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Pengyu Chen, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 05/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The immune system consists of many types of cells that defend the body against
disease. Measuring how these immune cells communicate with each other is
important for understanding immune response. Currently, there are no available
tools that can measure and track chemical signals secreted by immune cells in
real-time. The proposed research will address this challenge by establishing an
imaging system based on engineered nanomaterials. The investigators supported by
this award will develop a novel biosensor to directly study how immune cells
“talk” to each other via chemical signals. The new knowledge gained by this
project in immune communication will help advance immune disease screening and
diagnosis technologies. New education experiences developed as part of this
award will train K-12, undergraduate and graduate students about bioengineering
and nanotechnology. Learning activities and public events will be performed to
increase the public interests in material science and
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intercellular biochemical communication
occurs via cell-secreted signaling molecules. Communication between immune cells
is complex and transient. Measuring the timing and spatial distribution of
signaling events is critical to understanding immune response; however, current
methodologies are limited, measuring target biomarkers under static and quasi-
static conditions. The goal of this NSF CAREER project is to understand immune
cytokine communication via direct real-time mapping of multiple cytokine
secretion from individual immune cells. To accomplish this, a gold nano-particle
and DNA aptamer based nanoplasmon ruler biosensor will be developed. Parameters
governing the physiochemical properties and assembly of required nanomaterials
will be explored and guide the fabrication of the sensor. Model T-cell lines
will be co-cultured with model dendritic cells, B lymphocytes, and neutrophils
and cross-talk between cell pairs will be directly imaged following stimulation
of cytokine release.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.