* 1943351
* CAREER: A Holistic Context-based Approach for Security and Privacy in the Era of Ubiquitous Sensing and Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Murtuza Jadliwala, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2025
* USD 395,839.00

The phenomenal growth of ubiquitous sensing and computing devices such as
smartphones, wearables and Internet-of-Things (IoT) enable exciting new
applications that significantly improve the health, wellness, security and
quality of life of our citizens. Sensors and actuators on-board these devices,
however, can also be exploited to infer sensitive information about users or to
compromise their safety and cyber security. Continued progress in sensor
hardware, cloud and software (including, machine learning) technologies have
caused new threats to emerge which current access control models and protection
mechanisms are unable to address. One critical shortcoming of existing
protection mechanisms is that they do not work across different types of
sensors, applications and autonomous devices housing these sensors and
applications. As applications on these devices operate in an isolated fashion,
they are generally unaware of the holistic contextual information about users,
often resulting in grave privacy threats. This project develops a new approach
to expose and harness user context at multiple operational levels to protect
against uncoordinated and unregulated sensing and actuation in mobile and IoT
applications. The project's educational agenda is to develop a well-integrated
and hands-on curriculum in mobile and IoT security and through community-focused
educational summer camps, courses and training initiatives expose the curriculum
to a diverse set of students and practitioners with varying skill-levels and
backgrounds including San Antonio, TX area high school students, teachers,
soldiers and veterans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to uncover new
security and privacy risks in modern ubiquitous sensing and computing
environments comprising of functionally heterogeneous and isolated sensors and
applications and evaluate their feasibility in practical settings. To enable
secure and privacy-preserving sensor access by applications, the project will
design a novel framework that exposes and harnesses contextual information about
users both at the device and network levels for achieving fine-grained and user-
approved access control. The first design, called ConWare, will harness the
exposed user context at the device level by defining user-approved access
bindings between these contexts and the set of allowable sensing actions on that
device within those contexts. The second design, called ConWareNet, will harness
the exposed user context at the communication network level to regulate
applications across an autonomous set of devices using similar user-approved
bindings or policies. The project will also address the issue of preventing
misuse of the exposed context and will design adaptation mechanisms for these
frameworks to self-adjust in a dynamic sensing and actuation
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.