* 1943937
* CAREER: Evaluating the distribution of bubble nuclei for acoustic cavitation in tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Julianna Simon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2025
* USD 546,050.00

A major concern in every ultrasound application, such as fetal imaging, is
acoustic cavitation (the creation, oscillation, and collapse of bubbles in an
ultrasound field) because bubbles can damage tissues. In clinical ultrasound
imagers, the risk is lessoned by requiring machines to display the mechanical
index, which is a measure of the likelihood of cavitation. Yet therapeutic
applications of ultrasound make use of acoustic cavitation to break kidney
stones or destroy cancerous tissues. Acoustic cavitation arises from nucleation
of bubbles, but no one understands what constitutes a bubble nucleus in human
tissues and how these bubble nuclei might be influenced by certain diseases that
deposit minerals in tissues. Thus, the overall goals of the project are to
understand what constitutes a bubble nucleus in healthy tissues and to develop
ultrasound to sensitively detect changes in bubble nuclei that occur when
minerals are deposited in tissues. This research will provide a basis for
developing an interactive classroom activity kit specifically designed to
enhance the scientific interest and literacy of children, as well as educate
graduate students from all disciplines on scientific communication and outreach,
thereby increasing the societal impact of this work beyond what one scientist or
lab can do on their own.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Investigator’s long-term
career goal is to become a leader in bubble nucleation and acoustic cavitation
in biological tissues. Toward this goal, the goal of this CAREER project is to
improve the safety of diagnostic and therapeutic ultrasound by determining where
bubble nuclei exist in tissues for acoustic cavitation. Using a combination of
experimentation and modeling, the Research Plan is organized under three
objectives. The FIRST Objective is to evaluate the distribution of bubble nuclei
that can undergo acoustic cavitation in healthy biological structures (rat
skeletal muscle, hepatocyte, and mammary cells) with varying hydrophobicity and
mechanical properties. Studies are designed to test the hypothesis that acoustic
cavitation will occur predominantly extracellularly, with increased acoustic
cavitation occurring in a mechanically malleable extracellular matrix. Expected
results include: 1) identification of whether bubble nuclei exist predominantly
intracellularly or extracellularly in 2D and 3D cell culture; 2) evaluation of
the effects of mechanical properties in collagen gels and decellularized
extracellular matrix on the distribution of bubble nuclei; and 3) an improved
metric for the likelihood of cavitation based on a bubble dynamics and fracture
model. The SECOND Objective is to determine the effect of biomineralization on
the distribution of bubble nuclei for diseases including atherosclerosis
(cholesterol crystals), gout (uric acid crystals), heterotopic ossification
(calcium phosphate) and breast microcalcifications (calcium oxalate). Studies
are designed to test the hypothesis that all forms of pathological
biomineralization will have stabilized crevice microbubbles isolated to the
surface of the minerals. Expected results include: 1) an understanding of the
distribution of bubble nuclei on lab-grown crystals; 2) an evaluation of the
effects of surface tension on the distribution of bubble nuclei in lab-grown
crystals; and 3) a determination of how the mineral deposition by cells in
pathological biomineralization influence the distribution of bubble nuclei. The
THIRD Objective is to develop the color Doppler ultrasound twinkling artifact
for sensitive detection of mineral deposition through acoustic cavitation. The
distribution of bubble nuclei in healthy and mineralized tissues from the first
two objectives will be leveraged to improve the color Doppler ultrasound
twinkling artifact for detection of all forms of mineralization including gout,
atherosclerosis, heterotopic ossifications, breast microcalcifications and
kidney stones. Studies are designed to test the hypothesis that crystal
composition and the surrounding environment will influence the Doppler imaging
protocols for optimal detection of each form of pathological biomineralization.
Expected results include: 1) Doppler imaging protocols to enhance twinkling
specific to each identified form of pathological biomineralization and 2)
prediction of the crystal composition from the raw Doppler ultrasound signals.
The results from this fundamental research will provide the first connection
between all forms of pathological biomineralization – namely that stabilized
crevice microbubbles are present after mineralization occurs and may even cause
cells to revert to the diseased or mineral-depositing
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.