* 1943368
* CAREER: Secure, Resilient, and Risk-Aware Multi-Robot Coordination
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Pratap Tokekar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 01/31/2025
* USD 548,806.00

The overarching goal of this project is to make multi-robot systems operate
reliably in real-world conditions. Most current multi-robot systems are
"brittle" since the failure of a single robot may bring the whole team down.
Cyber-attacks that incapacitate robots or compromise their sensors are becoming
increasingly realistic. This project will focus on multi-robot coordination in
scenarios where the robots operate in failure-prone or adversarial environments.
The key question that the project will address is how can a team of robots
carefully coordinate and adapt their actions to make them resilient to failures.
The outcomes of this project will be a significant step towards the overarching
vision of persistent and reliable autonomous operations in real-world
conditions. These research activities will go hand-in-hand with educational and
outreach activities that will integrate real-world examples of multi-robot
coordination in precision agriculture and environmental monitoring to train the
next generation of engineers in multi-disciplinary thinking. To broaden
participation from underrepresented minorities, the project will develop a new
hands-on robot programming summer camp for middle-school students. To ensure
broad applicability, middle-school teachers will be trained in this workshop
with the goal of them incorporating the technical activities in their
classrooms. The investigator will develop a new course on multi-robot
coordination and mentor undergraduate/graduate students, who are the future
faculty, to create and lead a new design-oriented course through the Student
Initiated Courses program. Dissemination of our findings will be achieved
through workshops, articles geared toward broader audiences, and community
outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main intellectual contributions of
this project are in the introduction of a novel class of problems and
development of new algorithms and theoretical limits for multi-robot
coordination in adversarial and uncertain settings. The underlying framework
will be based on submodular optimization which is an often-used technique in
multi-robot coordination. Existing works that use submodular optimization for
coordination typically assume that the function value can be computed exactly.
The key contribution of this project will be to relax this assumption which
leads to a wide variety of research problems that will be investigated. Broadly
speaking, three classes of problems will be investigated: devising offline
coordinated deployments that are secure against adversarial attacks; devising
online, adaptive strategies that are resilient to real-time failures and
attacks; and devising online and offline plans that take into account novel
measures of risk in stochastic submodular optimization. Various versions of the
problem such as: distributed and scalable; richer attack models particularly for
distributed networks; and richer utility functions particularly those using deep
neural networks, will be investigated. The project seeks to devise algorithms
with constant factor approximation and constant competitive ratio
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.