* 1943798
* CAREER: Engineering Stem Cell-Based Cardiac Organoids
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Zhen Ma, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 03/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), cells that have the ability to
become any cell type, have provided an unprecedented opportunity to study human-
specific tissue and organ development. By differentiating hiPSCs into organ-
specific cell types, micro/mini tissues, termed organoids, can be developed to
have many of the characteristics of the organ of interest. These stem cell-based
organoids have been hypothesized to develop in a manner similar to actual organs
in an embryo. However, one of the challenges of current 3D organoid technology
is lack of spatial physical controls to promote spatial tissue patterning in
these self-assembled organoids, which often appear to have a random distribution
of cells. This CAREER project seeks to control hiPSC growth and differentiation
under geometrical confinement in order to generate beating cardiac organoids
with spatially distinct tissue architecture. This cardiac organoid system could
provide insights about how physical cues regulate the structural, functional and
cellular properties of stem cell organoids. The project aims to synergize the
educational mission with the research program to increase the opportunities for
students at different levels to participate in interdisciplinary research at the
interface of stem cell biology and microsystem engineering. Furthermore, the
project is dedicated to community outreach to the area surrounding the Central
New York Region, which is demonstrated by plans to develop and donate an
exhibit, “The Superpower of Stem Cells,” to the Syracuse Milton J. Rubenstein
Museum of Science &amp; Technology (MOST).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator’s long-term research goal is to gain in-depth mechanistic
understanding of the role of biophysical factors in human heart development and
diseases. Towards this goal, the goal of this CAREER project is to engineer a
cardiac organoid system with mechano-geometrical inputs to establish a basis for
understanding how biophysical cues, particularly physical confinement, affect
organoid formation, tissue functionality, and spatial cell differentiation. The
Research Plan is organized under three objectives. The FIRST Objective is to
investigate the influence of biophysical cues on regulating the structural
morphology and contractile functions of cardiac organoids. To create the
organoids, hiPSCs will be seeded onto PEG patterned substrata, expanded to near
confluence on the individual patterns, and then differentiated into cardiac
lineages. To investigate how physical confinement affects cardiac organoid
formation and functions, hiPSCs will be seeded into circle-shaped patterns with
different diameters to emphasize size differences, and triangle, square, and
rectangular shaped patterns with the same geometrical areas as the circles to
emphasize shape differences. The organoids will be characterized relative to
their contractile function (contractile motion, action potential, calcium
transport and heart rate) and structural morphology (wellness, height and
width). These characterizations will be used to establish the correlation
between organoid structure and cardiac functions, and to study how structure-
function relationship will be shifted by the changes on pattern geometry (size
and shape). Objective outcomes are expected to enable determination of the
optimal physical confinement that might create cardiac organoids with the
highest consistency in morphology. THE SECOND Objective is to investigate the
influence of biophysical cues on regulating the cellular composition of cardiac
organoids, particularly cardiomyocytes (CMs), cardiac fibroblasts (CFs),
endocardial cells (EDCs), smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and epicardial cells
(EPCs). Cardiac organoids will be differentiated under different pattern
geometries with additional differentiation protocols with different cytokines
(e.g., VEGF,, retinoic acid (RA) and BMP4)to promote co-differentiation into
multiple cardiac-specific lineages. Assessment of the spatial distribution and
percentile of the different cell types will enable exploration of how physical
confinement interplays with biochemical factors for effective co-differentiation
into spatial- organized cardiac organoids with controlled multicellular
composition. Expectations are that small pattern geometry will favor the
differentiation of stromal cell populations (e.g. CFs, EDs, EPs), while larger
pattern geometry will favor the differentiation of muscle cell populations (e.g.
CMs, SMCs). The THIRD Objective is to investigate the molecular mechanisms of
spatial organization of cardiac organoid associated with the signaling pathways
of mechanotransduction and cardiac development. Studies are designed to test the
hypothesis that physical confinement will enhance RhoA/ROCK activity, which
regulates the nucleocytoplamic shuttling of YAP/TAZ, and nuclear retention of
YAP/TAZ in the cells at the pattern perimeter will inhibit endogenous WNT
signaling during mesoderm induction, which eventually leads to the spatial
differentiation on the micropatterned hiPSC colonies. In summary, research
outcomes are expected to: 1) create of an in vitro cardiac organoid model with
mechano-geometrical inputs; 2) provide knowledge on the effects of biophysical
cues on controlling cardiac cell specification; and 3) provide mechanistic
insights into developmental mechanobiology relevant to cardiac tissue
morphogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.