* 1943583
* CAREER: Water movement in leaves and roots of C3 and C4 grasses: mechanisms, coordination and impact on whole plant growth during soil and atmospheric drought
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Christine Scoffoni, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2025
* USD 805,743.00

Two major challenges in plant sciences are to understand the mechanisms leading
to the decline in plant growth during drought and pinpoint traits that enable
some plants to be more drought resistant than others. Identifying these traits
can help inform crop breeders in the development of drought tolerant crops.
Research addressing these challenges is needed for grasses, which dominate about
40% of terrestrial surfaces and include some of the most important crops, such
as cereals and forage grasses. Grasses are particularly interesting as they
exhibit unique diversity in their photosynthetic machinery, and it remains
unclear how this diversity relates to differences in plant water movement during
soil and atmospheric drought. The goal of this research is to unravel the
specific mechanisms which lead photosynthetically diverse crop grasses to
decline in growth during drought and how they recover upon re-watering. This
work will focus on disentangling the root and leaf responses of diverse grasses
during soil and atmospheric drought using cutting-edge imaging techniques, new
physiological approaches and modelling. The project will integrate a plan of
research and education at a minority-serving undergraduate institution in East
Los Angelesâ€” one of the largest concentrations of ethnic minority groups in the
nation. Research-like modules integrated throughout the undergraduate curriculum
will expose 240 students/year to experimental design and critical thinking in
plant sciences. Outreach activities led by undergraduate students will help
inspire students at underserved schools of East Los Angeles into higher
education and plant sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
rigorously test mechanisms underlying the coordination in leaf and root
hydraulic conductance of C3 and C4 grasses during soil and atmospheric drought
and subsequent recovery. Three specific objectives will be carried out: (1)
Determine the coordination in leaf and root hydraulic decline with stomatal
conductance during dehydration and the underlying mechanisms leading to their
decline; (2) Quantify the effects of grass vein anatomy and biochemistry on leaf
and root hydraulic conductance during dehydration and rehydration using rice
mutants; (3) Achieve a new integrated understanding of the effects of soil and
atmospheric drought on leaf and root hydraulic conductance and their impact on
plant growth. To carry out these objectives, a large suite of physiological and
anatomical traits including leaf and root hydraulics and gas exchange and
cutting-edge imaging techniques will be performed on 12 diverse C3 and C4
grasses, and 11 rice aquaporin and vein mutants and their wild type growing in a
greenhouse under different soil and atmospheric drought conditions. Simulations
using spatially-explicit and whole plant modelling will be employed to test the
causality behind specific hypotheses. This work will create new concepts and
essential data to help improve predictive models of plant growth and responses
to climate change. The educational plan will help transform the experience of
students at CSULA, a minority serving institution, through research-infused
lectures, a Course Undergraduate Research Experience and student-led outreach
activities at local underserved schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.