* 1943138
* CAREER: Sensitivity Analysis in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Matthew Masten, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2025
* USD 424,082.00

Economists use data and theory to perform two key tasks for improving national
welfare: they evaluate the performance of existing public policies and predict
the outcomes of newly proposed policies. These evaluations and predictions often
rely on behavioral assumptions which are difficult or impossible to verify with
data. Researchers use many approaches to assess the importance of these
assumptions, but many of these approaches have serious problems which are not
widely understood. This CAREER research project will develop new and better
tools to allow researchers to test whether underlying assumptions are correct
and therefore improve the accuracy of predictions and policy evaluations. The
research consists of three projects that focus on measuring inappropriate
assumptions, how to deal with models that are known to be false, and building a
set of toolkits to test whether research results significantly change when the
underlying assumptions change. The research project will create a series of
publicly available videos and software to ensure that the new methods are widely
disseminated, understood, and used by practitioners. The results of this
research project will improve economic and other policy decision making as it
improves the quality of prediction and policy evaluation. In so doing, it
significantly contributes to economic growth and living standards of US
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research project advances the
literature on sensitivity analysis as it builds a set of tools used to assess
the robustness of empirical research and policy evaluation. The research project
has three components designed to improve on current methods. In the first
project, the PI will study ways for researchers to measure and calibrate
violations of assumptions. Specifically, this project will address which form of
assumption violations should researchers be worried about, and how researchers
can tell when these violations are large. The second project will study how to
deal with models which are known to be false because they usually fail
overidentification test, a common occurrence in structural models. The third
project will develop general tools for doing sensitivity analyses in a wide
variety of models. Together, these projects will help make the practice of
sensitivity analysis more robust, thus improving the quality of empirical
analysis throughout economics and the social sciences more broadly. The results
of this research project will decision making, hence improve the living
standards of Americans as well as establish the US as the global leader
evaluation models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.