* 1943105
* CAREER: Flow Control with Cellular Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Mitul Luhar, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Examples of cellular materials include spongy bone, plant stems and leaves, as
well as aquatic corals. Natural cellular materials are often multi-functional
and demonstrate unique physical properties such as low density, high strength
and stiffness, and the ability to regulate fluid flow. Due to advances in
additive manufacturing technology, it is now possible to create such multi-
functional materials for engineering applications. This project aims to develop
porous cellular materials for passive flow control. Appropriately designed
porous materials have the potential to reduce flow-induced noise, decrease skin
friction, regulate heat transfer, and control separated or high-speed flows. The
resulting performance improvements could benefit aircraft, waterborne vessels,
and ground vehicles. The research effort described below will clarify the
fundamental flow physics that underpin these applications and generate
scientific tools that can aid the design of cellular materials for flow control.
The project also has several educational and outreach components, including
sustained undergraduate research involvement, support for capstone senior design
projects, and long-term collaboration with a local high-needs public
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on gaining a better
understanding of turbulent boundary layer flow over a porous substrate. The
control objective will be to suppress the near-wall turbulence to ultimately
reduce skin friction (i.e. drag). This research involves three key objectives.
First, reduced-complexity models will be developed to predict how porous
materials with specified bulk properties (e.g., porosity and permeability)
modify the near-wall turbulent flow. The models will be used to optimize the
bulk properties to suppress near-wall turbulence. These results will then be
used to design and fabricate (via 3D-printing) cellular materials exhibiting
bulk properties identified by the models. This component will bridge macroscopic
descriptions of natural cellular materials with the design of actual
manufacturable cell geometries. Finally, channel and boundary layer experiments
with the porous cellular-like material walls will be used to measure the
statistical and structural features of the turbulent flow. In addition to
providing insight into turbulent flow physics over complex anisotropic porous
materials, these experiments will serve as proof-of-concept validation for the
models. Together, these research activities will create a tightly coupled
theoretical and experimental framework that can guide the development of
cellular materials with desired macroscopic properties to control a variety of
turbulent flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.