* 1943396
* CAREER: A Scalable Occupant-Driven Energy Optimization System for Commercial Buildings
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Xiaofan Jiang, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2025
* USD 422,923.00

This project seeks to fundamentally change how people live their everyday lives
towards a more environmentally responsible and sustainable future and has the
potential to play a major role in reducing our reliance on fossil fuels and
combating climate change. This research will help enable individuals to reduce
their personal energy usage in indoor commercial building settings by providing
real-time visibility into the energy cost of each action. This will enable
energy-accountability in commercial buildings by providing actionable
recommendations with quantifiable savings, as well as insights for both
occupants and building managers so that they can act in a timely manner. These
small savings can add up: even a small 1% reduction in commercial building
energy consumption translates to 1.5 billion dollars of annual savings for the
nation. This project will help advance research at the intersection of building-
scale systems, Internet-of-Things, wearable systems, and recommender systems.
Course modules developed on embedded systems, mobile computing, Internet-of-
Things, and deep reinforcement learning will be used to train undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to significantly
reduce energy consumption in commercial buildings by examining each occupant’s
unique and individualized energy usage, or “energy footprint”, and providing
occupants with actionable and measurable energy-saving recommendations. The
proposed system comprises of several components, including real-time sensing and
actuation, building energy monitoring, indoor localization, large-scale time-
series data analytics, and recommender systems. This project is organized into
three research thrusts: (1) develop a digital twin model of a commercial
building to simulate energy savings from human-driven actions, and research
efficient algorithms for computing each occupant’s “energy footprint” in shared
environments. (2) advance knowledge in deep reinforcement learning and design a
recommender system to discover actions that have the best potential for saving
energy while adapting to user preferences. (3) investigate effective feedback
mechanisms and incentive schemes to encourage energy saving behaviors, increase
recommendation quality, and improve recommendation acceptance
rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results, including datasets, embedded
hardware designs, software code, simulators, smartphone application code,
reports, presentations, and papers will be shared with the research community
through the research group website and GitHub. To ensure privacy, any personally
identifiable information in datasets will be removed. To encourage deployment
and experimentation by others, documented open-source software and hardware will
be release and maintain in the project’s GitHub repository at
https://github.com/Columbia-ICSL/EnergyFootprinting for at least five
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.