* 1943948
* Campus Cyber-infrastructure Planning Grant
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Isaac Sanders, Texas Asssociation of Developing Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 94,738.00

The Texas Association of Developing Colleges (TADC) is undertaking a data
network planning grant in preparation for establishing a regional highspeed data
network to support science, technology and engineering (STEM) research and
education. The network will connect TADC and its five Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCU) members: Jarvis Christian College, Paul Quinn
College, Texas College, Huston-Tillotson University, and Wiley College. It will
be used to develop a deeper learning educational environment by bridging the gap
between theory and practical utilization of technology. Access to gigabit
research and education campus networking gives the African American students
attending the member schools the opportunity to study in a next generation
learning environment to acquire 21st century skills needed to advance
professionally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, these under-resourced schools
are not able to keep up with the rapid changes in campus cyberinfrastructure.
They are lacking highspeed broadband for connecting to regional, national and
international education and research needed to advance the knowledge of their
students. Their campus information technology (IT) infrastructure is not capable
of providing the capacity needed to meet the demands of their faculty, students,
and administrators. Establishing the TADC regional network would set up a state-
of-the-art Science DMZ between the member schools that will provide direct
access to STEM education and research opportunities. Moreover, the facultyâ€™s
ability to compete for research and other grant opportunities would be greatly
enhanced. The creation of the TADC regional network starts with this Planning
Grant to collect information from each member school. The information will serve
as the roadmap to guide future planning and proposals to establish gigabit
networking to five underserved HBCUs and TADC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.