* 1943514
* CAREER: Identifying the roles of mitochondria at the neuronal presynaptic terminal
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Robert Renden, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,030,783.00

The goal of this project is to determine the contribution of mitochondria to
synaptic transmission between neurons in the mammalian brain. Mitochondria
provide energy in all cells, and are important to support brain function.
However, the large size and extended shapes of neurons represents a major
challenge for these cells to maintain energy at distant sites of activity,
especially at synapses where brain cells communicate with each other. At
synapses, mitochondria are assumed to produce energy to support the release of
neurotransmitter, but this remains untested. Knowing the mechanisms used to
maintain cellular energy in neurons is essential to comprehend brain function
and understand how these mechanisms break down in various disease states. This
project aims to provide new, critical, and fundamental knowledge on the routes
of energy supply in healthy neuronal synapses, and illustrate how synapses
compensate for loss of mitochondrial function. These results will inform
experiments to correct systems where mitochondrial function is impaired, such as
in neurodegenerative disease and aging, providing a significant benefit to
society. This information will be essential to better comprehend the impact of
neurological disease states in an increasingly aging population. Additionally,
undergraduates and graduate students will be trained in state-of-the-art
techniques for cell and molecular biology, with a focus on neuroscience
techniques, providing training opportunities for the next generation of
researchers. In addition, this project will generate a novel card game-based
learning tool to help teach fundamental mechanisms of synaptic function to
primary and college-level students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent reports suggest
that glycolysis and ATP buffering can compensate for loss of mitochondrial
function at the presynaptic terminal, even during bouts of activity. Thus, the
prevailing view of mitochondrial function at the presynaptic terminal is
inaccurate, requiring a fundamental re-evaluation of the role of presynaptic
mitochondria. The research team will utilize the exceptional experimental
accessibility of the calyx of Held synapse as a model to evaluate the role of
presynaptic mitochondria. In the first objective, mitochondrial ATP synthase
will be acutely inhibited, and synaptic transmission and ATP maintenance will be
measured using electrophysiology and fluorescence-based ATP-imaging methods. The
second objective will determine how presynaptic mitochondrial Ca2+-buffering
shapes short-term synaptic plasticity, by eliminating the mitochondrial Ca2+
uniporter (MCU) from the presynaptic terminal using in vivo viral-mediated
genetic deletion at the mouse calyx of Held. The effect of MCU elimination on
mitochondrial localization, presynaptic cytosolic Ca2+ buffering, and synaptic
plasticity will be measured using confocal microscopy, electrophysiology, and
fluorescent Ca2+ imaging. The third objective will determine how presynaptically
localized mitochondria fine-tune synaptic transmission. Viral expression of a
dominant-negative TRAK2 peptide sabotages the interaction between mitochondria
and kinesin motor proteins, and will be used to specifically impair axonal
trafficking of mitochondria, depleting them form the presynaptic terminal of
selected neuronal populations. Synaptic mitochondria will be visualized using
confocal microscopy, and short-term plasticity of synaptic transmission will be
evaluated using electrophysiology. Fluorescent imaging of ATP and Ca2+ will be
used to evaluate the effect of mislocalized presynaptic mitochondria on
transmission and synaptic maturation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.