* 1943455
* CAREER: The Morpho-Molecular Tissue Atlas: A Framework for the Generation and Comparative Profiling of Terabyte-Scale Tissue Phenotypes
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* David Mayerich, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This project will develop an imaging and computational framework to generate
searchable digital atlases of whole organs at the cellular level. These atlases
will enable tissue characterization and modeling at an unprecedented scale,
opening the door to new methods for studying anatomy, quantifying disease
progression, mapping potential treatments, and educating the next generation of
biomedical professionals. Publicly available whole-organ atlases will
fundamentally impact biomedical research and education, similar to how satellite
imagery, global positioning, and search algorithms have changed navigation.
Routine generation of tissue maps will also enable researchers to build detailed
models of complex diseases, opening the door to new precision treatments and
scalable drug discovery. This project will provide five specific contributions
to the field of biomedical imaging: (1) data storage methods for encoding the
complex data acquired using fast microscopes, (2) high-performance parallel
algorithms leveraging recent research in machine learning and artificial
intelligence, (3) software for efficient visualization, proofreading, and
interpretation, (4) a comprehensive framework for building and browsing
cellular-level whole-organ tissue atlases, and (5) an open repository containing
data from next generation imaging methods allowing researchers to build on and
expand this proposed framework. The imaging techniques and software proposed in
this project will open the door to new methods for studying anatomy, quantifying
disease progression, mapping potential treatments, and educating the next
generation of biomedical professionals. A browsable atlas will be designed for
integration into K-12 programs using virtual reality with game-based discovery
through a Tissue Exploration and Discovery Workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whole-
organ mapping is a challenge because a cubic centimeter of tissue requires
collecting multiple terabytes of data and encoding the complex mix of three-
dimensional structures into geometric and volumetric representations suitable
for analysis. This project will overcome these challenges by developing (1)
instrumentation for fast tissue slicing and multispectral imaging and (2)
synergistic parallel algorithms that convert 3D images into searchable atlases
by exploiting their inherent spatial and spectral sparsity. This project will
provide the transformational ability to construct three-dimensional searchable
models from terabyte-scale multispectral images that integrate explicit
structures and implicit molecular distributions, enabling tissue analytics at
unprecedented scales. This study will provide five synergistic contributions for
producing whole organ cellular level tissue atlases: (1) sparsity-exploiting
data structures that integrate explicit three-dimensional structures and
implicit molecular distributions for fast analysis, (2) massively parallel GPU-
based algorithms integrating recent research in deep neural networks and
perceptual grouping, (3) analytics-guided selective visualization methods that
allow efficient visualization, proofreading, and interpretation, (4) a
comprehensive framework for building browsable morpho-molecular cellular-level
and whole-organ tissue atlases, and (5) an open repository containing data from
next generation imaging methods including expansion microscopy (ExM), knife-edge
scanning microscopy (KESM), and light sheet microscopy (LSM), to foster
research, clinical, and educational software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.