* 1943626
* CAREER: Exploring the patterns and mechanisms of ant social parasite speciation and evolution: integrating teaching and research to foster biodiversity discovery in organismal evol
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Christian Rabeling, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 12/31/2024
* USD 830,450.00

This research will unravel the evolutionary history of a complex parasite-host
system, specifically, ant species that are parasites of the colonies of other
ant species. This parasite-host system has evolved many times across ant
species, but it is unknown how this convergently evolved behavior has affected
speciation patterns in the social parasites. The project uses an integrative
approach that includes (i) reconstructing the speciation patterns and the
evolutionary history of ant social parasites using genetic data from ant
genomes; (ii) unearthing the global biodiversity of ant social parasites using
new methods to biodiversity discovery to effectively delimit species and revise
the classification of ant social parasites across the ant tree of life; (iii)
deciphering the genetic mechanisms underlying the formation of new social
parasite species. In summary, this project integrates several approaches to
understand organismal evolutionary biology, exploring how parasitic lineages
originate repeatedly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the origin
and maintenance of biological diversity is a major goal in evolutionary biology.
Speciation by evolving reproductive isolation in allopatry is well accepted.
However, theoretical and empirical studies have established that reproductive
isolation can evolve in sympatry, in the absence of geographical isolation.
Empirical evidence for sympatric speciation has been accumulating from studies
of ant inquiline social parasites. Inquiline parasites inhabit the living space
of other species. The social parasites of ants are other ant species, often
closely related, that are highly specialized brood parasites. The parasitic
species exploit their hostsâ€™ social organization to selfishly maximize their
individual reproductive output. In contrast to other species that evolved via
sympatric speciation, the diverse assemblage of ant social parasites is a
promising and underutilized system for comparative study because at the moment
approximately 390 ant social parasite species are known from 34 genera. The high
number of independently evolved parasite species provides unique conditions for
comparative research exploring the ecological circumstances and the genetic
mechanisms associated with the independent evolutionary origins of ant social
parasites. This project integrates research, education, and outreach, and will
therefore benefit society in general. Graduate and undergraduate students will
be trained in organismal evolutionary biology in both the laboratory and the
field, and novel undergraduate field biology classes will be developed at
Arizona State University (ASU). Collaborations with colleagues in South America
and Europe will facilitate the international exchange of students and long-term
enhancement of a global scientific community. The outreach program will (i)
train teachers at elementary, middle, and high schools with high percentages of
under-represented and disadvantaged groups in the Phoenix Metro area, (ii)
integrate community colleague students into teaching and research activities at
ASU, (iii) use social parasites as a tool to start a conversation about
controversial or socially loaded metaphors in science, and (iv) offer student
workshops to integrate social and brood parasitism research across the animal
kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.