* 1943131
* CAREER: accelerating machine learning with low dimensional structure
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Madeleine Udell, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2022
* USD 167,229.00

Big datasets are everywhere: in science, in health, in commerce, and in
government, data is becoming easier and cheaper to collect. Yet extracting value
from this data is a challenge; every step requires human intervention: cleaning
the data, identifying useful features, and choosing a machine learning model.
The goal of this project is to develop new methods to accelerate and automate
the basic machine learning (ML) workflow. Automation frees data scientists from
data cleaning and parameter twiddling to concentrate on the important questions:
are we solving the right problems, and do we have the right data? This project
will help democratize machine learning and promote data-driven decision making
by developing automated methods to clean data and to choose ML models, including
open source software packages, that make these methods widely available and easy
to use. The project also advances these goals by training data scientists in how
to use these models and understand their potential risks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low dimensional structure provides the key to meeting the
diverse challenges required to automate machine learning. This project relies on
the central insight is that measurements of a complex object, such as a patient
in a hospital, respondent on a survey, or even a ML dataset, can be well
described as simple functions (or even linear functions) of an underlying low
dimensional latent vector. The project develops new algorithms and software to
identify low dimensional latent vectors and to use them to a) clean the data by
denoising observations or imputing missing entries, b) reduce the dimensionality
of feature vectors, and c) recommend better algorithms. This project will
develop new techniques to identify low dimensional latent vectors from sparse
observations via nonlinear (even, discontinuous) functions, with efficient
algorithms and with theoretical guarantees. To enable more efficient automated
machine, the project will develop methods localize similar datasets near each
other in a low dimensional space, so that nearness in this space predicts
similar performance of machine learning methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.