* 1943703
* CAREER: Task-Level Coordination of Motor and Machine for Fluent Lower-Limb Prostheses
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Patrick Wensing, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2025
* USD 530,119.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will enhance the comfort
and safety of lower-limb prostheses by studying the interplay between human
motor control loops and device control designs. Current powered lower-extremity
prostheses offer benefits over previous passive devices in terms of providing
work when ascending stairs and contributing actively to balance. The interface
between a user and their powered device, however, results in complex physical
dynamics and motor adaptations that both shape and are shaped by the control
strategy of the prosthesis. This project will address this interplay by using
models of the fundamental mechanics of human gait to coordinate machine response
in synergy with task-level motor control goals, and to understand how machine
response affects human gait. This project will promote the progress of science
by providing understanding into how human motor coordination is affected by
assistive device operation. It has potential to advance national health and
wellbeing by reducing falls for above-knee amputees through the restoration of
lower limb function. The project supports education and broadening participation
through (1) after-school STEM programs serving at-risk middle school students;
(2) enhancement of graduate and undergraduate curricula; and (3) a new graduate
student summer school for Robotics at the Mind, Machine, and Motor
Nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will study the dynamic interplay
between users and their prostheses through low-dimensional template models of
locomotion, which are hypothesized to reflect the intrinsic neural control of
movement. Experiments will provide extensive data on natural human gait, non-
amputee gait using a prosthesis with a bypass adapter, and amputee gait with
passive and active prostheses. These data will be used to identify task-level
human motor coordination goals and to understand how they are affected by injury
and by device operation. Computable frameworks will be investigated to
rigorously disambiguate between candidate template models in a quantitative and
data-driven fashion using a hybrid optimal control approach. In parallel, a new
paradigm for the task-level control of prostheses will be established, and
experiments will assess its effects on measures of balance, gait symmetry, and
user comfort. The use of an NSF-sponsored open-source prosthetic leg will
accelerate the diffusion of the project's methods, thereby hastening achievement
of translational impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.