* 1943112
* Improving the Resolution of Heat Flux Estimates Across Antarctica Using Recent-Generation Seismic Models
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Michael Ritzwoller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 235,888.00

Part I: Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;Geothermal heat flux is an important geodynamic
indicator throughout the world but is uniquely important in the home of the
worldâ€™s largest ice cap, Antarctica. Subglacial heat flux strongly influences
basal ice temperatures, the volume of ice at its melting point, the extent and
distribution of liquid water, the properties of glacial bed material, the
formation of subglacial lakes, and, crucially, whether the ice is frozen to or
slides along its interface with the solid earth. Ultimately, it determines the
thermal state and mechanical stability of the ice sheet. Nevertheless,
subglacial heat flux remains poorly known across Antarctica. Over the past 15
years, researchers have introduced a variety of indirect measures to estimate
heat flux across Antarctica. The proposed research aims to refine and improve
one of these methods by leveraging recent improvements in seismic models and
heat flow data bases. The goal is to deliver better basal heat flux estimates
and their uncertainties across much of Antarctica. If successful, this promises
to be an important and timely upgrade for Antarctic ice-sheet and ice-stream
modelers and may affect the assessment of the impact of global climate change
and sea level rise in the 21st century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II:
Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatially extended information about subglacial
heat flux across Antarctica derives mainly from indirect or proxy methods that
aim to infer heat flux from properties of the solid earth or glacial ice. Past
work by the PI has been based on the extrapolation of heat flux measurements
obtained elsewhere in the world guided by a global seismic model of the crust
and upper mantle. The proposed work is an update, refinement, and extension of
the earlier method designed to address two principal challenges: improving
continental-scale accuracy and regional-scale resolution of basal heat flux
across a large fraction of Antarctica. The proposed refinements are based on
recent improvements in regional-scale seismic models and heat flow data bases.
Better and notably higher-resolution seismic models of the crust and uppermost
mantle have been developed in the past few years across the US, China, Europe,
and Canada, as well as across much of Antarctica, that can be used to guide the
extrapolation of heat flux measurements to Antarctica from the US, China,
Europe, and Canada. The critical test for the refined method will be validating
it to infer heat flux across regions of the earth where such measurements exist,
notably the US, China, Canada, and Europe. Such validation experiments will
provide crucial tests of the proposed methods to infer heat flux across
Antarctica as well as quantitative information about the accuracy of the
inferences. The final product will be a regional-scale heat flux map with
attendant uncertainty information across central and West Antarctica. The map
will be composed of the means and standard deviations of the proposed inferred
heat flux distributions across central and western Antarctica with a grid-
spacing of about 100 km.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.