* 1943036
* CAREER: Scalable Approaches for Multiphysics Fluid Simulation
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Amanda Randles, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2025
* USD 292,452.00

Over the past decade, we have seen an emergence of the use of personalized blood
flow simulations in medical practice and biomedical research. These models are
used to help design new drugs, devices, and treatments for a wide range of
diseases. Large-scale simulations capture both the fluid movement and the
interaction of included particles and cells. This interdisciplinary research
will create a tool for researchers to interactively modify the geometry of the
device or vessels or properties describing the cells to study how changes
influence metrics that can improve treatment design. This project will also
provide a framework to facilitate new educational programs at the intersection
of computing and biomedical engineering with the goal to promote wider interest
in STEM degrees and careers. To engage next generation scientists with
computational modeling, the project aims to (i) develop virtual reality-based
interactive modules for K-12 students, (ii) develop standards-aligned primary
and secondary school classroom curriculum add-ons, and (iii) host implementation
workshops to broadly disseminate the material and findings.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program will develop and establish new
multiscale, multiphysics modeling techniques that enable users to use parallel
fluid-structure-interaction (FSI) models to design new therapeutics in an
intuitive and interactive manner. The program couples complementary resources
including virtual reality and augmented reality interfaces, massively parallel
fluid simulation, and high-fidelity cellular adhesion models. The following key
components will be combined: (i) the development of a robust, efficient
capability to capture a range of cell types, (ii) a parallel method to
initialize high cell densities in complex geometries, and (iii) interactive
techniques for design feedback and modification. The resulting
cyberinfrastructure represents a new and potentially transformative FSI
engineering paradigm that will lead to advances in fundamental knowledge, more
effective research techniques, enhanced clinical capabilities, and cross-cutting
impacts that transcend the bioengineering and biomedical fields. The knowledge
gained by development of a state-of-the-art, simulation-driven, geometry-
interaction methodology will have wide impacts beyond the use cases investigated
in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.