* 1943705
* CAREER: Leveraging mobile monitoring, low-cost sensors, and Google Street View imagery to identify and modify street-level determinants of exposure to particulate air pollution
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Steven Hankey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 448,080.00

Commuting and other time spent in transport in urban areas is responsible for a
large share of exposure to air pollution. The amount of exposure is influenced
not only by the amount of vehicle traffic, but also in large part by the design
of streets and neighborhoods in urban areas. The goal of this project is to
improve air quality model prediction to address the role that physical geography
plays in exposure. This will be achieved by using a novel combination Google
Street View (GSV) images, low-cost sensing, and mobile measurements. Results
from these models will provide new evidence on how best to modify streets and
neighborhoods to reduce exposure to air pollution. An added societal benefit of
this new approach will be the ability to cost-effectively measure air pollution
in urban areas. A smartphone app will be created as an outreach tool to track
exposure in the Washington DC metro area as a test case. The smartphone app will
be used by community members, Virginia Tech students, and other stakeholders to
facilitate design solutions in partner communities to cost effectively reduce
air pollution and protect human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Land use regression
(LUR) was developed to provide high spatial resolution estimates of air quality
at locations without measurements. Recent advances in mobile monitoring and low-
cost sensing have enabled unprecedented spatial coverage of measurements in
urban areas. Comparisons of these measurements to LUR estimates suggest that LUR
models do not capture all concentration gradients in urban micro-environments. A
potential reason for these differences is that street-level LUR covariates are
not included in traditional databases. This project will test if emerging mobile
monitoring and low-cost sensing measurement techniques can be used in
conjunction with street-level metrics from GSV images to identify previously
overlooked determinants of exposure that may be ripe for modification. The
project has three objectives to address these gaps: 1) use mobile monitoring and
a low-cost sensor network of particulate air pollution to develop previously
unavailable real-time LUR models; 2) develop new GSV-derived measures of street-
level features in urban areas to identify street-level determinants of exposure;
and 3) integrate the LUR models into a smartphone app to create a real-time
exposure tool for collaborative teaching activities with high school students
and community partners. This project will provide new knowledge of importance to
the public and policy-makers that could be readily applied to other cities,
settings, and pollutants. The web- and phone-based exposure tools have the
potential to transform how air quality models are disseminated and used by the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.