* 1943946
* CAREER: The Role of Heterogeneities in Electro-Chemo-Mechanics of Electrodes and Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Feifei Fan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports fundamental
research on the mechanics and its coupling with electrochemical processes in
high-capacity electrodes and their interfaces. Lithium-ion batteries are highly
efficient energy storage devices that have transformed personal electronics and
enabled the market introduction of electric vehicles. The ever-growing energy
storage industry has imposed dramatically increased demands that the current
batteries are unable to meet. Developing next-generation batteries requires a
thorough understanding of complex material behavior and failures of the primary
constituents, electrodes and their interfaces, to ensure the safety and
durability of devices. This research will enable a fundamental understanding of
the electro-chemo-mechanical behavior of electrodes and interfaces at multiple
scales by developing modeling and simulation capabilities. The effort will lead
to the discovery of electrochemical degradation mechanisms in electrodes and
guide their design, ultimately enabling the development of high-capacity
electrodes and benefitting the US economy. The grant also supports interrelated
education and outreach activities that integrate research and innovative
teaching approaches. These activities include curriculum development for a new
Batteries and Energy Storage Technologies minor program, design of senior
capstone projects, and multiple K-12 and underrepresented minority outreach
events at the University of Nevada, Reno.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the
electro-chemo-mechanics of electrodes and interfaces, the research approach will
achieve three specific objectives: 1) identify and characterize the cooperative
and competitive roles of heterogeneities in stress-mediated (de)lithiation
kinetics with the effect of charge by combining atomistic reaction pathway
modeling and molecular dynamics simulations with a reactive force field, 2)
identify how defects and mechanical stress affect pore formation/annihilation
during electrochemical (de)lithiation by accounting for deformation kinematics
in amorphous and open material systems and by coupling phase field modeling with
finite strain elastoplasticity, 3) evaluate the interaction between the reaction
kinetics at electrode-electrolyte interfaces with the chemo-mechanics of
electrodes and electrochemical performance at the battery cell level, via a
Butler-Volmer type approach that integrates reaction kinetics, ion transport,
and the influence of mechanics. The validation of the models will be performed
with experimental data from open literature and collaborator(s). The pursuit of
the underlying mechanisms will bridge the missing links between nanoscale chemo-
mechanical phenomena in individual electrodes and the electrochemical
performance at the battery cell level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.