* 1943208
* CAREER: Digital Mathematics Storytelling: Fraction Stories from Urban Emergent Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Theodore Chao, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 06/30/2025
* USD 687,711.00

Many elementary school children in urban communities are not given the
opportunity to relate what they see in school to the mathematics they see in
their homes, families, and communities. This project will help solve this
problem through a digital storytelling approach. It will investigate how
elementary grade children can use mobile technology to create digital
mathematics stories. These stories will be made from videos, photos, and audio.
Students will connect mathematics from out-of-school settings to the mathematics
they learn in school. This project will also create a teacher-friendly website
of short videos that showcase the rich mathematics that exists in the everyday
lives of urban children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, submitted to the
Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) will develop a digital
mathematics storytelling protocol for all teachers to use, understand the
effects of digital storytelling on children’s mathematical identities, knowledge
of fractions, and digital literacies, understand how using digital mathematics
storytelling effects mathematics instruction, the level of equity in the
classroom, and the level of connectedness that teachers feel to their
communities, and create a nationwide, online community space for all teachers to
learn how to use digital mathematics storytelling. In terms of research methods,
a Participant Design Research methodology will be used so that students, their
families, and community members will have a voice in developing the digital
mathematics storytelling protocol. Narrative Inquiry and Constant Comparison
Analysis will be used to analyze the impact of creating and sharing these
stories. Over five years, this project will impact 12 elementary classrooms
serving over 700 children. Research findings will be used to understand how
digital mathematics storytelling connects to mathematics learning. Additionally,
a free, online elementary teacher professional development website will be
created that features stories authored by participant children, their families,
and their communities. Finally, this project will help urban children learn how
to use current technology to craft mathematics narratives that help them see
themselves as mathematically powerful while still connected to their community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.