* 1943707
* CAREER: Computational discovery of oxide-based photocatalysts to create fertilizer from air
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Andrew Medford, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2025
* USD 568,943.00

Industrial agriculture enables the large-scale production of crops that support
modern society, and agriculture relies heavily on nitrogen-based fertilizers
produced from ammonia. Industrial ammonia synthesis is concentrated in about 50
large-scale plants around the world that collectively consume around 2% of the
world's energy and are responsible for around 3% of global carbon emissions. The
project will investigate alternative technology for producing fertilizers at
agricultural sites by directly utilizing molecular nitrogen from the air,
hydrogen from water, and energy from sunlight. Currently, the rate of ammonia
production is far too low to enable the production of fertilizer from air. Thus,
the research will focus on discovery of new catalyst technology capable of
manufacturing ammonia from air and sunlight via a process known as
photocatalytic ammonia synthesis. The resulting solar fertilizers would
contribute to environmental sustainability and enhance national food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the project is to
improve the efficiency of solar fertilizer processes through catalyst discovery
and reactor design. The strategy for catalyst discovery will involve
computational simulations of the properties of the active site and reaction
mechanism for nitrogen reduction on rutile metal oxides with p-block dopants.
Insight from this model system will guide screening studies to identify
promising new classes of oxide-based p-block compounds such as oxyborides and
oxycarbides. Reactor design studies will also guide screening by establishing
targets for materials properties such as efficiency and cost. Simple experiments
will validate reactor models and establish a platform for testing predicted
catalysts. The proposed work will advance knowledge in several ways. First, it
will establish new strategies for the rational design of photocatalytic
materials based on complex metal compound materials. Second, it will advance the
computational models needed to analyze complex multi-step photocatalytic
reactions. Third, it will use an innovative model that integrates student
researchers, agricultural experts, and community stakeholders to assess the
social and economic potential of solar fertilizer production. The culmination of
these results will establish an exemplar for the design of multi-element
photocatalyst materials for multi-step chemical reactions, and thereby advance
the field of solar fertilizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.