* 1943146
* CAREER: Data Analytics for Equity: Supporting STEM Faculty to Address Implicit Bias in the Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Daniel Reinholz, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 05/31/2025
* USD 781,474.00

This project will study how data visualizations may help university faculty
recognize their implicit biases and promote equitable participation in their
classrooms. Participation is a key part of learning, but implicit biases can
result in different opportunities for different groups of students to
participate in STEM classrooms. Such differences can cause inequities in
learning outcomes that may lead to underrepresentation of women, students of
color, and other groups in the STEM workforce. By studying how to provide STEM
faculty with meaningful data about the differential impact of their teaching on
student participation, this project has the potential to improve teaching and
learning in STEM at scale. This project aims to generate professional
development methods and technologies that support equitable teaching across STEM
fields. During the project, hundreds of faculty members will receive this
professional development, which in turn will impact tens of thousands of
students. The project will also develop supporting materials to enable
university professional developers and teacher educators to effectively provide
similar professional development to the educators they serve. Expected outcomes
of this work include new knowledge about equitable teaching in STEM, effective
methods for helping instructors teach more equitably, and widespread
dissemination of these methods.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will directly
support over 100 faculty to address implicit bias, by utilizing (and further
enhancing) the classroom observation tool, Electronic Quality of Instruction
Protocol (EQUIP). EQUIP is a free, web-based classroom observation tool that
provides visual representations of classroom participation by different social
marker groups. The research plan includes a longitudinal study of a subset of
faculty members as they engage in sustained professional development through
three interventions: (1) systematic design of data visualizations; (2) a summer
institute; and (3) faculty learning communities. Through a mixed-methods
research design, this project will address fundamental research topics around
how STEM faculty interpret data visualizations, how professional development may
leverage visualizations to reduce bias and improve teaching, and the nature of
the resulting impacts on student outcomes. The methods will utilize a
combination of within- and between-subject comparisons, triangulating data from:
classroom observations, data analytics, student outcomes, surveys, and
interviews. The major theoretical contributions of this project are to develop
knowledge about how data visualizations may improve equitable teaching
practices, and to longitudinally study the process through which faculty members
go as they learn to recognize and address implicit bias in their teaching. This
project can contribute significantly to broadening participation in STEM,
because it addresses implicit bias, which is a pervasive problem that limits the
participation of women, students of color, people with differing abilities, and
other underrepresented groups in STEM. Helping the faculty who participate in
the study address their biases is expected to directly produce more equitable
learning environments in undergraduate STEM. Moreover, this project will
contribute broadly to educator professional development efforts, by documenting
and disseminating a suite of tools and best practices for addressing bias and
improving equity. The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a
National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that supports early-career
faculty who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education. This CAREER project is supported by NSF's Education &amp; Human
Resources Directorate Core Research Program and its Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.