* 1943998
* CAREER: Multi-scale Multi-population Mean Field Game-Theoretic Framework for the Autonomous Mobility Ecosystem
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Xuan Di, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2025
* USD 584,137.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will contribute to the
improved well-being of individuals and increased U.S. economic competitiveness
by assisting in the development of control methods for autonomous vehicles (AV).
AVs are anticipated to improve traffic safety and efficiency. In the near
future, however, AVs will operate on public roads in mixed traffic and will have
to manage complex interactions with human-driven vehicles (HV). This award
supports research that will lead to control paradigms for AVs operating in mixed
traffic conditions, particularly when traffic is dense and safe operations
require effective automated car-following and lane-changing controls. The
project is expected to contribute to a better understanding of the future
transportation ecosystem and the controls needed to guide the ecosystem toward
an equilibrium that benefits society. The accompanying educational plan aims to
fundamentally redesign the transportation engineering curricula via new graduate
course development and outreach programs, leveraging the COSMOS testbed deployed
in Columbia’s neighborhood. The outcomes of this research will be assessed by an
advisory committee of select leaders from academia, public agencies, and the AV
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a new modeling framework
that builds from the fields of game theory, dynamic control, data science, and
transportation engineering. Mean-field game-theoretic methods are used to
characterize the dynamic behavior of the mixed traffic system and to examine
optimal policies associated with infrastructure planning and the regulation of
technology. This framework provides a rigorous foundation for the development of
a multi-agent simulation platform to inform policy and practice as part of the
development of the transportation ecosystem. The analytical framework leverages
the state-of-the-art techniques from game theory and AI methods. The research
addresses an important gap in the autonomous driving control literature in which
AVs are essentially modelled as human drivers that can "react" faster, "see"
farther, and "know" the road environment better.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.