* 1943040
* CAREER: Next Generation Universal Radio Platform with On-Demand Operation across UHF to Sub-Terahertz Bands
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Elias Alwan, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The growth of emergent communication systems in both the industrial and
commercial sectors has created a strong demand for extremely wideband radio
systems capable of handling multi-Giga-bits-per-second (Gbps) data rates. More
precisely, the desire for general-use ‘5G and beyond’ radios require
architectures with continuous operation across the whole millimeter-wave (mm-
wave) spectrum up to the sub-terahertz (sub-THz) bands. However, a major barrier
against achieving that goal is the associated signal loss that results from the
large path loss and atmospheric absorption at those frequencies. High gain
multi-antenna radios are a potential solution, but they require massive
hardware, making them unsuitable for 5G devices. To reduce hardware
requirements, research has been focused on implementing fully digital
transceivers to replace most of the analog hardware with software operations.
This hardware-to-software convergence is still limited to low frequencies and
remains relatively expensive. This CAREER presents novel techniques to implement
a universal radio architecture for operation across legacy, 5G, and future 6G
bands using a single multifunctional and adaptable platform. This research will
lead to improvement in terrestrial, airborne, satellite, and vehicle-to-vehicle
communications. Also, mm-wave and sub-THz systems will enable assistive
technology via miniature medical, wearable, and implantable devices. Therefore,
this research will have significant societal benefits impacting daily life for
all. The research proposed in this project will be integrated with the principal
investigator’s educational plans to develop new courses for both undergraduate
and graduate students with focus on 5G and mm-wave transceivers. Efforts will
also be taken to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM
via curriculum development, undergraduate research programs, and outreach
efforts. A new STEM outreach program on hands-on activities on radio
communications will be established that involves the children of formerly
homeless population, predominantly Hispanics and African Americans, individuals
with disabilities, substance use, and mental health disorders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study, design, and develop
wideband multifunctional adaptable transceivers for operation across the 5G, mm-
wave, and sub-THz spectrum. To date, transceivers that can handle extremely wide
operational bandwidths are not available. Indeed, current radios suffer from
several bottlenecks: 1) antennas suffer from size-bandwidth-gain tradeoffs and
are very lossy at high frequencies (i.e. mm-wave and sub-THz), 2) wideband radio
frequency (RF) components are costly, lossy, and nonlinear, 3) high speed
digitizers are power hungry and cost prohibitive, and 4) baseband digital
electronics and software defined radios (SDR) are limited to narrowband and low
frequency operations. This CAREER addresses these issues and brings forward
innovative techniques to implement a universal radio with ‘on demand’ operation
from a few hundred MHz to sub-THz frequencies using a single multifunctional and
upgradable platform that combines 1) extremely wideband and reconfigurable
aperture-in-aperture radiator, 2) high frequency modular and tunable RF front-
ends that are inexpensive and power efficient operating from UHF (300MHz) up to
sub-THz (300GHz) bands, and 4) physical layer interference suppression
techniques. Importantly, the proposed radio is upgradable with evolving SDR
technologies. That is, as SDR frequency coverage expands into emergent bands and
becomes more affordable for commercial use, the RF hardware will be replaced
with software operations. This hardware-to-software convergence will contribute
in further reduction of the modular hardware whereby more RF modules will be
integrated in the SDR. The long-term vision of this project is to implement an
affordable and efficient fully digital system, with minimum hardware, operating
from the low microwave frequencies up to the mm-wave bands. Overall, the
proposed architecture will enable interference resiliency with increased
spectral efficiency, spatial filtering, and concurrent beams across extremely
large bandwidths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.