* 1943243
* CAREER: Power and information transmission kinetics in multifunctional electrolytic vascular systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* James Pikul, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The objective of the proposal is to investigate a new paradigm for integrating
multiple chemical functionalities into a bio-inspired system similar to vascular
and nervous systems. The specific functionalities to be investigated are power
distribution and information transfer through the electrolyte and information
transfer through soft, ionic connections between electrochemical transistors.
Results from this research will enable multifunctional synthetic vascular
systems that store energy, provide mechanical transmission for actuation, allow
communication, and improve computation of nearby electronics. The experimental
outcomes and theoretical tools developed during this work will contribute
towards overcoming fundamental challenges of autonomy, control, and energy
storage in soft robotics. Although these capabilities will be targeted towards
soft robotics, they will be broadly useful across all robots and machines. To
realize the project goals, the PI will combine fundamental research and
educational activities into an integrated program that will train a new
generation of scientists and engineers to work at the intersection of
electrochemistry, electronics, and robotics through extracurriculars,
interdisciplinary courses, undergraduate research, and community development.
Students will gain knowledge and skills in areas desired by industry. New
initiatives will also increase the involvement of women, underrepresented
minority, and first-generation students in national Formula electric racing
competitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern machines are engineered by
integrating specialized components that excel at individual predetermined
functions. In contrast, biological systems such as the circulatory, muscular,
and nervous systems achieve impressive capabilities through the use of
multifunctional chemical processes in an aqueous electrolyte. Despite this
diverse functionality, aqueous systems are rarely found as active components in
machines due to the difficulty of controlling all the chemical functionality and
interfacing with the electrolyte. The intellectual significance of this work
will be results from new experiments and theoretical models to understand power
and information transmission in electrolyzed fluids. The knowledge gained from
studies of ion and dissolved oxygen kinetics under transient conditions with
multiple interacting electrodes will enable three new functionalities in the
same electrolyte: wire-free distributed power delivery (mimics the animal
circulatory system), direct current power and information transmission through
the electrolyte (mimics a nervous system), and information transmission through
soft, ionic connections between organic electrochemical transistors (for
neuromorphic computing). Additionally, undergraduate students will build and
measure the heat transfer coefficient of electrolytic fluids, and study their
ability to store energy and transport heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.