* 1943716
* CAREER:Genetic approaches to establish design rules for implantable neurotechnology
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Erin Purcell, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2025
* USD 543,269.00

Brain cells communicate through the generation and transmission of electrical
signals. Neurological diseases, such as Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s
disease, and injuries can result from faulty or interrupted signaling between
networks of brain cells. The development of implanted electrodes, which are
medical devices capable of “write-in” or “read-out” of electrical signals to and
from the brain, has significantly improved the treatment and understanding of
these neurological diseases and injuries. However, following implantation, the
body recognizes the implanted device as a foreign object. The tissue response to
the implant often results in a build-up of scar tissue and loss of signal-
generating cells surrounding the device. This, in turn, is believed to
contribute to a loss of function of the implant over time. This CAREER project
seeks to answer fundamental questions regarding the tissue response to
electrodes implanted in the brain: what are the critical biological events that
most strongly impact long-term device performance, and how are they influenced
by design features of the electrodes? To answer these questions, new techniques
in molecular biology will be applied to reveal biological markers that can
predict device performance; then device design choices will be systematically
tested to determine the influence of materials and dimensions on these markers.
As a result, the project is expected to deliver new understanding of how to
design implanted electrodes with optimized biocompatibility and performance. The
complementary educational objectives of the project are to strengthen the new
graduate curricula in biomedical engineering at Michigan State University
through the development of novel assessments of the success of the program,
while creating a new peer-mentoring program for undergraduate women interested
in entering the field of biomedical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Investigator’s long-term research goal is to create fully integrated neural
electrode-tissue interfaces. Towards this goal, the goal of this CAREER project
is to develop new approaches to understand and control biological responses to
brain implants, which are believed to be a key limitation to device function,
stability, and lifespan. The Research Plan is organized under three objectives.
The FIRST Objective is to identify biomarkers of device-tissue interaction
through RNA-sequencing. Laser capture microscopy (LCM) will be used to excise
selected portions of brain tissue for extraction of RNA and subsequent
sequencing to provide a comprehensive view of possible changes in gene
expression induced by single shank, non-functional silicon-based devices
implanted in the motor cortex of adult rats. Results will be compared to
contralateral tissue samples receiving an insertion injury only (to control for
“stab” wound effects), which will enable identification of a subset of genes
that will be further screened as potentially key biomarkers of long-term chronic
performance. The SECOND Objective is to test biomarker effects on signal
detection through knockdown of the three gene expressions that were the most
highly differentially expressed at the interface relative to control in the
first objective. Knockdown will be via stable, viral-mediated expression
surrounding functional, 16-channel, single-shank silicon microelectrode arrays
implanted in the motor cortex of rats. Changes will be assessed in terms of the
number of “units” detected per device, longevity of detected unit activity,
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and amplitude of units and local field potentials,
in comparison to contralateral control tissue treated with an empty vector. The
THIRD Objective is to define design rules via systematic tests of electrode
materials and feature sizes. Planar style, single shank arrays, will be
fabricated from silicon, Parylene, polycrystalline diamond and
polydimethylsiloxane. The impact of device dimensions, Young’s modulus, bending
stiffness, and feature size on both traditional histological measures and the
expression of biomarkers identified in the first two objectives will be tested.
These results will provide guidance on design parameters that should be pursued
to optimize the biointegration of electrodes with the
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.