* 1943862
* CAREER: Computational and Neural Basis of Social Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Stefano Anzellotti, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 557,590.00

In order to interact appropriately with others, people need to recognize
identities, facial expressions, and actions. What are the brain mechanisms
underlying this recognition? This project proposes that face identity and
expressions are processed by common brain regions, and that distinct regions are
specialized to process static and dynamic information. This could be a
particular case of a more general phenomenon: “complementarity”, in which
different tasks like recognizing identity and recognizing expressions are
performed by the same brain regions, because solving one of the tasks helps to
solve the other. Complementarity might be a general principle of organization of
the brain. This research aims to shed new light into social perception and more
broadly into the large-scale organization of the human brain, through
measurement of neural activity and building artificial neural networks. This
aims to improve understanding of social cognition and its impairments, such as
autism spectrum disorders. The project will design courses and research
opportunities for students to receive training at the intersection between
neuroscience and artificial intelligence (AI), preparing them to study
neuroscience questions with new AI tools, and to build new AI inspired by state-
of-the-art research in neuroscience. The project will also reach out to the
broader community, using a combination of in-person and online events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to a classical theory, face identity and facial
expressions are processed by separate neural pathways. The identity of a face is
recognized by the ventral temporal lobe (occipital face area: OFA, fusiform face
area: FFA), while expressions are recognized by the lateral temporal lobe
(posterior superior temporal sulcus: pSTS). By contrast, recent research
identified identity information in pSTS, and expression information in OFA and
FFA. This project hypothesizes that: 1) representations of orthogonal properties
like face identity and expressions operate synergistically during recognition,
and arise spontaneously within the same brain regions; 2) this phenomenon occurs
not only in the case of face identity and expressions, but also in the case of
body identity and actions, constituting a broader principle of organization of
social perception; 3) ventral and lateral regions are not distinguished by the
content they encode, but by the type of properties they process. The project
will test these hypotheses by asking participants to watch controlled and
naturalistic videos of expressions and actions while undergoing fMRI, and by
modeling their responses with encoding models using features from deep neural
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.