* 1943370
* CAREER: Enhanced Analysis &amp; Algorithms to Minimize the Spread of Misinformation in Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Francesca Spezzano, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2025
* USD 435,174.00

The project goal is to significantly reduce the destructive spread of
misinformation on social media and other Web sources, and its potential threat
to national security. To do so, the investigator will develop new machine
learning algorithms to better detect authenticity and recommend content. The
research integrates computer and social sciences to account for the complex
real-world interactions among publisher, platform, content recommendation
algorithms, bot users, human users, and their social connections. One way social
networks engage users is by keeping them consuming personalized content.
Malicious actors can easily penetrate these systems with misleading stories and
consequent recommendations that prompt people to make decisions based on this
misinformation. Younger generations are increasingly active on such platforms,
making it critical to reduce the threat that the continuing spread of
misinformation poses. Findings will result in a deeper understanding of how
recommender systems behave in the presence of misleading stories, and will offer
systems design strategies to insure that people receive accurate information to
make decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently no framework in place to
quantify how much recommendations with misinformation in the loop influence
social network users. This research will fill this gap. Project objectives are
to: (1) develop graph-based models to measure the degree of story, sources, and
user credibility as opposed to a typical binary assessment; (2) develop a new
framework integrating user-centric information diffusion models to assess the
impact of, and compute benchmarks for, current recommender systems in spreading
misleading stories; (3) develop algorithms for content recommender systems that
will minimize misinformation spread in social networks. An integrated education
plan will engage Boise State University college students, who will use a
service-learning approach to help Idaho high school students and teachers
improve their ability to identify and respond to misinformation. Educational
activities will also increase awareness of and interest in computer science
occupations, and encourage minorities' retention and
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.