* 1943964
* EAGER: Celebrating the successes and identifying the obstacles faced by innovative and entrepreneurial underrepresented women of color
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Ebony McGee, Berry College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 353,748.00

This EAGER award conducts exploratory research on the successes and obstacles
faced by innovative and entrepreneurial women of color in STEM (science,
technology, engineering, mathematics). Situated within the intersectionality
framework, this research will be conducted via in-depth interviews and focus
groups with Underrepresented Women of Color (URWOC) innovators and
entrepreneurs. This research defines Women of Color as those women who identify
as African-American/Black, Latinx/Hispanic/Chicana, and Indigenous/Native
Alaskan/ Native Hawaiian to better understand: (1) the background of URWOC
founders and how they became interested in starting a STEM venture; 2) the
strategies that URWOC owner/founders employed to start and persist in their
ventures/innovations, choose to license, or sell their ventures/innovations; 3)
similarities and differences in intersectionality across URWOC groups who are
engaged in STEM innovation and entrepreneurship (I&amp;E); 4) the unique
experiences and challenges that URWOC endure in their I&amp;E endeavors and 5)
how to increase the number of URWOC in I&amp;E with a focus on providing
assistance to national initiatives aimed at diversifying underrepresented groups
in I&amp;E. This research will support the creation of theoretically robust yet
practical frameworks for understanding the experiences of URWOC innovators and
entrepreneurs in STEM. In turn, these insights will be used to integrate
research with practice via the creation of outcomes that have the potential to
engage a variety of stakeholders in co-creating solutions focused on increasing
the number of URWOC in STEM Innovation &amp; Entrepreneurship
(I&amp;E).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project fills an important gap in
synthesizing the literature on intersectionality and entrepreneurship and
innovation in STEM for URWOCs and documenting the historical changes of the
composition of URWOC in STEM I&amp;E across the nation. Findings will inform and
connect to more robust investigations of how key factors impact URWOC who are
engaging in unique experiences that enable their success and enhance their
ability to overcome typical issues of race, class, and gender oppression for
URWOC in STEM I&amp;E. Research findings will provide critical information for
use by STEM education and STEM entrepreneurship researchers, stakeholders, and
leadership n STEM in policy formation, assessment of the progress of diversity
initiatives toward building a vibrant and robust community of
URWOC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.