* 1943245
* CAREER: Physical Side-Channels Beyond Cryptography: Transforming the Side-Channel Framework for Deep Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Aydin Aysu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2025
* USD 257,155.00

Machine Learning (ML) classifiers are hard to develop and are used in safety-
critical applications like autonomous driving. Exposing the details of an ML
classifier thus results in intellectual property theft and also makes it easier
to be fooled by adversaries. Unfortunately, the implementation of an ML
classifier may leak information about its inner workings. The primary research
goal of this project is to develop secure ML classifier implementations. This
work specifically addresses the fundamental electromagnetic and power side-
channel vulnerabilities of physical implementations of ML
classifiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is to
extend the physical side-channel analysis framework beyond cryptography for
securing deep neural network (NN) classifiers. Although there is research on the
mathematical analysis and digital side-channels of NN model extraction, physical
side-channels are largely unexplored. The research tasks are to design physical
side-channel resilient NN components, to integrate the developed components into
a high-level synthesis framework for automatic generation of protected NN
hardware accelerators, and to evaluate/benchmark side-channel security and
countermeasure overheads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
project includes disseminating publications, distributing open-source hardware
and software, and bridging the research on NNs and hardware security. The
project also aims developing a college course to teach hardware security for NNs
with hands-on experiments. This work may also help the Executive Order on
Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence, by evaluating the
security of the Artificial Intelligence standards being put forward by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use a repository with multiple back-up servers to store and log the
data, and the major results and hardware and software products will be made
publicly available by using resources over the world wide web. Further
information on the project repository will be made accessible at
https://research.ece.ncsu.edu/aaysu/research/MLSec-CAREER-nsf.html. The
repository is intended to be actively maintained for the duration of the project
and 5 years after its completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.