* 1943205
* CAREER: Enabling Autonomy via Enhanced Situational Awareness for Underwater Robotics
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Ioannis Rekleitis, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 02/28/2025
* USD 442,581.00

The role of the aquatic environment is of great importance: it plays a critical
role in climate; it contains the highest biodiversity on the planet; ports are
among the most critical infrastructures for trade and transportation; and as
much as 40% of the global population lives within 100km of the shoreline.
Improving our understanding of the underwater domain is essential. Using
autonomous robots to collect additional information will be safer, more cost
effective, and can be extended to a larger scale than previous methods. The goal
of this project is to enable autonomous operations of robotic systems in
underwater environments. In order to achieve this goal, the robot needs to be
aware of the environment, and of its own position inside the environment. The
robot needs to develop movement strategies that would facilitate the efficient
and accurate estimation of its position and the location of obstacles/objects in
the environment, while taking into account the errors in the measurements. The
underwater domain presents several unique challenges: there is no Global
Positioning System (GPS); communication, when available, has extremely limited
bandwidth; visibility conditions, even in the best-case scenarios, are limited
due to particulates in the water that obstruct the view. The investigator will
advance the state of the art in four areas: information from different robot
sensors will be used to calculate the position of the robot as it moves through
the underwater domain; then, the investigator and his graduate students will use
all available information to produce a representation of the environment the
robot can use to navigate; next, planning will be implemented to guide the robot
through the environment taking into account the shorter distance and the areas
with viewing interest; and finally, the team will investigate new strategies for
exploring unknown environments efficiently. The investigator will use his
research results from the underwater realm to raise interest for students and
the general populace towards science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enable
autonomous operations of robotic systems in underwater environments. In order to
achieve this goal, the robot needs situational awareness. Additionally, the
robot needs to develop motion strategies that would facilitate the efficient and
accurate estimation of its pose and the location of points of interest in the
environment, while taking into account uncertainty buildup and the effect of
external forces such as wind or current. The underwater domain renders
satellite-based GPS ineffective. Communications, when available, have extremely
limited bandwidth; and visibility conditions are limited due to hazing and
blurring, lighting variations over time, and color loss. The investigator will
advance the state of the art in four areas: information from different sensors
will be used to calculate the pose of the robot as it moves through the
underwater domain; all available information will be utilized to produce a dense
representation of the environment; next, a decision process will be implemented
to guide the robot through the environment taking into account efficiency
(shorter distance) and the areas with viewing interest; finally, new strategies
for exploring and covering unknown environments efficiently will be
investigated. More specifically, robustness measures and divergence predictors
will be developed for the state estimation in order to provide early warnings of
erroneous estimates. Measuring the quality of the different sensors will result
in the judicious use of the subset of sensors that provide accurate information.
The mapping challenge will be addressed by augmenting the feature-based map with
features generated from the lighting variations, such as shadows and caustic
patterns. Coverage patterns will be employed in open areas with limited
obstacles, while a frontier-based strategy will guide the underwater vehicle to
unexplored areas. Returning to mapped areas in a systematic manner will maintain
the localization uncertainty below a user defined level. The results will be
published in conferences and journals of robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.