* 1943784
* Workshop for Alaska EarthScope Synthesis and Future Opportunities in Canada with EON-ROSE: September 2019
* GEO,EAR
* 06/03/2019,08/31/2022
* Jeffrey Freymueller, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,835.00

Alaska is home to a major tectonic plate boundary, creating conditions that give
rise to significant volcanic activity and frequent earthquakes. Though progress
has been made in the last 25 years in understanding the geology and tectonic
history of Alaska, the EarthScope Transportable Array and Plate Boundary
Observatory provide the opportunity to make significant advances in constraining
the structure and dynamics of the plate boundary. This project would support a
workshop that would bring together Earth scientists from different disciplines
to integrate and synthesize information from geology and geophysics to provide a
synoptic understanding of tectonics in Alaska. The project would support
approximately twenty participants to attend this workshop, as well as two
complementary workshops to be held in Sitka, Alaska, and Whitehorse, Canada, and
result in the development of multiple synthesis or review papers. The project
would also foster United States - Canada research network development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would support the development of a EarthScope
synthesis workshop focused on elucidating what EarthScope has accomplished in
understanding the tectonics of Alaska. The primary workshop goal is for the
development of multiple synthesis papers. The workshop will be held in
conjunction with a Geological Society of America Penrose conference and a
Canadian-lead EON-ROSE (Earth-System Observing Network - Reseau d'Observation du
Systeme terrestrE) workshop, to maximize the participation of the EarthScope
community in these activities. The workshop agenda includes approximately one
day of plenary talks and EarthScope synthesis discussion groups followed by a
field trip from Sitka, Alaska to Whitehorse, Yukon Territory, Canada, that takes
participants between meeting venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.