* 1943598
* CAREER: Mechanics of Damage-Tolerant Electro-Mechano-Chemically
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Qiming Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2025
* USD 523,656.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research to understand the coupling of color-change, self-healing, and electro-
deformation of a cephalopod-inspired damage-tolerant electro-mechano-chemically
responsive elastomer. Cephalopod skins, simultaneously featuring color-change
for active camouflage, self-healing of wounds and injuries, and neuron-driven
muscle actuation, have recently inspired novel synthetic materials for diverse
engineering applications, ranging from camouflage skins, soft robotics, flexible
electronics, and thermal regulators, to biomedical devices. Despite the great
potential, the design of cephalopod-skin-like synthetic materials with coupled
properties remains at the trial-and-error stage without theoretical guidance.
This project will fill the knowledge gap by integrating theories and experiments
to provide a mechanistic and quantitative understanding of the multiphysics
coupling of a new synthetic elastomer with properties of force-induced color-
change, self-healing, and electro-mechanical actuation. The knowledge obtained
from this project may facilitate innovations of future camouflage skins for
underwater robotics and aerial vehicles. The insights from this research may
also help the design of affordable anthropomorphic prostheses and artificial
organs to improve the life quality of millions of disabled people. Besides, the
project includes an integrated education plan to train diverse groups of next-
generation engineers through a variety of avenues, including engineering
curriculum development, involvement of underrepresented undergraduates and high
school students via summer research programs, outreach to K-12 students and
teachers at Orthopaedic Hospital Medical Magnet High School, and outreach to the
general public at Los Angeles EXPO Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthetic
elastomer consists of flexible polymer networks crosslinked by radical-forming
mechanophores diarylbibenzofuranone, expecting to simultaneously enable force-
induced color-change, self-healing, and electro-mechanical actuation. The
central hypothesis of the project is that the polymer-network-linked
mechanophores can undergo a reversible chemical reaction to trigger
dissociation-induced color-change and re-associated-induced self-healing. Driven
by the hypothesis, material fabrication, multiaxial mechanical testing,
electromechanical actuation, mechanochromic measurement, and corresponding
analytical modeling will be integrated to reveal the profound multiphysics
coupling of polymer network mechanics, scission-binding chemical reactions, and
electro-mechanical interactions. Specific tasks include: (1) to understand the
constitutive behavior of the synthetic elastomer, (2) to elucidate the coupling
of color-change and self-healing of the elastomer under mechanical loads, and
(3) to decode the coupling of color-change, self-healing, and electro-
deformation when the elastomer is under electro-mechanical loads. The research
effort will open promising avenues for mechanistically and quantitatively
understanding a feed-back-loop coupling of multiple physical fields (mechanics,
chemical reaction, and electric field) within the context of stretchable soft
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.