* 1943777
* CAREER: Enabling Immunomodulatory Treatment of Influenza Infection using Multiscale Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Jason Shoemaker, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2025
* USD 547,494.00

Respiratory virus infections are a constant threat to public health. Influenza
infection results in up to 700,000 hospitalizations and 56,000 deaths each year
in the US. Extreme lung inflammation due to an excessive immune response is a
major factor of severe disease outcomes in influenza virus and coronavirus
infection (including SARS, MERS, and in emerging evidence, the COVID-19 virus.)
The immune system is a complex, interactive, dynamic system that must optimally
clear the virus infection while minimizing collateral damage to the lungs and
other organs initiated by immune-regulated processes. Engineering-based
mathematical modeling approaches are ideally suited to create computational
simulations of the immune system that can be used to estimate the system’s
response to virus infection. The overall goal of this research project is to
construct realistic, predictive, physiologically accurate computational models
of the natural immune response during influenza virus infection. The
computational models will form the foundation for simulation-based research to
identify the immunologic conditions that allow for excessive immune responses to
occur. Simulations will also identify the best way to suppress immune activity,
using chemical inhibition to reduce tissue inflammation while ensuring rapid
clearance of the infection. As excessive inflammation is a common feature of
many respiratory virus infections, the insights on immune regulation generated
are expected to impact a variety of respiratory virus diseases. In parallel with
this research effort, the research team will develop virtual reality (VR) games
to better engage the public on matters associated with respiratory infection and
immune responses. The VR games will be distributed to user smartphones for free
to ensure strong public engagement. The VR games will also be used during
workshops at local high schools to promote student engagement in engineering and
immunology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Investigator’s long-term CAREER vision is
to engineer computational modeling-based solutions to regulate and improve
immune system responses. Toward this vision, the objectives of this CAREER
project are to identify the molecular/cellular mechanisms that drive lung
inflammation during influenza infection and to evaluate immunomodulatory
treatment in silico using multiscale computational modeling. Studies show that
selectively inhibiting the immune system can significantly improve infection
outcomes by reducing inflammation without compromising virus clearance.
Immunomodulation has also been shown to offer greater protection than
administration of antiviral medicines (e.g. oseltamivir), but no comprehensive
guidelines for administering immunomodulatory treatments, such as anti-
inflammatory corticosteroids, exist. Such immunomodulatory strategies are
inherently an engineering optimization challenge: modifying immune responses to
limit inflammation while ensuring virus clearance. The predictive models
designed can be used to evaluate specific hypotheses on the mechanisms
regulating inflammation during influenza virus infection. The research program
is organized under three synergistic objectives. The FIRST Objective is to
construct and use an ODE (Ordinary Differential Equations) model to identify the
molecular drivers of inflammation in influenza-infected human lung epithelial
cells. A model of epithelial intracellular signaling will be developed and used
to uncover the molecular drivers of inflammatory protein production, evaluate
trade-offs between inflammation and suppressing virus replication, and to
identify possible virus-specific inflammatory regulation when comparing highly
pathogenic (H5N1) and milder virus infections. Completion of this objective will
provide evidence of the molecular mechanisms regulating lung epithelial
inflammation in general and in specific virus infections. The SECOND Objective
is to construct and use an ODE model to identify the immunologic conditions that
drive enhanced inflammation in influenza-infected mouse lungs. The model will
link lung epithelial signaling with immune cell infiltration. The model will be
used to identify the mechanisms that drive enhanced inflammation at the tissue
level and explore treatment options. Comparisons between infection with
different viruses and between male (less severe) vs female (more severe)
infection may reveal virus and cohort-specific inflammation regulation.
Completion of this objective will identify the key molecular and cellular
drivers of influenza-induced inflammation, provide a novel computational model
of the lung immune system that enables comparisons between important infection
cohorts, and potentially identify virus-specific or sex-specific immune
regulation that is driving differential inflammation. The THIRD Objective is to
construct and use an ABM (Agent Based Model) of the lung immune system to
quantify the impact of cell heterogeneity on tissue-level inflammation.
Interferon production is stochastic and may factor into variable infection
outcomes. Using customized code, an ABM in which ODEs define how agents
(epithelial cells) interact with their environment will be constructed and used
to interrogate how epithelial cellular heterogeneity impacts tissue-level
inflammation during influenza infection. Completion of this objective will
identify the components of the immune system responsible for maintaining a
tightly regulated inflammatory response, provide knowledge of how intra-subject
inflammation may vary due to differences in immune regulation, produce new code
for the simulation community, and produce a novel ABM of the lung immune system
during influenza infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.