* 1943553
* CAREER: The Upstream Impacts of Mountains on Frontal Precipitation Using  Olympic Mountain Experiment (OLYMPEX) Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Deanna Hence, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 04/30/2025
* USD 714,140.00

This award supports research to study the development of precipitation over
mountainous terrain. Increased rainfall and snowfall often occur when weather
systems are forced to go over or around mountainous terrain, significantly
impacting the availability of water for regions such as the Olympic Mountains of
Washington State, but also increasing the risk of hazards such as flooding,
avalanches and mudslides. Under some conditions, the location and intensity of
this intensified precipitation can change, with this terrain-induced enhancement
occurring at distances upstream of the mountains themselves. Quantifying how,
and where, this upstream precipitation enhancement occurs and how it evolves in
rapidly changing conditions is crucial to completing the full picture of how
these weather systems provide precipitation to a region, as well as more
accurately quantifying the evolving weather-related hazards that come with the
system interacting with terrain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through comprehensive
field observations and high-resolution numerical simulations, this project will
quantify the conditions where this upstream enhancement occurs and identify the
mechanisms that lead to this enhancement in rapidly evolving atmospheric flows.
This project will coincide with the development of a holistic mentoring and
research experience program to support the transfer of students from two-year
college programs. Through a comprehensive mentorship model, this program will
develop cross institutional relationships while also providing year-round
research, communication skill building, and professional development
opportunities to support studentsâ€™ path into
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project use analysis of high-resolution
radar data and soundings collected during NASA-NSF OLYMPEX field campaign,
operational data from the National Weather Service WSR-88D radars and NWS
Quillayute, WA sounding station, and complimentary high-resolution numerical
simulations to quantify how frontal precipitation processes are uniquely altered
upwind of the Olympic Mountains of Washington State. The main tasks will be to
identify the preferred regions of orographic precipitation enhancement upstream
of the mountains through statistical analysis of operational radar data, to
quantify the variability and evolution of upstream flow diversion through high-
resolution Doppler analysis and numerical simulations, and to determine how
variations in low-level winds and atmospheric stability extend the reach of the
orographic enhancement and how this affects frontal circulations and
precipitation through detailed case study analysis of ground-based and
satellite-based radars. This research will contribute new understanding about
the interaction of fronts and other highly variable atmospheric flows with
isolated mountain ranges, which has significant implications for understanding
the distribution and evolution of orographically-enhanced precipitation around
mountainous islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.