* 1943574
* CAREER: Unveiling the role of catchment physiography in the  hydrologic response of headwater streams
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Catalina Segura, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2025
* USD 645,896.00

Water quality and availability are vital to society and wildlife sustainability.
However, we are still not able to predict the paths that water follows from
precipitation to streamflow in a river, nor how long this process takes. A
deeper understanding is crucial to anticipate overall water quality and supply.
This is particularly true for headwater streams because their input controls the
water quantity and quality of larger freshwater systems. While it is widely
recognized that the flow paths water can take depend on the available catchment
storage, i.e., the size of the underground “bucket”, it is not yet possible to
measure how large this storage is. This project will investigate the
relationship between geology, geomorphology, and topography and storage
availability, as derived from hydrologic tracers such as water stable isotopes.
This investigation will enhance societal ability to adapt and ensure sustainable
supply of clean water under modified hydrologic conditions, likely to occur as
consequences of human activities (forest harvesting, urbanization) and climate
change. Through this project a relationship with the Oregon Museum of Science
and Industry will be established to develop hands-on activities and to teach the
general public about water availability in the context of climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand the temporal-
spatial variability of rainfall-runoff generation in headwater streams using
LiDAR derived metrics of storage potential and tracer data. This research will
be conducted in headwater streams over variable geomorphology and geology over a
wide range (0.1–62 km2) of catchment areas. The approach will integrate water
stable isotopes and electrical conductivity as tracers, hydrometric data
collected by an NSF LTER site, and LiDAR in catchment-scale models to predict
event transit times and storage in unmonitored locations. This study has the
potential to transform the current approach to estimate water storage and to
incorporate it in multiscale hydrologic modeling. This research will form the
structure for an educational program to engage the public in activities that
enhance their understanding of the water movement in the context of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.