* 1943621
* CAREER: Adaptive Web Execution: Supporting Billions of Diverse Users by Adapting Execution to Available Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Ravi Netravali, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 10/31/2021
* USD 199,034.00

Web pages provide access to many critical services (e.g., health care,
education, news), and are increasingly accessed by users with diverse network
and device resources. Unfortunately, despite the fact that performance and
functionality of page loads can vary drastically across resource settings, page
loads today minimally adapt to their execution environments. This results in
either underutilized resources or broken (incomplete) pages. This project aims
to develop a new web paradigm called Adaptive Web Execution (AWE), in which page
loads directly adapt their execution or content according to the available
resources. The key goal is to maximize the performance and functionality that a
web page can offer a user based on that userâ€™s resource
availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three synergistic
directions that develop the foundational algorithms and practical systems for
realizing the AWE paradigm. First, it will develop strategies to collect and
expose resource information to page loads in a way that balances cross-stack
profiling overheads with actionable adaptation insights. Second, it will design
a suite of content-preserving optimization systems that 1) dynamically adapt
existing optimization strategies via efficient, web-focused machine learning,
and 2) judiciously incorporate new, unused device resources into page loads.
Third, it will create methods to simplify the development of content-altering
adaptations, such as web-aware replay debugging that comprehensively evaluates
page modifications across potential execution
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will fundamentally transform
and improve the web for multiple players. Users in developed regions will
experience lower delays or increased functionality (increasing website revenue),
while users in developing regions will get proper access to critical
applications that are currently unusable with their available resources. AWE
will also reduce development costs for websites and bridge the gap between web
research and practical deployments by generalizing optimizations. The research
will be informed by and evaluated in testbeds in developing regions, as well as
through partnerships with industrial collaborators. The project will also
involve 1) a new pedagogical 'full stack' approach to teaching networked system
design, and 2) efforts to attract underrepresented undergraduate and K-12
students through the highly accessible lens of the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research artifacts and course materials designed as part of this project will be
released on a public website: https://web.cs.ucla.edu/~ravi/awe/. In addition,
the project site will include aggregate summaries of page structures and
resource availability (in the form of privacy-preserving emulation traces)
collected on developing region testbeds. The site will be regularly maintained,
and project data will be kept for at least 5 years after publication, with
extensions based on public interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.