* 1943628
* CAREER: Coevolutionary Community Dynamics of Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixing Associations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Maren Friesen, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2025
* USD 764,052.00

Everything in our world is covered in complex communities of microorganisms
called microbiomes. These microbiomes are important for human health, clean
environments, and productive crops. Since they are much smaller than their
hosts, microorganisms can evolve much faster. Within the microbiomes, some
theoretical models predict that faster evolution will result in microorganisms
that cause more severe disease, whereas other models predict that faster
evolution will cause beneficial microorganisms to become even more beneficial.
Understanding when each of these outcomes occurs will be important for coming up
with strategies to manage microbiomes. This project will use coevolutionary
theoretical models to understand how communities of microorganisms that colonize
the roots of clover plants interact and evolve. Clover is a relative of many
crop plants such as beans, alfalfa, and chickpeas, and this information can be
used to improve agricultural yield and soil health. Students will be trained in
methods to study these microorganisms and will isolate strains, analyze genomes
and physiology, and measure ecological interactions. The project will recruit
underserved Native American students in the Pacific Northwest. This project will
also produce a coevolutionary video game that will combine outreach and
education with research. A symposium bringing together student researchers,
empiricists, and theoreticians will catalyze transformative research in this
rapidly moving field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Host-associated microbial communities
are key mediators of host traits and ecosystem processes, and a scientific
frontier is understanding how these communities interact and coevolve in nature.
Clover nodule-associated microorganismal communities are an ideal model system
to study these processes. This project has three key elements: (1) an accessible
field system at Bodega Bay, amenable to the collection of long-term data on both
hosts and associated microorganisms, (2) the ability to bring key players into
the lab to measure the molecular basis of host-microorganism and microorganism-
microorganism interactions, assess patterns of fitness covariance, and conduct
experimental coevolution, and (3) mathematical models that can be parameterized
with empirical data to predict community assembly and coevolutionary dynamics.
The project will address (1) how asymmetries in evolutionary rates influence
coevolution in complex communities, (2) scenarios in which 'Red Queen'
dynamics–arms races between antagonists–outpace 'Red King' dynamics, where
rapidly-evolving mutualists evolve costly traits that enhance host fitness, and
(3) how multi-partite interactions influence host benefit and specialization. By
linking empirical measurements over varying evolutionary timescales to
mathematical models, this project will potentially generate insight into general
properties of complex coevolving host-associated
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.