* 1943415
* CAREER: Determining the impact of asexual ploidy transitions on evolutionary trajectories
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Meleah Hickman, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2021
* USD 208,871.00

The research will determine how the ability to change the number of copies of
genes within a cell affects evolution. Genetic variation is important for
species to be able to survive and adapt to changing environments. For most
plants and animals, mating creates new combinations of genes, generating
variation. However for many fungi, mating is rare or absent. Instead, during
growth fungi often change the number of chromosomes and chromosome sets (ploidy)
they contain. This research uses Candida albicans, a fungal pathogen of humans,
to identify how frequently changes in ploidy occur, and what environments
promote these changes, including antifungal drugs. One result will be a better
understanding of the evolution of virulence and drug resistance. The project
will develop an upper-division writing-intensive class using C. albicans ploidy
variation as a compelling biological context; the course will be designed to
teach students how to transform experimental results from data to knowledge
while challenging students to distill scientific knowledge into a framework
accessible to the general public. The data will be generated in an introductory
biology lab module that measures mutation rates in C. albicans strains with
different ploidy states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While asexual ploidy transitions
are well-documented to occur in many fungal species and across diverse growth
environments, whether they drive evolutionary processes or are simply a
consequence of elevated genome instability remains to be explicitly tested. The
environmental signals and pathways to ploidy changes have not been well
characterized, nor have the consequences of asexual ploidy transitions been
tested within an evolutionary framework. By screening for Candida genome size
changes across many in vitro and host environments at short- and mid-length time
scales, environments that promote ploidy transitions will be identified. By
constructing C. albicans strains that are genetically-locked into the diploid or
polyploid state, the researchers will test how ploidy transitions contribute to
evolutionary processes by comparing the rates and outcomes of selection for
virulence and antifungal drug resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.