* 1943276
* CAREER: Descending neural control of a motor sequence in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Julie Simpson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2025
* USD 841,098.00

An animal's nervous system controls its behavior. Complex behavioral sequences
are assembled from simpler motor programs. Like nest-building in birds and web-
spinning in spiders, grooming in flies represents a flexible, innate, adaptive
motor sequence. This project will use the genetic tools available in flies,
combined with new machine vision analysis, to identify the neurons that control
fly grooming behavior. It will focus on the connections between the brain and
the ventral nervous system, since these descending neurons are a natural
information bottleneck. Understanding how a limited number of neurons convey
commands and coordinate competing reflexes into productive behaviors will
advance basic knowledge in neuroscience and provide conceptual insights into how
any brain – including human ones – solve similar challenges. One focus of the
NSF's mission to promote basic science research is to understand the rules of
life, and specifically to predict phenotypes. This research contributes to
ongoing efforts to generate maps of all the neurons and their connections in the
fly by adding information about their behavioral functions. As part of the
educational objectives of this project, the PI will organize a summer course at
the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics for experimentalists and theorists
that will involve both cutting edge topics in modern systems neuroscience and
theoretical approaches. Specific efforts will be made to recruit undergraduate
students to this quantitative biology summer course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will employ automated behavioral analysis of Drosophila grooming,
optogenetic manipulations, and anatomical characterization of neuronal circuits.
Screens using new genetic reagents to target specific descending neurons will
delineate their behavioral roles. The project will characterize the projections
and connections of these neurons to determine how they interface with sensory
and motor circuits. Activating combinations of descending neurons that initiate
competing behavioral programs will reveal whether decisions are made in the
brain or the ventral nerve cord. Neural circuits that can be mapped in the fly
represent fundamental motifs that perform computations common to all brains.
Understanding their roles in grooming behavior uses the advantages of this model
to learn how the brain achieves motor sequences. The broader impact activities
include a summer laboratory course in systems neuroscience as part of the
ongoing KITP summer program in quantitative biology as well as undergraduate and
graduate student training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.