* 1943683
* CAREER: Scalable Ionic Gated 2D Synapse (IG-2DS) with Programmable Spatio-Temporal Dynamics for Spiking Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Feng Xiong, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 02/28/2025
* USD 507,337.00

CAREER: Scalable Ionic Gated 2D Synapse (IG-2DS) with Programmable Spatio-
Temporal Dynamics for Spiking Neural Networks&lt;br/&gt;ECCS :
1943683&lt;br/&gt;PI: Feng
Xiong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Artificial intelligence (AI)
has the potential to transform people's lives. Machine learning has shown
promise in healthcare, transportation, and advanced manufacturing, but requires
enormous amounts of energy. The human brain is better at cognitive tasks such as
pattern recognition than even supercomputers while requiring less than 20W of
power. Inspired by the human brain, neuromorphic computing and artificial neural
networks have recently attracted immense interest. Spiking neural networks mimic
biological processes by incorporating similar temporal dynamics. This type of
computing offers a promising route for energy-efficient computing with high
bandwidth. It is, however, challenging and expensive to implement spatio-
temporal processes such as short-term and long-term memory in spiking neural
networks with existing digital electronics. In this project, the PI will develop
a critically missing element, a dynamic synapse, by controlling the charge
carrier concentration in two-dimensional devices. This breakthrough will lead to
a truly neuro-realistic computing system with dramatic improvements in energy
efficiency, bandwidth, and cognitive capabilities. This can lead to the wide use
of AI and revolutionize society through advances in cognitive computing, self-
driving vehicles, and autonomous manufacturing. The PI will develop an
afterschool outreach program in partnership with a local community engagement
center. Students from underrepresented groups will have design and laboratory
experiences with the aim of attracting them into engineering
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to elucidate the transport mechanisms in ionic gated two-dimensional synaptic
(IG-2DS) devices and build synaptic arrays with programmable spatio-temporal
dynamics, high precision, low power, good scalability, and good reliability for
the hardware implementation of spiking neural networks (SNNs). Despite recent
success in the development of artificial neural networks, the hardware
implementation of SNNs has been challenging because existing digital electronics
do not possess the spatio-temporal dynamics needed for a dynamic synapse-the key
building block of SNNs. In this project, the PI will adopt a novel approach to
demonstrate short-term and long-term plasticity in 2D synapses by modulating the
volatile doping effect from ionic gating and the non-volatile doping effect from
charge transfer doping via intercalation. The PI will carry out the following
three research tasks: (1) elucidate the short- and long-term doping mechanisms
in IG-2DS; (2) demonstrate tunable spatio-temporal dynamics in IG-2DS for the
hardware implementation of SNNs; and (3) investigate the scaling potentials of
IG-2DS for large-scale integration. Fundamentally, this work elucidates the
electronic and ionic transport in 2D electronics. Practically, this work will
have an immense impact in the fields of computing, self-driving, automation in
manufacturing, flexible sensors, and wearable electronics through the hardware
implementation of SNNs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.