* 1943906
* CAREER: Uncovering the Impact of Traditional and Novel Chronic Stimulation Modalities on Neural Excitability and Native Neuronal Network Function
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Takashi Kozai, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2025
* USD 553,321.00

The ability to selectively stimulate a small group of neurons has been long
desired for basic neuroscience studies as well as for clinical applications. To
address this need, the investigator has developed a wireless technology that can
precisely stimulate a distinct population of neurons by electrical or light
stimulation. Because a balance between excitatory and inhibitory neural activity
is important for perception in the brain, a key question is how stimulation
impacts this balance. An imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory neuronal
activity can lead to cognitive dysfunctions and is a hallmark of autism spectrum
disorder. Moreover, brain injuries such as traumatic brain injuries, stroke, and
microelectrode implantation have also been shown to disrupt this balance.
Therefore, the research goal of this CAREER project is to establish the
relationship between different types of stimulation and their impact on
excitability of neuronal populations. The project's educational goal is to train
the next wave of investigators with the multidisciplinary skills needed to solve
the chronic neural interface challenge. This will be achieved through: 1)
integrating examples from this research into an outreach program to
Underrepresented Minority Students that focuses on introducing the fundamental
principles of the scientific method and engineering design controls and criteria
and on demonstrating how science and engineering converge at the neural
interface; 2) making neural interface knowledge more widely accessible by the
formation of the virtual "Education in Biological and Neuroelectronic Interface
Community" (eBioNIC.org) that will be a focal point for providing videos and
other training materials; and 3) providing an early platform for hands-on
education on integrating Neurobiology and Neural
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Investigator's long-term career vision is
to seamlessly integrate the brain and technology in order to enable new
approaches to studying long-standing neurobiology questions such as how to
repair brain injuries and neurodegenerative diseases. Towards this vision, this
CAREER project’s specific goals are to break through traditional limitations of
neurostimulation by engineering wireless axons that use specific biomolecules to
modulate the activity of a small population of neurons in the brain, and then
apply this technology to modulate excitatory-inhibitory neuronal imbalances. The
project will employ new optical technologies to solve long-standing questions on
the relationship between stimulation technologies and changes to the brain’s
excitatory-inhibitory balance. This will be achieved using optical and
transgenic methods to determine the cell-type specificity of excitatory and
inhibitory neuronal activity, an important parameter that can enhance our
physiological understanding of the activated brain region. The project's guiding
hypothesis is that different stimulation modalities will differentially alter
spatio-temporal excitatory and inhibitory neuronal activity, which will in turn
alter the long-term excitability of nearby neurons in different capacities. The
Research Plan is organized under two objectives. THE FIRST Objective is to
further engineer this wireless stimulation technology to reliably and repeatably
release specific biomolecules including neurotransmitters. Coating technologies
will be applied to the wireless axons to release biomolecules during stimulation
and recharge by drawing upon endogenously produced biomolecules. THE SECOND
Objective is to investigate how stimulation with electrical, optical, wireless-
axon, and wireless neurochemical modalities impacts long-term excitatory and
inhibitory neuronal excitability using in vivo 2-photon microscopy and
genetically encoded fluorescent indicators. In vivo images will be collected
from awake head-fixed mice at increasing intervals daily for two weeks and then
once a week until 12 weeks. The number, distance, timing and neuronal subtype
densities before, during and after electrical stimulation will be examined over
time. The method enables tracking of stimulation-induced dynamic changes with
high spatial resolution near the electrodes. Research outcomes are expected to
have a significant impact on the future design of neural interfaces through the
engineering of chronic selective neural stimulation tools with ultra-small free-
floating implants that will provide scientists with a new tool for interrogating
neuronal networks and creating different sensations in BCIs and through
visualization of how stimulation with electrical, optical, wireless, and
wireless neurochemical modalities impacts long-term excitatory and inhibitory
neural excitability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.