* 1943971
* EAGER: In-Database Prescriptive Analytics under Uncertainty
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Peter Haas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,317.00

Prescriptive analytics, and constrained optimization in particular, is central
to decision making over a broad range of domains, including finance,
transportation, manufacturing, and healthcare, and has applications to
scientific research as well. Typically, decision makers have relied on
application-specific solutions to model and solve these problems. Such solutions
are often complex and do not generalize. Moreover, the usual workflow requires
that data be extracted from a database and then reformatted and fed into a
separate optimization package, after which the output must be reformatted and
inserted back into the database; this process is slow, cumbersome, and error
prone. Finally, modern data-intensive optimization problems are of unprecedented
size. A domain-independent, declarative, and scalable approach is needed,
supported and powered by the system where the data relevant to these problems
typically resides: the database. Then modeling becomes less ad hoc, and the
overall optimization process, from data preparation through solution and
exploration of results, becomes much more efficient. Desirable data management
functionality --- such as consistency, persistence, fault tolerance, access
control, and data-integration capability --- become an integral part of the
system "for free". This project will develop algorithms and systems to provide
general-purpose in-database support for prescriptive analytics applications over
the sort of large scale uncertain data that is commonly encountered in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will develop extensions
to the SQL relational query language to allow specification of ``stochastic
package queries'', a class of database queries that selects an optimal set
("package") of tuples that satisfy both per-tuple and global constraints. Such
queries correspond to stochastic integer linear programs. Novel solution
algorithms will focus on the scaling challenges caused both by uncertainty in
the data and by large data volumes. The system will provide exact solutions when
possible, and otherwise provide scalable Monte-Carlo-based solutions with
rigorous approximation guarantees. The project will radically re-design the
prior PackageBuilder system for deterministic package queries, incorporating
techniques from probabilistic databases, to create a complete end-to-end system.
The project will impact a broad set of domains with applications that boil down
to modeling and solving constrained optimization problems over uncertain data,
including finance, healthcare, and transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.