* 1943723
* CAREER: Large, Deployable and Adaptable Structures Through Origami Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Evgueni Filipov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 619,549.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will explore origami
engineering to enable large-scale civil engineering structures that move and
reconfigure efficiently, predictably, and safely. This research will enable
motion and reconfiguration of a civil structure with a minimal amount of force.
The origami engineering principles will be used to generate traditional
structures and architectures (e.g. beams, columns, surfaces), but with unique
properties for reconfiguration and adaptability. These large-scale deployable
and adaptable structures will result in fundamental improvements for
construction methods, building operations, re-use of structures and adaptivity
of infrastructure. The fundamental concepts will also allow innovations in space
structures, robotics, biomedical devices, metamaterials, and more. The
educational efforts of this program will establish Do-It-Yourself (DIY) learning
to teach technical content and encourage engineering interest by engaging
participants to make and explore their own origami structures. The project will
actively engage high-school students in a low-income Detroit neighborhood,
undergraduate researchers, graduate students, and children of different age
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to understand the
mechanics of origami engineering with low to zero stiffness, and the fundamental
research necessary to realize origami engineering principles in civil
engineering structures. The research objectives are to: (1) establish a
mechanics-based analytical framework that combines internal stress, body forces,
elastic deformations, dynamics, and other behaviors to enable simulation of the
novel origami; (2) explore the relationships between geometry, pre-stress,
counter-balances and the desired low/zero stiffness characteristics, and
formulate an optimization approach to tailor these properties; (3) identify
origami geometries for functional applications in engineering and architecture.
Through collaboration with practicing architects, these geometries will be
optimized and systematically explored for realistic loading scenarios; and (4)
fabricate, instrument, and experimentally test the new origami structures, and
explore practical issues related to large-scale implementations. The overarching
focus will be to harness low to zero stiffness characteristics in order to
enable efficient and stable actuation for large structures. This project will
advance the field of origami-inspired deployable and reconfigurable systems and
contribute to making them feasible for civil engineering and architectural
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.