* 1944480
* CAREER:  Self-Clearing Glutamate Biosensor Towards Chronic Neurodegeneration Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Hyowon Lee, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Enabling continuous monitoring of how our bodies change with age can
significantly enhance our understanding of how many chronic illnesses progress
and provide new opportunities for novel preventative treatments. However, even
the state-of-the-art implantable biosensors currently have a limited lifetime of
&lt;14 days largely due to the body’s immune response, which continuously fouls
the sensor surface. This CAREER project is aimed on creating a new class of
implantable biosensors that can self-clear its sensing elements to allow truly
longitudinal monitoring of various biomarkers for chronic neurodegenerative
diseases. By utilizing a combination of active and passive anti-biofouling
measures on printable biosensors, this work aims to improve the functional
lifetime of these implantable biochemical sensors by an order of magnitude.
Post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate students working on this truly
multidisciplinary project will receive a world-class training in biosensor
development and learn fundamental skills in microfabrication, electrochemistry,
and biosensor physics. The proposed research will also lead to complementary
educational and outreach activities as a part the CAREER project. For example,
in collaboration with the nationally recognized Purdue Engineering Projects in
Community Service (EPICS), this program will increase adolescent (K–8) awareness
of biomedical research within the context of the future medical devices using
game-based learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofouling is a significant challenge
in the development of chronically reliable implantable biosensors. To minimize
the immunogenic biofouling, various biomaterials have already been explored.
However, most passive anti-biofouling approaches can only delay, not eliminate
biofouling to extend the lifetime of these implantable biosensors. Building upon
successful preliminary studies using active anti-biofouling magnetic
microactuators and nanocomposite-based electrochemical biosensors, this CAREER
proposal seeks to develop self-clearing biosensors that can be implanted for
months and potentially years by passively preventing biofilm formation and
actively clearing biofilm from the sensor surface. This novel microscale sensing
platform will serve as the launchpad for a new class of implantable biosensors
that can enable truly longitudinal in vivo monitoring of multiple analytes over
the lifetime of patients. Using a combination of in vitro and in vivo models,
the proposed research seeks to evaluate the chronic functional efficacy of this
self-clearing biosensing platform to measure changes in glutamate, a key
inflammatory biomarker in the brain that is linked to a number of
neurodegenerative disorders. The results of this proposal will significantly
advance our understanding on the limits of implantable microscale biosensors
towards personalized continuous monitoring of chronic illnesses. Furthermore,
the knowledge gained from this work will support the PI’s educational objectives
to improve STEM pipeline for multidisciplinary biomedical engineering research
by increasing the awareness of implantable microdevices in K-8 students and
early career engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.