* 1944907
* CAREER: Phase transformations in complex oxides for energy storage: operando x-ray nanovision
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Andrej Singer, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 12/31/2024
* USD 590,462.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficient use of
intermittent wind and solar energy necessitates grid storage - a pressing need
for the transition towards a sustainable future. Sodium-ion batteries emerged as
promising candidates for economical energy storage: sodium is abundant, enables
faster charge rates, and allows avoiding the use of precious materials. Despite
these excellent prospects, structural degradation of crystalline sodium-ion
cathodes during operation prevents further developments. A particular challenge
is understanding these degradation mechanisms during battery charge or
discharge, while the degradation takes place. This NSF CAREER award project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, seeks to understand degeneration in cathodes and find what
makes a sodium-ion cathode material durable. The project uses advanced x-ray
characterization, thereby allowing researchers to see processes inside of real
operating batteries at the nanometer length-scale in real-time. Through
advancing fundamental understanding this work has a societal impact by laying
the foundation for the improved design of novel energy storage materials. The
project further aims at fostering diversity in the field of materials science
through creating and disseminating to elementary, middle and high school
students hands-on experiments for experiencing the importance of periodicity,
nanotechnology, and microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sodium-ion technology promises
sustainable grid storage. However, the limited understanding and control of the
prevalent phase transformations continue to limit the energy density, charge
rates, and calendar life of available cathode materials. Due to the lack of
available tools for observing how phases nucleate, coexist, and propagate inside
the building blocks of the cathode during operation, one cannot establish
fundamental structure-property relationships. The overall objective of this NSF
CAREER award, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research, is the systematic operando characterization
of mesoscale structural and chemical mechanisms underpinning phase
transformations in nanocrystalline intercalating oxides. In particular, using
operando Bragg coherent diffractive imaging the research team images how
coexisting phases nucleate and grow inside individual nanoparticles. Laue
microdiffraction is used for elucidating how structural phases and ions
propagate through grain boundaries. Finally, operando resonant x-ray scattering
allows collecting spectroscopic data of coexisting phases. Accomplishing the
specific aims is expected to develop a fundamental understanding of phase
transformations in sodium-ion cathodes and beyond, and ultimately accelerate the
search for materials with higher energy density, faster charge/discharge rates,
and longer calendar life. Excellence in education builds on two strategic axes:
(1)Vertical integration of traditionally underrepresented minorities and
fostering of diversity in the field of materials science using the natural
appeal of colors in nature. The project develops hands-on experiments, which
leverage the interplay between nanoscience and optics, resulting in colors in
butterflies. Additionally, the PI and his students teach electrochemistry to
elementary, middle and high school students. (2) Development of a curriculum on
coherent x-ray techniques, the defining feature of novel x-ray
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.