* 1944812
* CAREER: Real-time In-situ Characterization of Evolving Rock Systems for Smart-controlled Subsurface Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Fatemeh Pourahmadian, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will establish an
integrated research and education program aimed at the next generation of
physics-based data analytics to enable holistic (multiscale and multiphysics)
characterization of the subsurface in real time. Coupled physics processes
driven by engineered stimulation of the subsurface underlie many emerging
technologies germane to advanced geo-infrastructures; examples include
sustainable energy mining from enhanced geothermal systems and intelligent
mitigation of the affiliated environmental impacts. Optimal design and closed-
loop control of such operations require real-time feedback on the nature of
progressive variations in the target subterranean regions. 3D in-situ tracking
of multiphysics processes in such environments is, however, exceptionally
challenging; engineered treatments (such as fluid or gas injection) are often
induced in a complex domain whose structure and material properties are unknown
(or uncertain) across multiple scales. Nevertheless, existing approaches to in-
situ monitoring mostly rely on simplistic characterization of the subsurface,
and mainly ignore the multiscale and coupled-physics nature of the induced
processes in data inversion. Moreover, these tools are by and large
computationally expensive and inapplicable for real-time sensing, or only
amenable to ad hoc sensory configurations. Therefore, there exists a critical
need for fast (yet robust) holistic data processing tools that transcend some of
these limitations. In light of the fast-paced developments in sensing
instruments, furnishing high-resolution spatiotemporal measurements and big data
sets, such advances in data analytics is paramount for engineered systems of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of this project aims to
establish a comprehensive (analytical, computational, and experimental) platform
for: (1) real-time geometric reconstruction of advancing interfaces and
volumetric process zones in multiphasic subterranean domains of a-priori unknown
properties, (2) high-fidelity hydro-mechanical characterization of thus-
recovered regions, and (3) verification and validation of these developments in
a laboratory setting for better understanding of injection-induced multiphasic
variations in randomly fractured rock masses pertinent to enhanced geothermal
systems. This will be accomplished by taking advantage of the most recent
advances in applied mathematics, geophysics, biomedical engineering, and sensor
technology. In particular, the inverse solution is built upon three fundamental
lynchpins: (i) inverse scattering and the theory of transmission eigenvalues,
(ii) Marchenko integral equations and the generalized autofocusing concept, and
(iii) non-iterative solutions to full-field inversion. The education component
of this project aims at: (1) integration of the interdisciplinary knowledge
underpinning state-of-the-art data processing tools for complex environments
into the curriculum of science and engineering students at CU-Boulder and
outreach activities, and (2) cultivating an effective knowledge transfer from
research to academia and practice that includes all the stakeholders. In this
vein, a three-tier educational program will be developed, involving: (i)
engineering outreach to K-12 students with emphasis on underrepresented
minorities, (ii) introducing WISE: wave-based inversion in subterranean
environments as a new thrust in the engineering program at CU Boulder, and (iii)
multilateral collaborations among scientists, engineers, and practitioners at
regional, national and international levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.