* 1944040
* CAREER: Surface Engineering by Predictive Laser Deposition of Multi-Principal Element Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Ganesh Balasubramanian, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 02/28/2025
* USD 628,378.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports a
transformative, experimentally-validated predictive framework to manufacture
multi-principal element alloys (MPEAs). These alloys represent a new class of
materials that, unlike conventional alloys such as steels, generally consist of
five or more principal elements in significant proportions. Promising structural
properties, such as superior mechanical strength and hardness, encourage their
use as coatings for additively engineered surfaces. The processing of these
materials presents some challenges, however, including uneven mixing and
microstructure changes during rapid cooling that contribute to formation of
cracks when these materials are deposited as coatings. This research project
will build an understanding of the correlation of atomistic properties to
system-scale processing parameters through the synergistic use of computational
predictions, quantification of uncertainties in the processing conditions and
material properties, and experimental characterization. The outcomes of the
project will advance the manufacturability of these alloys and their surface
coatings, which will have significant impact on many technological areas
including propulsion, machinery, transportation, and medical devices. The
predictive processing paradigm developed through this project will be widely
applicable to an array of materials systems, and can bolster additive
manufacturing processes with optimization capabilities. The tightly integrated
educational and outreach activities are targeted to encourage students from
underrepresented minorities to pursue opportunities in STEM fields, and
simultaneously contribute towards gender equality and economic opportunities for
impoverished communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER
project is to generate new knowledge on how the diffusion of multiple principal
elements in an alloy melt under rapid cooling affects the microstructure and
properties of their laser deposited clads. To realize this objective, an
integrated computational framework will be established that (1) marries together
structure and property predictions from molecular dynamics simulations of the
alloy melt with processing conditions, (2) provides recommendations for
optimizing the manufacturing parameters for producing clads of desired
composition and quality, and (3) imparts robustness to the correlations by
electron microscopy and X-ray spectroscopy characterizations, and uncertainty
quantification of the high-dimensional parameter space of compositions,
impurities, and manufacturing environment variables. The direct and multiscale
correlation of the simulation predictions to the system scale processing
parameters, will facilitate the mapping of the parameters to targeted criteria
space via a Pareto front. The interrelationship between the processing
conditions (system scale) and the alloy melt dynamics (atomic scale) will enable
intelligent parameter selection for the laser cladding and aid in creating
surface coatings that are homogenous in composition and crack
resistant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.