* 1944323
* Career: Using High-resolution Piezoelectric Sensing to Investigate Liquid-vapor Phase-change Mechanisms in Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Shankar Narayanan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2024
* USD 594,281.00

Evaporation and condensation processes are central to water desalination, power
generation, heating, air-conditioning, and manufacturing. Improving and
controlling the characteristics of the liquid-vapor phase-change can enhance the
performance and the overall efficiency of these applications. One of the
techniques to enhance phase-change is by incorporating nanomaterials or
nanostructures. However, implementation of this technique so far has primarily
been trial-based, by comparisons of applications with and without
nanostructures. The overall goal of this NSF CAREER project is to integrate
research and education around the use of nanoengineered materials to enhance and
control evaporation and condensation. This project will determine and quantify
the role of various factors that affect phase-change on smooth and textured
surfaces. The education objectives of this project are to equip students and the
future workforce with the technical knowledge and skill sets to innovate and
build transformative and sustainable systems for power generation, energy
storage, and water desalination. The project also aims to increase the
participation of students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
by providing extended research opportunities and augmented reality instruction
to excite students about energy transfer mechanisms and their applications in
the industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although phase-change and vapor transport at
the macroscale are fairly well understood, they show unique characteristics in
nanostructures. Understanding these characteristics is essential to leverage
nanomaterials in industrial applications. The proposed project will allow
elucidating phase-change and vapor transport at the nanoscale by using a novel
experimental technique combining a piezoelectric mass and area-sensing
mechanism, visualization, and infrared thermography. This approach allows
detecting mass changes with high sensitivity, accuracy, and repeatability. The
project will generate a new understanding of how geometry and surface chemistry
of nanostructures control liquid-vapor phase-change and vapor transport. The
research will address the effect of non-idealities on phase-change. These non-
idealities include non-volatile impurities in the liquid phase and non-
condensable gases in the vapor phase. Although such non-idealities are
ubiquitous, prior efforts have primarily focused on evaporation and condensation
of pure fluids. Direct measurements of phase-change will also test the accuracy
of the classic models used to predict evaporation and condensation within
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.