* 1944967
* CAREER: Quantum Hydrodynamics:  From  Electron Fluids To Chiral Active Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Sriram Ganeshan, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2025
* USD 413,072.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This career award supports research
and education on the collective properties quantum mechanical fluids and active
matter systems. The study of quantum mechanical phenomena on the mesoscopic
scale, intermediate between the macroscope and the scales of atoms, holds
promise to advance understanding of how the unusual quantum world connects with
the familiar macroscopic world and may lead to new electronic device
technologies. Robust quantum effects can manifest at sufficiently low
temperatures where essentially the whole system can behave like a single quantum
mechanical entity that can exhibit unusual and counterintuitive properties.
Superconductivity is one example of such a quantum state of matter. The
electrons in superconducting states behave like fluids that can flow without
viscosity and so, without dissipation, a phenomenon not displayed by the
classical fluids of everyday experience. Theoretical understanding of quantum
fluids is built on hydrodynamics, which is the theory of classical fluid motion
under external forces. The PI and his research team will focus on developing
theoretical descriptions of such states as modifications of the classical
hydrodynamics in a conceptually transparent way that captures the unique
properties of the macroscopic quantum state. The PI’s effort in this direction
will build toward generalizing the approach for other quantum liquids, including
those that arise in electrons that are trapped between two semiconductor layers
and exposed to a perpendicular magnetic field, quantum Hall fluids. Success of
this long-term objective will hopefully uncover hitherto untapped mesoscale
phenomena that can be harnessed to develop the technology of a new generation of
quantum devices. Inspired by the appearance of dissipation-free phenomena
analogous to quantum fluids, the PI will investigate fluids made of self-
propelled particles that can autonomously change direction as they move. These
chiral active matter systems obey the laws of classical mechanics but are far
from the tranquil state of equilibrium. The PI aims to investigate the extent to
which they may be able to serve as simulators of quantum fluids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important component of this project is to disseminate
the research effort via three channels of education and training (a) a special
topics course on fluid dynamics applied to condensed matter systems aimed at
graduate students and senior undergraduates, (b) Research opportunities for
undergraduates and high school students, and (c) Interactive demonstrations
based lectures for high school students on basic fluid dynamics principles that
underpin the research effort. This component will seek to remedy the resource
scarcity for setting up demonstrations in many of the schools under the ambit of
the College-Now program run at City College of New
York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This career award supports research and education
on the collective properties of mesoscopic quantum systems and chiral active
matter systems. Understanding the transport properties of ground-state quantum
fluids such as superconductors and Quantum Hall (QH) fluids is not only
important for fundamental physics but also central to the development of the
next generation of low dissipation electronic devices. In this project, the PI
and his research team will investigate the quantum modifications to classical
hydrodynamics that arise beyond the ideal fluid regime due to dominant non-
linear and higher gradient viscous effects. The non-linear nature of the theory
facilitates the study of the strong interaction effects of quantum many-body
systems. The PI will focus on three interrelated objectives that share a common
quantum hydrodynamic framework: (I) Study the phenomenology of QH hydrodynamics
that includes higher gradient effects such as odd/Hall viscosity: Developing a
hydrodynamical theory of QH fluids that includes higher gradient odd viscous
effects will bring new insight into the fluid nature of QH state in the form of
non-linear effects and free surface dynamics which has so far remained outside
analysis based on topological field theories. (II) Incorporate non-linear fluid
dynamical effects in the transport properties in viscous electron fluids: The
proposed research in viscous electron fluids will enable the study of non-linear
effects, such as solitons, in mesoscopic transport. This research direction is
timely due to the recent experimental advances in mesoscopic quantum systems
such as Gallium Arsenide and Graphene, which are host to viscous electron
fluids. (III) Determine the mechanical properties and hydrodynamic instabilities
of non-equilibrium chiral active fluids: Chiral active fluids despite being non-
equilibrium classical systems, share many properties with QH fluids and viscous
electron fluids and can serve as analog simulators. Understanding the mechanical
response and instabilities of chiral active matter will not only help design
active matter experiments that can be used to understand quantum fluids but can
also lead to the design of new synthetic active materials with remarkable
properties. &lt;br/&gt;The PI’s long-term effort to develop the semiclassical
theory of QH fluids will hopefully bring new understanding in the development of
the semiclassical theory of general quantum fluids, which has been a long open
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational objectives of this project will be
achieved via three main vehicles: 1) A topical course on fluid dynamics
applicable to condensed matter systems for graduate and senior undergraduate
students that will be offered at the City College of New York. 2) Research
opportunities in the field of theoretical fluid dynamics applied to condensed
matter systems for City College of New York undergraduate students and High
School for Math Science and Engineering high school students. 3) Interactive and
demonstration-based talks on fluid dynamics for New York City high school
students in collaboration with the College-Now program, which serves students
from inner-city schools and underrepresented groups to facilitate a smooth
transition from school to the first years of college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.