* 1944789
* CAREER: Dynamic Modeling and Fabrication of Compliant Material Systems for On-Demand Specialist Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Daniel Aukes, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2025
* USD 680,500.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will make it possible to
develop cost-effective, “specialist” robots that can be prototyped by a non-
expert in a matter of hours. The goal of this project is to make robots more
ubiquitous, accessible, and tunable for newcomers to robotics and for
applications in industry, education, and academic research. Achieving this goal
requires a shift towards more affordable materials, accessible fabrication
strategies, and assistive design software that considers the particular dynamics
of cost-efficient motors and materials, as well as the needs of specific
applications. The results of this project will impact fields in which
specialization is desirable, such as assistive robotics for the elderly, custom
agricultural applications, and trash pickup in smart cities. The robots
developed through this project will also serve as an affordable starting point
for children to compete in after-school robotics competitions organized by
local, youth-focused nonprofits. In addition, the models and templates developed
for this project will be integrated into college-level robotics curricula,
permitting students to venture deeper into advanced robotics topics earlier in
their studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental research contribution of
this project lies within the consideration and integration of compliant material
systems into a unified design framework that supports the specialization and
optimization of dynamical robotic systems. The research plan involves developing
reduced models for the nonlinear mechanics of material systems that permit more
affordable robot designs, and considering that compliance in simulations to
customize, model, and optimize their performance. This approach will investigate
machine learning techniques to automatically tune parametric, template-driven
designs in a way that balances competing performance trade-offs like speed,
payload, and efficiency. The project’s research objectives include the
representation of compliance, the utilization and understanding of compliance,
the optimization of compliant systems, and validation of the framework through
prototyping, experimental validation, and exemplar use-cases. The generality of
the approach will be demonstrated by modeling and optimizing several subsystems
of a bipedal robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.