* 1944334
* CAREER: Programming Microbial Extracellular Electron Flux
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Benjamin Keitz, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2025
* USD 541,439.00

Microbes shuttle electrons into and out of their cells in a process called
extracellular electron transfer (EET). Microbes sense their environment using
extracellular electron transfer. If connected to an electrode, these organisms
could also generate electrical currents. One major challenge to harnessing
electrical currents from microbes is the inability to precisely control
extracellular electron transfer. This project is focused on developing a genetic
toolkit that would allow extracellular electron transfer activity to be
programmed. In computer programming, logical operations like "AND" and "OR" can
be combined with other operations to create a set of instructions. Genetic
elements that perform regulatory functions can be created that mimic logical
operations. This project will develop those elements and combine them to program
the behavior of the extracellular electron transfer system. This project will
include an education and outreach program that expands student access to
project-based learning through the creation of a freshman research program.
These efforts will contribute to the development of a highly skilled STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extracellular electron transfer has implications
for microbial catalysis and biomanufacturing. Unlocking these applications will
require strict genetic control over extracellular electron transfer flux. To
address this challenge, the primary goal of this research project is to program
extracellular electron transfer flux through the optimized expression of
critical extracellular electron transfer proteins in the model electroactive
bacterium, Shewanella oneidensis. To accomplish this objective, the project
researchers will pursue several major objectives. The first goal will be to
develop libraries of promoter/ribosome binding sites that will drive the
production of specific extracellular electron transfer proteins. Another aim
will be to design genetic logic gates that will respond to externally applied
signals. Overall, the results will provide fundamental insights into
extracellular electron transfer. This outcome, in turn, will establish
Shewanella oneidensis as a potentially transformative organism for
biomanufacturing, bioenergy, and biosensing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.