* 1944301
* CAREER: Leveraging Existing Knowledge and Artificial Intelligence to Understand the Performance of Civil Infrastructure Under Extreme Hazard Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Stephanie Paal, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2025
* USD 520,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support research to
understand the physical performance of civil infrastructure under extreme loads,
such as earthquakes and windstorms, and the interactions among materials,
structures, systems, and community needs under such loading. Existing knowledge
regarding the performance of conventional materials and structures under normal
operating and various hazardous loading conditions has been amassed over years;
and data on the performance under earthquake and windstorm loading increasingly
are being captured as a result of improved instrumentation, experimentation, and
observations. Innovations in new materials and structural design are being
created to respond to these extreme loads. To maintain pace with these
innovations, while continuing to provide robust and resilient structures, there
is a need for a rapid and reliable approach to understanding the behavior of new
materials and structural designs under these more extreme loads. The convergence
of artificial intelligence (AI) into the civil engineering domain provides the
capability to learn the highly nonlinear, complex relationships between
material, structural, and load characteristics and a structure’s performance or
community’s response. This research will leverage the power of AI and the
existing wealth of physics-based performance data to transfer knowledge
concerning conventional, well-studied, structural components and loading
mechanisms to make performance predictions for out-of-sample cases and
innovations where little data is available. This can reduce the reliance on
experimental testing and computationally expensive analytical evaluations, and
mitigate the catastrophic effects of natural disasters on communities. In
tandem, this award will support a multidisciplinary educational and outreach
plan, STEM in Motion, which will focus on the development of technologically-
forward and active learning-focused activities for undergraduate and graduate
civil engineering courses. Data generated from this project will be archived and
made publicly available in the Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https:/www.DesignSafe-c.org). This award
contributes to the National Science Foundation's role in the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
employ available experimental data to accurately, robustly, and quickly predict
the seismic performance of common structures as well as structures which are
exceptionally susceptible to hazardous loads. With a highly accurate AI approach
to modeling the behavior of existing structures under well-known material and
loading constraints (e.g., reinforced concrete buildings under currently
considered seismic loads) where big data is available, the inherent knowledge in
these models can be robustly translated across domains and at varying scales
(e.g., material, component, system, and load) to reduce uncertainty and lead to
enhanced, near-real-time understanding of the physical behavior of new
structures. With the ability to derive these relationships directly from
existing datasets, the opportunity arises for innovative material and structural
modeling procedures and designs uniquely suited for specific performance
requirements. Specifically, this research will investigate the following: (1)
the dataset features or characteristics necessary to establish relevance between
datasets, (2) the mathematical construction and physics-based constraints needed
for the algorithmic development to reduce the impact of sample bias in transfer
learning problems, (3) verification and validation of the AI model when the
model itself is not easily interpretable, and (4) the impact of a
multidisciplinary, team-focused environment on the retention of fundamental
engineering principles and learning of new concepts by engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.