* 1944046
* CAREER: A Red Yeast Cell Factory
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Eric Young, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2025
* USD 512,591.00

Different types of microorganisms have been found that produce chemical
compounds and function at activity levels that have not been seen previously.
New genetic tools must be developed in order to exploit their abilities fully.
This research project focuses on developing such tools for a specific type of
yeast named Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous, often referred to as red yeast. This
organism was chosen for study due its ability to produce astaxanthin, an
antioxidant related to beta-carotene. Astaxanthin has exhibited some success in
treating many diseases, including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, high cholesterol,
and diabetes. Harnessing red yeast's ability to make this molecule will enable
the production of a large number of related compounds that potentially have a
broad range of uses. Graduate students involved in this project will be trained
through course development, laboratory research, and continuing education
programs. These efforts will prepare the next generation of engineers as the
rapid pace of synthetic biology innovation continues to transform
biomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project involves using
genomics approaches to understand and engineer a basidiomycete yeast,
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous, often referred to as red yeast. Red yeast is
genetically tractable, generally regarded as safe, and used to manufacture the
terpenoid astaxanthin. This organism has promise as a terpenoid production
platform because it produces precursor pools for nearly all terpenoids. A major
aim of this research is to create a terpenoid cell factory for several different
valuable compounds using red yeast as a host. Transcriptomics will be used to
study the genetic basis of unique gene regulation and photobiology. The goal is
to harness these unique traits using a high-throughput combinatorial strain
engineering approach. This process will modify the host and heterologous pathway
simultaneously to improve terpenoid titer and productivity. Along the way, the
project will advance basidiomycete engineering strategies and contribute to
collections of yeast synthetic biology parts available to the scientific
community. This research will also develop methods for high-throughput strain
engineering in this understudied yet important class of
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.