* 1944457
* CAREER: Observation-Driven Mapping of the Linkages between the Terrestrial Water, Energy and Carbon Cycles
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Leila Farhadi, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2025
* USD 397,931.00

The exchange of water, energy, and carbon between the land, biosphere and
atmosphere play a key role in the Earth’s climate. The terrestrial or land
component of water, energy and carbon cycles are strongly linked and operate in
a harmonized manner. For example, an increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide
modifies the amount of vegetation biomass, thus altering ecosystem
photosynthesis and transpiration (hence, heat exchange) rates. Land Surface
Models used in hydrologic, ecological and climate models require accurate
representation of the links between terrestrial cycles. The lack of direct
observation of key variables that can quantify these linkages result in
uncertain projections from these models. Using satellite information on land
surface state measurements of soil moisture, soil temperature and vegetation
index, this project applies a novel observation-driven approach to diagnose and
map the linkages at regional scale. Mapping the linkages across different
seasons, ecological and environmental conditions advances understanding of how
the terrestrial water, energy and carbon cycles are linked and operate in the
real world. The educational goal of this CAREER proposal is to enhance
environmental knowledge and promote scientific discovery on the part of
graduate, undergraduate and 6-12th precollege students in the Washington DC
area. This education effort includes engaging minority students from local
schools in STEM fields with a focus on climate and land-atmosphere interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the current knowledge gap in
understanding the spatio-temporal variations of land-atmosphere
interactions/couplings. The research plan includes (i) developing a state of the
art framework based on a variational methodology to diagnose and map the
linkages between the terrestrial water, energy and carbon cycles across a range
of temporal and spatial scales from the implicit information contained in land
surface state observations; (ii) testing the methodology at point scale (field
site, synthetic simulations) and at large scale (Continental US) (iii) and
expanding our fundamental understanding of the coupling between the terrestrial
cycles by mapping and studying the linkages across different biomes, echo
hydrological regions, seasons and environmental conditions. The observation-
driven form of the linkages between the cycles can be used to guide improvements
in the predictive capabilities of Land Surface/Earth System models and hence
improve simulation of regional land surface fluxes, climate and climate
projections. The research method and the low order inverse modeling techniques
developed in this proposal is of interest to a broad community, including
physicists, applied mathematicians, meteorologists, climate scientists and
hydrologists. The educational plan leverages the GLOBE (Global Learning and
Observations to Benefit the Environment) framework to engage 6-12 students from
the DC metro area in STEM by engaging them in activities that will enhance their
understanding of land atmosphere interaction. We will ensure long-term
sustainability of this program by developing a network of participating
teachers, online resources, and program assessment and evaluation
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.