* 1944734
* CAREER: Establishing New Insights into Uterine Smooth Muscle Cell Mechanobiology with Engineered Tissue Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Megan McCain, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will investigate how the
smooth muscle cells in the uterus respond and adapt to mechanical forces. The
uterus is a muscular organ that contracts due to the shortening of smooth muscle
cells located in its wall. Pregnancy and many uterine disorders, such as
fibroids, change the mechanical load on uterine smooth muscle cells. However,
the effects of mechanical forces on uterine smooth muscle cells are poorly
understood. This fundamental science gap in understanding hinders the
development of treatment strategies for uterine disorders. For example, during
pregnancy, uterine smooth muscle cells are stretched by the growing fetus but
remain quiescent until the fetus reaches term, at which point they rapidly
become contractile. If this transition occurs too early, this can result in
preterm labor and birth. Preterm birth is the leading cause of neonatal death in
the US. It is difficult to predict or prevent in large part because the
biomechanical and biochemical stimuli that trigger uterine contractions are
poorly understood. Given these knowledge gaps, the research goal of this project
is to measure how the contractility of uterine smooth muscle cells is affected
by tissue stiffening and stretch. A second goal is to identify the
mechanosensing proteins and pathways inside uterine smooth muscle cells. These
could be leveraged as therapeutic targets for conditions such as preterm labor
or fibroids. The major educational goal of this project is to develop a series
of interactive hands-on activities related to muscle mechanobiology and tissue
engineering for high school students. These activities will be developed in
partnership with undergraduate student volunteers, executed at a local high
school in urban Los Angeles, and broadly disseminated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific research goal of this project is to establish new insights into the
mechanobiology of human uterine smooth muscle cells using engineered cell and
tissue models. First, the effects of matrix rigidity on calcium activity,
contractility, and gene expression in engineered human uterine smooth muscle
microtissues will be measured. Second, the independent and combined effects of
mechanical stretch and progesterone (the pregnancy hormone) on contractility,
mechanoadaptation, and gene expression in engineered human uterine smooth muscle
microtissues will be measured. Third, molecules expected to be mechanosensors
will be perturbed and sensitivity to matrix rigidity and stretch will be re-
evaluated to identify mechanisms of mechanosensing. With tightly coupled
educational objectives to broaden participation, this project will also
positively impact the career trajectory of the PI by supporting the pursuit of a
new research direction on an important topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.