* 1944204
* CAREER: Optical Nanosensors to Monitor Linked Metabolism in Microbial Consortia
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Kevin Cash, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2025
* USD 416,165.00

Microbial communities are all around us - in soil, your body, and every local
pond - breaking down and recycling nutrients. The interdependence of these
communities has been known for over a century, but the bulk of laboratory
microbiology is done on one species in isolation. Determining how nutrients flow
between these different species is essential to better predict how microbial
communities can process heavy metal pollution, effect bioremediation, or adapt
to new ecological settings. This project will develop the sensing tools to
adequately measure interrelated metabolism in a spatially and temporally defined
manner and develop smaller (capillary-based) model systems able to better mimic
the real-world settings seen in the environment while remaining suitable for use
in the lab. Educational outreach includes partnering with the local Head Start
preschool to expose disadvantaged preschoolers (including minorities, disabled,
and the homeless) and their siblings to STEM and sensing, and working with the
county high school system to place research interns into the lab for this
project to prepare them for a future career in scientific research and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER award is
to develop and apply optical nanosensors to monitor metabolic markers throughout
striated environmental microbial communities in capillary culture systems. This
will address the question of how well these capillary approaches are able to
recapitulate the striated consortia seen in larger scale systems. The central
hypothesis is that capillary based communities will establish similar gradients
in nutrients (oxygen, iron, sulfate, lactate) to larger column-based systems and
show faster establishment. Three specific aims build toward this goal: 1:
Optimize persistent luminescence "glow" nanosensors for quantification of
sulfate and iron. 2: Optimize nanosensors for quantification of lactate in
aerobic and anaerobic environments. 3: Determine how well capillary based
microbial systems mimic the nutrient gradients of larger column-based
approaches. The expected outcomes of this CAREER award include a new nanosensor
technology, an expansion of the range of analytes measurable (iron, sulfate,
lactate), and the development of a relationship between small and large model
systems for studying microbial consortia. These outcomes will advance the field
of sensors through the use of persistent luminescence for background reduction
in nanosensors and new sensors for spatiotemporal monitoring of these key
analytes. This project will quantify how well capillary based microbial culture
approaches recapitulate the complicated environment established in larger
columnbased systems. This advance is made possible with these new tools to
monitor inter-species metabolism. The capillary based microbial communities and
corresponding nanosensors can monitor transport dynamics in a range of fields
including heavy metal pollution, bioremediation, and microbial ecology
(especially in attempts to understand microheterogeneity). The tools and
techniques developed in this research can benefit scientific communities
researching any three-dimensional biological system. Related applications where
this work can make a large impact include medical models (e.g. tumor organoids,
organ-on-a-chip systems, biofilms, and 3D tissue scaffolds), other environmental
systems (e.g. microbial mats), and industrial systems (e.g. biotherapeutic
production, wastewater treatment). The ability to spatiotemporally monitor
metabolism with nanosensors will enable a wide range of advances in all of these
complex metabolically linked systems. This work will also be integrated to a
first year Studio Biology course which is taught in an immersive laboratory
setting rather than in a classroom. In this module, students will explore
microbial community metabolism, and apply nanosensors in scientific
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.