* 1944053
* CAREER: Closing the Loop on Neuroinflammation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Levi Wood, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The brain’s immune system is critical for maintaining brain health and cognitive
function. Neuroinflammation is responsible for clearing of pathogens and
supporting neuron health. However, when neuroinflammation goes out-of-control
they can contribute to permanent or progressive cognitive loss in brain injury,
Alzheimer’s disease, and many other neurological conditions. Treatment of these
diverse diseases would benefit from better understanding of how to regain
control of healthy neuroinflammation. Importantly, healthy neuroinflammation is
a dynamic process that requires first a pro- followed by an anti-inflammatory
response. However, there has been limited investigation to identify the dynamics
of healthy neuroinflammation or to determine how to control brain immune cells
to restore healthy function. The focus of this CAREER project is microglia,
which are the main immune cells of the brain that dynamically respond to pro-
and anti-inflammatory stimuli. Their behavior will be explained using
quantitative engineering models similar to those used in the design of
autopilots. This novel engineering approach will provide new fundamental
knowledge on the dynamics of brain immune cells and the relationship between
these dynamics and their function to clear pathogens. Moreover, it will enable
design of treatments that will promote healthy brain immune function. The
Investigator will integrate these research activities with a strong educational
outreach program to teach underprivileged elementary school students about the
immune system. Planned activities include developing a summer camp on
engineering and biological science that includes reinforcement though generation
of materials that can be used through-out the school-year and rigorous
assessment of student grades and interest in engineering and science. The
Investigator's goal is to open the minds of these students to thinking and
working as both engineers and scientists and to foster their interest and
aspirations to working in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Investigator’s
long-term career goal is to create and use engineering methods to elucidate
mechanisms driving brain immune function and to actively regulate these
mechanisms to reduce immune-based injury and promote brain health. Toward this
goal, this CAREER project is to develop a novel paradigm to quantitatively
understand the immune cell response to exogenous stimuli and to use this
understanding to implement a control system for active regulation of microglia
(ARM). The project will create ARM controllers that will regulate multiple
markers of diverse microglial states that will be applicable both in vivo and in
vitro and will identify quantitative models of microglial cell state dynamics in
response to multiple pro- and anti-inflammatory inputs. The research plan is
organized under three objectives. The FIRST Objective is to use top-down data
driven modeling from control systems engineering to quantify the dynamics of
microglial activation in response to biochemical stimuli and use these models to
design open-loop control strategies for temporally regulating microglial
response in vitro. This will be accomplished through employing flow cytometry to
quantify microglial marker dynamics using protein markers known to indicate
homeostatic, anti-inflammatory and pro-inflammatory states; identifying a data-
driven dynamic system model for each marker; using results obtained to determine
the appropriate system input in terms of an optimal control function; and then
validating the system by determining whether or not temporal regulation of
primary murine microglia response will modify uptake of Amyloid beta, a key
pathogen in Alzheimer’s Disease. The SECOND Objective is to determine if
quantitative models can be used as part of a real-time feedback strategy to
reduce error between desired and actual trajectory of microglial activation.
This will be accomplished by establishing a microfluidic cell culture platform
to enable real-time feedback control of microglial activation markers; enabling
real-time monitoring of microglial activation state via microglial transduction
with fluorescent reporters for each of the markers studied in the first
objective; and then determining, by placing the microfluidic system and
transduced reporter microglia in a live-cell imaging system, if the feed-back
control “autopilot” system is capable of regulating a population of microglia to
a desired set-point or trajectory. The THIRD Objective is to determine if
control systems modeling can be used to model and design open-loop immune
trajectories in mice. This will be accomplished by identifying a data-driven
model for microglial markers in vivo and combining these dynamic models to
predict open-loop input strategies using the same modeling framework as used in
the first and second objectives; and then testing if modulation of microglial
activity will reduce Amyloid beta pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.