* 1944184
* CAREER: Bifacial Cyclophanes for Solution-Phase Synthesis of Semiconducting Porous Nanoribbons
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Nagarjuna Gavvalapalli, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Nagarjuna Gavvalapalli at
Georgetown University designs and develops strategies for bottom-up synthesis of
semiconducting porous nano-ribbons (SPNRs). Inspired from the β-sheets design in
nature, Professor Gavvalapalli’s group designs novel monomers to enable bottom-
up synthesis of SPNRs with control over their ribbon width, conductivity and
pore size. SPNRs combine the transistor properties of semiconductors with the
sensing and sieving capabilities of nanopores. They can be potentially useful
for applications such as high-throughput transport detection, sensing multiple
biomarkers of a disease, and energy conversion. The project contributes toward
training, educating, and inspiring a diverse group of people including high-
school students from underserved communities in science, undergraduate students,
and the public. Professor Gavvalapalli develops and uses a “Superhero
Scienceplanation” program to tap into people’s interest in and curiosity for
superheroes in order to easily connect with a broader audience from diverse
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic SPNRs have several advantages,
including single-atom-thickness and synthetic amenability to tune pore size,
shape, and chemical functionality compared to traditional solid-state nanopores.
However, the current top-down approaches are not suitable for generating SPNRs
with control over the nanoribbon and pore dimensions as well as their chemical
and electronic structure that are desirable for the above-mentioned
applications. The proposed work in Professor Gavvalapalli’s group designs novel
building block monomers for SPNRs and develops design rules for bottom-up and
solution-phase synthesis of SPNRs with control over the ribbon and pore
dimensions as well as their chemical and electronic structure. The monomers are
designed such that they hinder interchain van der Waals interactions and render
solution processable SPNRs. The three main objectives of the research are
focused on: i) varying the monomer design parameters to generate soluble linear-
polymers that provide guidelines for SPNRs solubility; ii) identifying and
controlling the linear-polymer structural parameters that play a key role in
transforming them into SPNRs; and iii) synthesizing SPNRs of various nanoribbon
width, pore size, and electronic nature and studying their impact on the
photophysical and electronic properties of SPNRs. This research provides access
to nanoporous membranes that have been elusive so far. The obtained SPNRs enable
transformative changes to above-mentioned technologies and also pave the way to
new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.