* 1944545
* CAREER: The onset of the rainy season in Amazonia
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Jung-Eun Lee, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2025
* USD 655,366.00

The Amazon basin has been called the "Green Ocean", a term inspired by the
emerald expanse of its dense forest canopy. In the rainy season the analogy has
physical significance as the rain falls primarily from mid-depth cumulus clouds
which resemble those commonly found over tropical oceans. Also, the forested
surface provides an abundant source of moisture to sustain the clouds, playing
the same role as the ocean surface in maritime convection. But prior work by the
PI shows that at the end of the dry season the analogy breaks down and clouds
look more like the cumulus towers that form over dry grasslands. The surface
also plays a different role, as the deep clouds are triggered by high values of
convective available potential energy (CAPE), and the surface serves primarily
as a heat source to build CAPE rather than a moisture
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing the differing roles of moist and dry
land surface, the principal investigator (PI) considers the role played by plant
physiology in cloud formation during the pre-onset season (also referred to as
the transition season). Water stress is common at the end of the dry season and
vegetation under water stress retains moisture, causing the surface to heat up
and promoting higher CAPE. On the other hand clouds need a source of water
vapor, which can be supplied by plant transpiration in adjacent regions where
the soil is still moist. Thus the PI hypothesizes that rising motion induced by
surface heating over water stressed regions draws in moisture from regions of
low water stress (where plants transpire moisture into the air), so that the
gradient between high and low plant water stress plays a key role in promoting
convection at the onset of the rainy season.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
uses observational data from sources including satellite remote sensing and
meteorological reanalysis products, together with numerical simulations, to
cover the range of phenomena and spatial scales linking plant physiology with
clouds and precipitation. One key data source is satellite-derived Solar Induced
Fluorescence (SIF), a subtle and wavelength-specific glow emitted by chlorophyll
in plants exposed to sunlight. Previous studies have shown that SIF declines
when plants are under water stress, thus SIF from satellites can be used to map
the spatial gradient of water stress over the Amazon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of this CAREER award focuses on outreach to K-12 and
college students from underserved and underrepresented populations. At the
college level the PI works with the Leadership Alliance Summer Research Early
Identification Program to provide summer internships for undergraduates from
minority serving institutions. K-12 education is addressed in collaboration with
the Providence Public Schools (PPS), which serve a high percentage of Hispanic
and African American students. The PI's team works with PPS officials to
organize summer workshops for elementary and middle school teachers to assist
them in creating and implementing lesson modules on weather, climate and
ecosystem interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.