* 1944998
* CAREER: Stress, deformation and seismicity in continental interiors: Testing the "weak zone" hypothesis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Maximiliano Bezada, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2025
* USD 339,209.00

Most earthquakes happen around the edges of tectonic plates. Yet, large and
damaging earthquakes occasionally happen in the continental interiors. The
reasons why earthquakes occur away from tectonic plate boundaries is not well
understood. Several possible explanations have been proposed and they have been
debated for decades. Here, the researchers test one of the leading explanations:
"weak zones" in the continental interior may lead to the buildup of stress,
resulting in earthquakes. To explore this possibility, they use records of
seismic waves produced by distant earthquakes. These waves propagate through the
Earth’s crust and mantle. They are used to investigate Earth’s interior in a
similar way that sonography is used in medical imaging. The team investigates
several regions where weak zones may exist, in Australia and the United States.
It analyzes records to determine if seismic waves have lost energy on their path
through the Earth. Indeed, when the waves pass through a weak zone, they lose a
significant amount of energy which can be detected. This allows mapping the
locations of possible weak zones, hence where stresses build up in continental
interiors. These data are used as input for geodynamic models which reproduce
the mechanics of continental plates and weak zones. To test the models, their
outputs – i.e., modeled earthquake locations and characteristics - are compared
to records of real earthquakes using statistical analysis tools. The project
provides support for an early career scientist from a group underrepresented in
Science. It also provides training for a postdoctoral associate and a graduate
student at the University of Minnesota – Twin Cities. Aspects of this research
are integrated with an educational component that uses sound and music to
introduce concepts in signal analysis and Earth
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers test the "weak zone" hypothesis in
terms of lateral rheological variations. The work includes three phases: 1)
Seismic imaging (primarily teleseismic attenuation) will constrain lateral
variations in viscous strength in the studied areas; 2) Geodynamic modeling will
determine where the imaged strength anomalies would lead to enhanced deviatoric
stresses, given the regional stress field; 3) Molchan error analysis will
quantitatively measure the ability of the expected deviatoric stresses to
predict the seismogenic regions. Phase 3 will include testing of the results for
statistical significance. The relative magnitudes of the principal stresses
predicted by the modeling will also be compared to observations. The studied
regions include Australia, the Eastern U.S. and the South-Central U.S. Target
areas were chosen because of the availability of the requisite data. Preliminary
imaging also shows that seismicity is consistent with the weak zone hypothesis
in these regions. For the South-Central U.S., the focus is on induced
seismicity; the team test there whether the existence of a weak zone can explain
the disproportionately high occurrence of induced seismicity in
Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.