* 1944004
* CAREER: Extrapolatable, Uncertainty-Quantified Modeling of Nitrogen Kinetics  Informed by Data Across Multiple Scales
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Michael Burke, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2025
* USD 402,191.00

Predictive computer models have immense potential to enable faster, cheaper
design of cleaner, more efficient engines that our society and planet urgently
need. To have the highest impact on designing engines, models must make accurate
predictions with known uncertainty, especially for new cutting-edge engine
designs never manufactured or tested. Such predictive models would be especially
useful for minimizing the formation of nitrogen oxides (NOx), which are
responsible for smog, ground-level ozone, and other effects detrimental to human
and environmental health. The goal of this project is to create and validate a
predictive model for NOx formation during combustion. An innovative approach,
which leverages modern data science and computational chemistry, will be used to
create predictive models with known uncertainty. The resulting methodology and
models will then form the backbone for future studies of NOx formation during
combustion of all conventional and alternative fuels. The project will also
engage local high-school students in chemistry and data-science projects, create
and disseminate lesson plans for high-school and university teachers, and
partner with industry to enable the research to lead to better engine designs
immediately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective is to create an
extrapolatable, uncertainty-quantified, foundational NOx kinetic model by
optimally selecting, creating, and exploiting data from molecular to macroscopic
scales. The approach fuses (1) theoretical calculations to create molecular data
and develop rate laws and mixture rules to represent the pressure and
composition dependence of reaction rates, (2) experimental measurements to
gather macroscopic data at conditions that best inform engine predictions, and
(3) uncertainty-quantified modeling based on multiscale data to create models
trustable for predictive design. This work largely centers on undiscovered
pathways hypothesized to comprise a major NOx route at the high pressures and
low peak temperatures of high-efficiency, low-NOx engines. Altogether, the
research will address key outstanding issues in the present understanding of NOx
formation at high pressures and produce the first uncertainty-quantified NOx
kinetic model constrained by multiscale data. More broadly, the present rate
laws, mixture rules, and multiscale data-driven approach will also enable better
models of, simulation codes for, and understanding of many other chemically
reacting gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.