* 1944001
* CAREER:Muscle-Driven Endoprostheses for Restoring Natural Sensorimotor Function
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Dustin Crouch, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2025
* USD 504,459.00

Limb amputation causes severe loss of motor and sensory function for about 2
million Americans. Current limb prostheses (artificial body parts), which are
all worn externally on the body, fall short of restoring realistic motor and
sensory function. This is partly because most external prostheses remain
physically detached from muscles, which play a key role in generating and
sensing movements in biological limbs. To facilitate physical muscle-prosthesis
attachment, this CAREER project will develop “endoprostheses,” which are limb
prostheses that can be fully implanted within living skin. Such muscle-driven
endoprostheses (MDEs) represent an important, essential step toward limb
prostheses whose function and appearance are indistinguishable from those of the
biological limb. Eventually, MDEs could dramatically improve the function,
independence, and quality of life for people living with amputation and other
severe musculoskeletal defects due to trauma or cancer tissue removal. The
project will integrate research and education activities to provide research and
career development training to talented graduate and undergraduate students, to
develop interactive, hands-on education modules that teach project-related
biomedical engineering concepts to K-12 students and to provide opportunities
for involving high school students in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator's overarching research goal is to develop and promote
clinical translation of muscle-driven endoprostheses (MDEs), jointed skeletal
devices that are implanted within skin and physically attached to muscles, which
will enable anatomically realistic musculoskeletal reconstruction and restore
near-normal sensorimotor function. Towards this goal, this CAREER project will
design and quantify the motor function of an MDE prototype to replace the
hindlimb foot and ankle in an animal (rabbit) model. The project's central
hypothesis is that an MDE prototype with one degree of freedom (ankle
dorsi/plantar flexion) and attached to select lower limb muscles (gastrocnemius,
soleus, and tibialis anterior) can contribute to locomotion. The prototype will
consist of rigid tibial and foot segments, bone pins to anchor the MDE in the
tibia bone, the ankle joint, an over-molded silicone sleeve and suture-based
synthetic tendons that will be used to attach muscles to foot segments. The
Research Plan is organized under two thrusts. The FIRST Thrust is to create
computational musculoskeletal models to identify an MDE prototype design to
replace the rabbit hindlimb ankle that can meet the biomechanical demands of
locomotion and determine the relative influence of MDE design parameters on
motor function. Steps include compiling musculoskeletal data needed to construct
the rabbit model (architecture, geometry, kinematics, elastic properties, etc.),
implementing the musculoskeletal data in OpenSim, validating the model for the
intact-limb situation, using numerical optimization methods to identify the
optimal MDE geometry and performing biomechanical sensitivity analysis to
determine the relative influence of design parameters. The SECOND Thrust is to
iteratively implant pre-MDE and MDE prototypes in a rabbit model and assess the
resulting motor function. Iterative experiments include implanting a series of
pre-MDE prototypes that each includes a subset of features of the MDE prototype.
After each successful implantation, the size and number of features will be
increased. The iterative design facilitates identifying and addressing potential
issues with the prototypes. Steps include using Computer Aided Design (CAD) and
finite-element analysis (FEA) to define geometry and estimate mechanical
stresses and strains, fabricating prototypes, radiography, surgery, recovery and
tissue evaluation. Motor Function recovery experiments include following a
formal rehabilitation protocol, testing locomotion to determine the extent to
which the rabbits choose to load and move the ankle during a functional task and
testing biomechanical capacity by measuring the capacity of the ankle
independent of how the rabbits choose to use it during locomotion. Research
outcomes are expected to address two critical questions: 1) do residual muscles
have sufficient biomechanical capacity to generate joint torque and displacement
to enable useful motor function with MDEs? and 2) can patients adapt their
neuromuscular control to use an MDE effectively to perform motor
tasks?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.