* 1944138
* CAREER: Information Frictions in Consumer Credit Markets: Evidence on Policy, Practice, and Beliefs
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Christopher Palmer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2025
* USD 320,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops data and empirical methods
to quantify how information frictions distort the functioning of consumer credit
markets. The research advances understanding of the unintended consequences of
the U.S. bankruptcy system, how loan screening can be enhanced to improve credit
access across disadvantaged groups, and how households form expectations about
future prices. These three topic areas are critical to the fundamental economics
of credit markets, as well as to several credit products, policy questions, and
consumer decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides tools to measure
the extent, causes and impact of market failures in three domains: (1) testing
for moral hazard in debt accumulation among personal bankruptcy filers, (2)
explaining the prevalence of credit rationing, (3) understanding extrapolative
expectation formation. Using newly collected data detailing the composition and
timing of liabilities incurred by bankruptcy filers, this project develops an
identification strategy based on wage garnishing policies to test for strategic
borrowing effects. To study loan rejections, this project assembles rich data on
hundreds of lenders and millions of loan applicants in a setting where
applications are frequently rejected with credit not offered on any terms.
Combining plausibly exogenous variation in firm and loan-officer lending
policies with a semi-parametric selection model allows the characterization of
information frictions that lead to such a high percentage of loans being
rejected in equilibrium. The project further explores whether, conditional on
those frictions, current loan screening practices are optimal. Finally, the
project uses survey micro data of house price expectations and quantile-
regression techniques to study heterogeneity in extrapolative expectations and
the linkage between optimistic beliefs and behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.