* 1944644
* CAREER: Stereotypes of Teens and Adolescent Neuropsychological Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Yang Qu, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 466,109.00

________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adolescence is
often viewed in a negative light in American society. Both American youth and
adults view teens as more rebellious and irresponsible than younger children.
Accumulating evidence underscores that negative stereotypes that youth hold
about teens, which appear to be culturally shaped, undermine their behavioral
adjustment and neural development. Despite the detrimental impact of negative
stereotypes about teens, little is known about how youth’s stereotypes of teens
change over adolescence, how such changes impact long-term academic, social, and
neural development, and how social context plays a role in transmitting
stereotypes of teens. The overarching goal of this study is to examine the
developmental trajectories of adolescent stereotypes of teens, as well as the
antecedents and consequences of such trajectories. This study will highlight the
importance of changing negative stereotypes about adolescence at the policy and
societal level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will employ a longitudinal
design that combines survey and functional magnetic resonance imaging. Youth and
parents will complete a survey, including assessments of their stereotypes of
teens, annually over 4 years. Longitudinal neuroimaging data will be collected
to assess participants’ neurodevelopment of cognitive control and affective
systems. This work exemplifies a multi-method, multi-dimensional approach by
integrating adolescent development across belief, behavioral, and brain levels
in theoretically novel and important ways, with attention to the role of social
context (e.g., parents). Although no prior research has examined the
developmental trajectories of adolescents’ stereotypes of teens, this study will
systematically investigate this issue. The longitudinal design will not only
provide insights into the reciprocal and dynamic pathways between stereotypes
and adjustment over time, but also elucidate the neuro-behavior transactions
initiated by stereotypes of teens. Highlighting the role of parents in
transmitting cultural views of teens, this work also stands to inform
theoretical models regarding parental socialization of adolescent
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.