* 1944722
* CAREER: Control and Fractal-based Stability of Dynamic Vision-Based Aperiodic Legged Locomotion
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Koushil Sreenath, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 586,096.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant is to enable
legged robots that are as sure-footed and agile on rough terrain as snow
leopards, mountain goats, and human parkour experts. The project considers two
critical questions towards achieving this goal. The first is how the robot can
use cameras to decide where and how to take its next few steps. The second is
how to make sure that upsets caused by small stumbles and slips fade away over
time, instead of growing bigger and eventually causing a fall. The first
question will be partially answered by observing how vision and locomotion are
connected in humans, and translating that relationship to legged robots. The
second question requires extending current mathematical ideas about running and
walking. For example, a legged robot might run along a dry path, walk slowly to
cross a muddy patch, and then carefully hop on stepping-stones to cross a
stream. Current approaches pretend that each basic step is repeated forever. In
contrast, this project allows different basic patterns of steps to be combined
in any order. Without the ability to navigate realistic terrain and respond to
unplanned obstacles, legged robots will be restricted to highly controlled
settings. This project will help bring these robots into real-world usage, for
tasks involving exploration and security, moving in factories and warehouses,
and assisting humans in everyday tasks. The education portion of this project
will teach expert skills in dynamics and control through competitive student
activities under creativity-enhancing constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will create control techniques for highly dynamic robots that can run
rapidly on extreme terrain, and transition between walking, running, vaulting,
jumping, and landing on discrete footholds. These movements require rapid
switching between dynamical behaviors based on perceived information of the
world. An extension of current theory is needed to analyze the resulting
aperiodic locomotion. This project invokes fractal-based theory to define and
prove formal stability guarantees. The project also unites deep learning and
formal control theory to model and emulate human visual-motor integration for
translation to legged robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.