* 1944669
* CAREER: Leveraging Complex Variables to Refine Estimates of Air Pollution Emissions and their Impacts under Uncertainty
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Shannon Capps, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2025
* USD 436,388.00

Air pollution is one of the top ten health risks for Americans. We need to
understand which actions result in the most pollution to effectively reduce
these risks. This CAREER project will develop a new computational approach to
understanding these relationships using satellite data. This technique holds
great promise to provide results more rapidly, efficiently, and economically
than existing techniques. The public will be able to access these estimates
through an interactive website at science museums and in urban classrooms. The
second aim of this project is to use these computer-based tools to improve
estimates of where air pollution moves to better identify sources. Finally, this
work aims to develop improved air pollution forecasts across the United States.
Successful completion of this research will benefit the public by providing
tools to identify pollution sources to help clean the air. The public will also
benefit from rapid and accurate forecasts and warnings of pollution to protect
populations vulnerable to the health effects of air pollution. The researcher
will engage with regulators and other stakeholders to improve forecasts and
partner with schools to teach students about the science of air pollution.
Together, these efforts will increase the scientific literacy of the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to augment
GEOS-Chem and the Community Multiscale Air Quality model to efficiently
elucidate the relationship between pollutant emissions and atmospheric
concentrations. By augmenting two of the most widely used atmospheric chemical
transport models, the results will be available to environmental decisionmakers
for use in designing emission control strategies. Satellite-based atmospheric
composition observations will be assimilated with a novel ensemble-based four-
dimensional variational framework. Observations of ammonia from the Cross-track
Infrared Sensor will be used to refine the ammonia emissions estimates to allow
comparison of this novel approach to existing techniques that have previously
been used to refine ammonia emissions. The utility of the assimilation framework
for improving air quality forecasting will be evaluated for particulate matter
and ozone for which observations will be produced in approximately real-time
from NASA’s geo-stationary satellite-based Tropospheric Emissions: Monitoring of
Pollution (TEMPO) sensor. Successful completion of this research will benefit
the scientific community long-term through the development of an easily
extensible approach to sensitivity analysis in two widely used atmospheric
chemistry models. As such, it has great potential to provide faster and more
accurate predictions than presently used techniques using satellite-based
observations of atmospheric composition. These results will provide tools for
policy decision makers who are tasked to identify emission strategies to meet
the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.