* 1944247
* CAREER: A systems engineering approach to elucidate and treat multi-factorial pathology
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Cassie Mitchell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2025
* USD 533,682.00

Millions of patients suffer worldwide from multi-factorial disease, which is a
disease with no single cause but rather numerous contributing factors. Due to
their complex nature, most multi-factorial diseases are currently incurable.
Examples include the devastating neurodegenerative diseases of Alzheimer’s
Dementia (AD), frontotemporal dementia (FTD), and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
(ALS), which all impact brain function and the ability to perform normal daily
tasks. Effectively measuring multiple simultaneous contributing factors
throughout the disease course is extremely challenging in a traditional lab or
clinical setting. The goal of this CAREER project is to develop new complex
computer models that integrate and simultaneously analyze data from thousands of
studies examining individual disease factors measured in the lab or clinic. The
developed computer models prioritize the most promising factors and develop
optimal combination treatment strategies. Computer prioritization increases the
likelihood of clinical trial success and expedites the rate of new treatment
availability to patients. While this project focuses on predicting treatments
for AD, FTD, and ALS, the developed new technology can be applied to numerous
other multi-factorial diseases. Educational activities for this project focus on
undergraduate research internship curricula to increase opportunities;
professional mentoring of students with disabilities; integrated advocacy of
patients with AD, FTD, and ALS through local and national organizations; and
improved collegiate education for neuroengineering via development of a new
integrative class that integrates therapy design with medical school lectures on
clinical neurologic disease. In addition to graduate research assistants, this
project is estimated to provide STEM research internships for about 100
undergraduates and high school interns with an emphasis on under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term goal is to use
“pathology dynamics” (a branch of pathophysiology that deals with the motion,
equilibrium, or homeostasis of physiological systems under the action of
pathological forces) to enhance predictive medicine, whose primary purpose is to
improve, expedite and personalize healthcare by developing computer models that
forecast disease progression and treatment response. Towards this goal, the goal
of this CAREER project is to construct new literature mining and predictive
medicine models that leverage pathology dynamics to tackle multi-factorial
disease(s). Most multi-factorial diseases are intractable and not responsive to
traditional therapeutic approaches. The project’s driving hypothesis is that
pathology dynamics is the key to unlocking unique signatures that can
differentiate a spectrum of multi-factorial diseases that share similar
symptoms, etiology, and biomarkers, but are currently clinical “diagnoses of
exclusion” due to the lack of sensitive and specific clinical diagnostic tests.
Three multi-factorial neuropathology test cases--Alzheimer’s Disease (AD),
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD)--will be
used to characterize the ability of pathology dynamics-based models to improve
diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic prediction. The Research Plan is
organized under three Aims. The FIRST Aim is to construct databases to capture,
quantify, and aggregate entire fields’ literature. The investigator’s optimized
student-driven assembly line (a hierarchy of high school and undergraduate
students trained for biocuration tasks) will fully recapture journal article
data along with key experimental methods/protocols, which enable meaningful data
aggregation and analysis. The assembly line will first complete full published
preclinical data recapture and corresponding databases for ALS, AD, and FTD
(approximately 40,000 articles), which will be followed by construction of
integrative clinical databases that consist of de-identified patient data for
AD, ALS, and FTD. Efforts will also be made to develop and integrate additional
biocuration automation for full data recapture with a goal of increasing
biocuration automation from 40% to &gt;75%. The SECOND Aim is to develop
protocols for literature relationship extraction and ranking. Text mining with
semantic inference networks will be used to identify multi-scalar relationships
from 30+ million PubMed articles using the United Medical Language System
ontology for keyword categorization and adapted unsupervised rank aggregation to
prioritize relationships of interest. The THIRD Aim is to construct “pathology
dynamics” models for the multi-factorial diseases using the data curated in Aim
1 and the relationships identified and ranked in Aim 2. Unsupervised models will
be constructed for pathology dynamics phenotyping and supervised machine
learning models will be constructed for diagnostic and therapeutic prediction.
The models will be used in comparing rankings of literature relationships to
experimentally measured relationships. In summary, the deliverables of this
project include: novel multi-scalar databases for full curation of the AD, ALS,
and FTD corpuses; new biocuration automation and relationship-based literature
mining technology; and de novo systems-dynamics based preclinical and clinical
predictive medicine models of AD, ALS, and FTD that can be used to predict
etiology, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.