* 1944964
* NRI: EAGER: Teaching Aerial Robots to Perch Like a Bat via AI-Guided Design and Control
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Sarah Ostadabbas, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 102,367.00

This research will develop the scientific and technological foundations for
design of small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) with bat shapes and flying
abilities. These bat-like UAVs will be non-intrusive and safe to operate in
shared spaces to provide situational awareness to humans. Our bat-inspired
design will also be collision-tolerant to negotiate cluttered, hard-to-access
environments in the physical world. The resulting technology can significantly
improve public safety and vehicular dynamic traffic control in smart cities and
cost-effectiveness associated with monitoring environmental disasters.
Ultimately, the UAV can provide computing, communication and sensing
capabilities in large-scale systems such as, residential buildings, streets,
construction zones, and state parks. These capabilities should result in
enormous societal impact and economic benefit. In addition, as the result of
this project, a new generation of scientists and engineers will be trained in
addressing multidisciplinary challenges at the intersection of theory and
experiment. The project will create programs and tools to train workforce with
new skills including bio-inspired robotics, machine learning and artificial
intelligence, and nonlinear control theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
adopts an artificial intelligence-guided framework to study bat's flight
maneuvers including perching (i.e. upside-down landing), zero-path flight, and
hovering. Due to the fact that the salient aspects of the bat's wing motion can
be represented in a low-dimensional subspace, we will apply an auto-encoding
variational inference approach on the flying data from real animal in order to
extract low dimensional, yet interpretable, embedding of the its underlying
flight model. We will also use a high-fidelity virtual environment for 3D
modeling, synthetic design and validation of the extracted low-dimensional
latent variables. This will also lead to better understating of the bat sensory
feedback mechanism through a data-driven procedure. Our research objective will
simplify the engineering procedure to design bio-inspired aerial co-robots that
closely mimic the flight behavior of a target animal, therefore is directly
towards lowering the barriers for understanding fundamentals regarding closed-
loop control and design of bio-inspired multimodal co-robots. In order to
achieve the proposed research objectives, we will center our effort around
conducting two main phases during the one year timeline of this project: first,
AI-guided analysis and modeling of bat's various flight maneuvers, and second,
development of a soft and collision-tolerant bat-inspired aerial agent capable
of landing on structures. These two phases will be accomplished by team's cross-
disciplinary collaborative, as components are highly interlinked and
dependent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.