* 1944014
* CAREER: Supercritical Insulation for Energy and Cost Efficiency (SCIENCE)
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Lukas Graber, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Electrical power plays an increasingly important role in everyday life. In fact,
we could not imagine modern society to work without electrical power. We depend
on it for everything from food production to communication, transportation,
health, finances, education, research, law enforcement and many more. The
continuous increase in electrical power consumption as well as the
electrification of traditionally non-electrical applications, require higher
power densities, which are often not achievable with today’s technology and call
for a paradigm shift. There are many emerging technologies with the potential to
enable such a transition, which have in common that they need electrically
insulating materials with unique properties. This research project is focusing
on understanding the physics of a promising class of materials, called
“supercritical fluids,” so that they can be tailored for their respective
application. Furthermore, the fundamental understanding of the physical
properties of supercritical fluids could fill knowledge gaps in other areas of
natural sciences. This project fills an important gap for workforce in high-
voltage engineering. Multiple activities to engage K-12 students, undergraduate
and graduate students as well as post-docs are highlighted including curriculum
development in the high-voltage engineering. The work will use an integrated
approach to engage high school teachers, high school students, undergraduate
students and graduate students building on established programs at the Georgia
Tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supercritical fluids show a dielectric
behavior that is different from that of ideal gases and justify fundamental
research to expand the knowledge in this area. While chemical and thermal
properties of some SCFs have been investigated and documented in the literature,
only very few dielectric studies exist. In particular, there is no theory known
that describes the ionization, attachment, excitation, and avalanche processes,
and even the breakdown behavior in uniform field is mostly unknown. Developing a
thorough understanding of these processes and formulating a theory will be
challenging. A combination of numerical methods and experimental techniques will
be used to refine our models and further our understanding of this class of
material. Fundamental understanding of the dielectric strength of supercritical
fluids is expected to enable the design of DC circuit breakers, a crucial
component of multi-terminal high voltage DC power transmission, enabling
transcontinental exchange of renewable energy. Such switchgear is expected to be
equally important for DC distribution systems on electric aircraft and ships.
The electrification of the transportation sector will help reduce the reliance
on fossil fuels and reduce the emission of carbon dioxide. SCFs could also make
electrostatic motors and generators feasible with their ability to interface
directly with the high voltage transmission grid, their much reduced
electromagnetic signature, and their independence from rare earth magnets.
Besides these applications in power and energy, supercritical fluids might
enable more affordable particle accelerators for high energy physics and medical
applications, with big benefits to accelerate research and lowering costs of
medical treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.