* 1944735
* CAREER: The relative importance of remote oceanic forcing on estuarine exchange flow across a broad parameter space - Numerical analysis integrated with visualization &amp; educati
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Sarah Giddings, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 508,879.00

Exchange between estuaries and the coastal ocean is a key dynamical driver
affecting the flushing characteristics of an estuary (residence time) and impact
critical biological and biogeochemical processes such as nutrient and
phytoplankton concentrations, development of anoxic/hypoxic conditions and
acidification across the estuary/ocean interface. Extensive research on the
local forces (i.e., river flow, vertical mixing, tidal pumping due to
bathymetry, local winds) driving estuarine exchange flows has helped advance
knowledge of estuarine physics. However, the relative role of oceanic forcing
(i.e., offshore plumes, coastal trapped waves, storm induced set-up, and wind
driven upwelling / downwelling) is less understood, particularly across the
different estuary types. This study aims at understanding the relative influence
of remote oceanic forcing on estuarine exchange flow using numerical modeling
applied across 10 different estuary types. Existing, validated, realistic
numerical simulations are paired with semi-idealized and idealized numerical
simulations for analysis. The scientific value of understanding the influence of
remote forcing on estuarine exchange is broad given its impacts on important
biological and biogeochemical processes, and more importantly, it will afford
improved understanding of how estuaries may respond to future changes of oceanic
and atmospheric conditions. In addition, as part of this study, research is
integrated with education through the design of an interactive visualization
tool for numerical simulations. This study employs a synthesis approach and uses
simulations generated by numerous scientists. This brings together the estuarine
research community to address scientific questions that could not be answered by
individual estuary studies. The educational component of the work aims at
building a community of scientist - educators that include scientists, education
researchers and experts, secondary school teachers in science and computer
science, undergraduate researchers, a postdoctoral researcher, and a graduate
student. Valuable tools for both the research and education communities,
including analysis codes, an interactive simulation visualization tool
accompanied with lesson scaffolding curriculum content, and teaching resources
will be developed and made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
knowledge gap on the relative importance of remote oceanic forcing on estuarine
exchange flow and how this varies across different estuary types. This gap is
addressed in this study where existing estuarine parameterizations are tested,
and the results are mapped onto the appropriate parameter space. The synthesis
of 10 different estuarine numerical models constitutes a novel way of
approaching estuarine science - studying a variety of estuaries rather than one
"favorite estuary." Specifically, the proposed work will (1) Calculate the
estuarine exchange flow (as quantified by the Total Exchange Flow, TEF) across a
wide estuarine parameter space (defined by the mixing parameter, M, and
freshwater Froude number, Frf); (2) Quantify the role of remote oceanic forcing
on TEF for different types and frequencies of remote forcing and on different
estuary types and geometries; (3) Use model output to optimally design an
observational array to measure these processes with TEF; (4) Integrate an
interactive visualization tool of numerical simulation output with lesson
scaffolding to produce educational tools and opportunities for integration
between research and education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.