* 1944539
* CAREER: Anomalous Thermal Relaxations of Physical Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Marija Vucelja, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2025
* USD 423,460.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most processes in nature are out
of equilibrium. Examples are everywhere around us – turbulence of vortexes
forming on the sides of airplane wings, water flows from a tap, cooling of a cup
of tea to room temperature. Coupling of a system to its environment, the tea to
the surrounding air, leads to energy exchange between the two, and relaxation to
a new joint state. If isolated, this joint system settles to what we call a
thermal equilibrium. It means that the energy exchange stops being on average
directional, from the hot cup of tea to the colder ambient air. Instead, the
flow of energy starts to fluctuate, without any drift or bias, on average,
equally back and forth, between the tea and the air. This approach to a joint
steady state is called thermal relaxation or equilibration – it is the long-time
collective fate of most coupled systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
relaxation processes is particularly relevant for metallurgy and materials
science, where annealing is the heat treatment that yields metals or glasses
with desirable hardness and stress properties. Thermal relaxation is also used
in optimization problems to find configurations that are optimal for an
environment, for example, optimal traffic schedule routes that minimize the
mileage or polymer configurations that have the minimal energy and thus are
prevalent at low temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of our intuition and
theoretical understanding stems from observing physical systems in or close to
equilibrium. It is also where the dynamics stop to be important, and the
properties of the physical systems can be captured by a few measurable
quantities, such as temperature, average energy, and magnetization (in a
magnetic system). However, often in nature and in the laboratory, physical
systems are not even close to an equilibrium. How does the relaxation occur
then? Apparently, it is full of ”surprises,” and our intuition often fails. One
such highly unusual relaxation phenomenon is the Mpemba effect. It occurs when
”hot can cool faster than cold,” that is, when a system prepared at high
temperature takes less time for cooling than an identical system starting at a
lower temperature. Mpemba was the first to observe it in water; later, others
saw the effect in the water, plastics, magnets, and other systems. The PI aims
to put many of these diverse observations under a common ”umbrella” – a general
theoretical framework that focuses on salient features necessary for the
anomalous relaxation. That is, the goal of this activity is to study anomalous
thermal relaxations and build a theoretical framework describing the approach to
thermal equilibrium of different physical systems. Applications of the outlined
research include proper sample preparation, design of materials with specific
properties, optimal heating, and cooling protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI’s long-term education goal is to effectively communicate science to audiences
of diverse educational backgrounds and ages. The educational objective of this
project is to introduce a mini-series of interactive science lectures to middle
and high school students, exposing them to cutting-edge research and
facilitating networking between scientists and students. High school students
selecting their science requirement credits often overlook physics. The PI aims
to remedy this gap by making physics, as well as other natural sciences, more
approachable by her "quiz the scientist" series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this activity is to study the anomalous thermal relaxation of physical systems
and thus deepen the fundamental understanding of nonequilibrium physics. A prime
example of unusual relaxation phenomena is a ”shortcut” in thermal relaxation
called the Mpemba effect. It occurs when a system prepared at high temperature
takes less time for cooling than an identical system starting at a lower
temperature while both are coupled to an even colder environment. It was
observed in the cooling of water, clathrate-hydrates, polymers, carbon nano-
tube resonators, magnetic alloys, driven granular gasses, and spin glasses.
These observations of the effect in very different systems suggest that there
might be a general theory behind the phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
nonequilibrium dynamics phenomenon, the Mpemba effect cannot be captured by
looking at the linear-response regime. Therefore, the PI introduces a framework
based on stochastic thermodynamics to study anomalous relaxation effects. The
outlined theoretical framework will serve as the starting point for analytical
and numerical studies of several macroscopic, and also typically much harder to
treat, mesoscopic systems. As model systems, kinetically constrained lattice
gases, random energy models, and several spin and magnetic systems will be
explored. The systems where the Mpemba effect was observed have phase
transitions. Hence the PI will explore the connections between phase transitions
and the Mpemba effect as well as the relationships between aging, memory,
rejuvenation, and the effect. A perturbative approach will be used to study the
anomalous relaxation of Markov chain Monte Carlo
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications of results emanating from the
activity will lead to advancements in control theory, optimization, and
numerical algorithms. Particularly the PI envisions more efficient simulated
annealing and Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms, which would be extremely
useful for efficient sampling and protein folding. Another application is
optimal cooling and heating protocols, and through those, the research products
will impact the design of materials with specific thermal
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mpemba effect has received more attention
in education than in research. Not much is known about anomalous relaxation
processes. Most of the intuition and theoretical framework come from static
properties of thermal equilibrium. Yet most of biology and physical systems are
out-of-equilibrium, where dynamics is essential. The prospective research
results will have an impact on a wide range of physics fields. The outlined
theoretical work will impact experiments as well, as the strong Mpemba effect
should be readily observable. With improved understanding from this work, the
educational plan will bring cutting-edge research topics closer to high school
and middle school students. The PI will organize a mini-series of scientific
talks and student led discussions with the speaker. The broader impacts include
improvements in the STEM education of several age groups, an increase in public
scientific literacy and retention of STEM interest among the younger
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.