* 1944415
* CAREER: Soft, biocompatible ion-based transistors for responsive neuroelectronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Dion Khodagholy, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Bioelectronic devices have numerous potential benefits to human health, from in-
home wellness monitoring to diagnosis and treatment of neuropsychiatric
diseases. However, safe and effective use of these devices is limited by the
rigid, non-biocompatible electronic components that must be incorporated to
allow execution of the required functions. This project seeks to study how soft
and fully biocompatible materials can be leveraged to interact directly with
signals from the body without damaging tissue. A transistor fabricated from
these materials will be used to create the circuits necessary for bioelectronic
devices to acquire and modulate the activity of neurons in the brain. The
outcome of the research will benefit society by improving the design of
bioelectronic devices currently used for patients with conditions such as
epilepsy or Parkinson's disease by eliminating the need for implantation of
bulky or rigid materials in the body. This project will also facilitate
understanding of the principles underlying interactions between the body and
electronic devices. The educational component of this project leverages ion-
gated transistors as biocompatible and low-cost components to be used in student
and educator projects that teach principles of bioelectronic device design.
These projects will be maintained in a comprehensive database to facilitate
dissemination to educators and outreach coordinators, providing evidence-based
methods to improve project-based learning in bioelectronics more broadly. The
educational objectives of the project are to provide students and educators with
hands-on opportunities to design and test simple, biocompatible bioelectronic
devices. These efforts will increase exposure to engineering methods in schools
and stimulate interest in bioelectronics to benefit
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an enormous need to develop bioelectronic
components that can merge biocompatibility, ion transduction, high speed, and
reliable operation in physiological environments. The objective of the project
is to develop ion-driven, conformable, implantable bioelectronic devices to
enable efficient interaction with neural circuits. The central hypothesis is
that ion-gated transistors will effectively interact with neural signals because
they can directly transduce the brain's ionic flux, and are sufficient to create
the integrated circuits required for fully implantable, soft, closed-loop
devices that do not require rigid encapsulation. The research involves
fabrication of integrated circuits comprised of ion-gated transistors with
comprehensive in vitro and modeling-based characterization of the parameters
governing their operation in physiologic environments. These devices are then
used to modulate neural networks in an in vivo animal model of epilepsy and
acquire neurophysiologic data from human subjects. The rationale underlying this
research is that realization of such devices will transform design of
bioelectronic devices with the potential to enhance diagnosis and therapy for
neuropsychiatric disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.