* 1944369
* CAREER: Conflicting Traffic Streams with Mixed Traffic: Modeling and Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Danjue Chen, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports fundamental
research in understanding of traffic flow patterns in mixed autonomous and
human-controlled traffic streams. Emerging connected automated vehicle (CAV)
technologies hold enormous potential to reduce transportation system congestion,
improve safety, and facilitate higher energy efficiency. While anticipated
benefits are greatest when all vehicles on the roads are CAVs, the near-term
future will consist of mixed connected vehicles (CVs) connected automated
vehicles and non-connected (human-driven, or HV) vehicles. This project will
study mixed traffic streams, quantifying their impact on congestion and traffic
flow, and develop robust strategies intended to improve performance and safety
of the system as a whole, thereby enabling better understanding of how different
vehicle types interact in traffic. The results will guide the development of
roadway design, policies, and long-term planning for future transportation
systems. The research activities will be closely integrated with a set of
education and outreach activities to effectively promote smart and sustainable
transportation. These activities include (i) developing a set of tools that will
be shared with the research and practice communities (e.g., portable driving
simulators, and an open-sourced micro-simulation platform), (ii) enhancing
existing engineering curricula, (iii) broadening participation of women in STEM,
and (iv) providing outreach to a broad audience, including K-12 students and
teachers as well as cross-sector research communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this project are to
(i) characterize the driving behaviors of HVs and CAVs in conflicting traffic
streams, (ii) the collective impact of mixed traffic on the traffic flow, and
(iii) investigate robust tactical-level control strategies for CAVs to improve
system performance with respect to throughput, traffic flow stability, and
safety. The research involves data collection on using driving simulators and
field tests, establishment of behavior models for different vehicle types (i.e.,
CAVs, CVs, and HVs) based on the collected data, and design and evaluation of
tactical level control strategies using rule-based and Artificial Intelligent
(AI)-based control approaches. This research will uncover the cooperative
behavior of CAVs and the behavior of HVs and CVs under cooperation in the
context of conflicting traffic streams. The research is expected to produce
effective control strategies for CTS with mixed traffic. The outreach plan will
provide high school students and teachers with exposure to the university's
virtual driving lab as well as to research challenges in emerging transportation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.