* 1944211
* CAREER: Coarse-grained Theory and Simulation of Ion-containing Liquids: Study of Ion Solvation by Polymers and Ionic Liquids and between Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Issei Nakamura, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2025
* USD 392,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project supports research and
education to study properties of liquids containing charged molecules. This
project is focused on advancing understanding of how charged molecules, also
known as ions, are surrounded by liquid molecules. This solvation process is a
crucial step in making novel materials for emerging technologies; the lithium-
ion polymer battery is one example. Existing computer simulations are unable to
access the scales of length and time required for an adequate understanding of
ion solvation.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will develop simplified
computational models, called coarse-grained models, which represent units
containing multiple atoms as effective particles with effective interactions.
This procedure reduces the computational intensity of simulations making them
tractable, but at the expense of some accuracy. This method will enable more
straightforward identification of the key parameters and general mechanisms of
ion solvation in polymers, which are long chain-like molecules. The project is
aimed to advance the current state-of-the-art of molecular simulations. The
knowledge acquired in this study will also help to refine existing theory at the
level of atoms and associated simulation methods. Using the developed methods,
the PI will also study the role of various nanoparticles in ion solvation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component involves framing a pedagogy for
both college and high school students, in which students can develop scientific
problem-solving skills and cultivate interdisciplinary approaches to problems
using computer simulations and visualization. Education objectives will be
achieved through utilizing a combination of programming languages and open-
source software with an aim to help students visualize mathematical expressions
and bridge the gap between practice and theory while enriching their programming
skills. The PI also aims to use education innovations developed in this CAREER
project to bridge the gap in education between soft- and hard-condensed matter
physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To extend the reach of the project, the PI and
his group will collaborate with a K-12 educator to develop and hold short summer
programs on topics related to this research. These programs are designed to
provide a taste of soft-matter physics to local secondary school students using
open-source software, such as PhET and Physlets, and simulation techniques,
along with introductory programming. Ultimately, the aim is to develop,
evaluate, and disseminate these outreach program resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project
supports research and education to study the thermodynamic and electrochemical
properties of ion-containing liquids. When liquid mixtures, polymers, different
time and length scales, and significant spatial inhomogeneity of dielectric
responses appear together, electrostatic interactions become amazingly intricate
making understanding ion-containing liquids challenging.&lt;br/&gt;This study is
aimed to provide a deeper understanding of ion solvation at molecular and
atomistic scales to enable the design of novel electrochemical materials for
next-generation technologies. The PI will focus mainly on the solvation energy
of ions and the solvation mechanism in polymers and ionic liquids. The solvation
mechanism of nanometer-sized solid bodies, such as metal oxide nanoparticles and
quantum dots, will also be investigated with an aim to evaluate the effect of
Lifshitz forces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate the hypothesis
that the key factors in determining physical properties of ion-containing
liquids are: (1) the strong fluctuation of electrostatic potentials, (2) the
spatial inhomogeneity of the dielectric response, (3) the synergy among specific
interactions such as hydrogen bonding and aromatic interactions, and (4) van der
Waals forces from solid bodies. The complexity of polymers, such as chain
architecture and chain connectivity, often makes understanding the physical
properties that arise from these factors challenging. To address this issue, the
PI will develop coarse-grained molecular simulations by connecting dipolar and
quadrupolar monomeric units. The PI will also develop effective force fields
between uncharged nanoparticles, which account for the molecular interactions of
polyelectrolytes and ionic liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed education
plan seeks to frame a pedagogy for soft-matter sciences in physics. The plan
will use open-source software such as PhET, Physlets, and LAMMPS that can be
executed on standard computers to ensure wide accessibility. The PI’s main aim
is to minimize a gradually surging concern in physics education, specifically,
‘‘the gap in education between hard- and soft-condensed matter physics.’’ To
further the impact of the CAREER project, the PI and his group will hold short
summer programs based on the PI’s expertise to provide a taste of soft-matter
physics to local secondary schools. Developed and delivered in coordination with
a K-12 education specialist, these outreach sessions will use open-source
software, such as PhET and Physlets, and associated simulation techniques along
with introductory programming. The aim of the outreach component is to develop,
evaluate, and disseminate resources for use in similar programs
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.