* 1944063
* CAREER: Dynamic characterization of acoustofluidic devices using living probes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* John Meacham, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 02/28/2025
* USD 395,083.00

Acoustofluidics is the use of sound waves to manipulate small objects or
particles in liquids. Acoustic microfluidic devices have great potential for
applications in medicine and biology because ultrasound, which is known to be
safe, can be used to move tiny objects without touching them. These objects can
range in size from individual molecules to biological cells. However, the use of
acoustofluidic devices has been limited by an inability to measure and compare
their performance to ensure consistent quality. This CAREER project will use
active, swimming algae cells to assess how well acoustofluidic devices work. The
ability of swimming microorganisms to respond to their changing environment will
be exploited to see and measure ultrasound waves in devices with complicated
shapes. This new measurement approach can be used to streamline testing of
acoustic microfluidic devices for mixing, separation, trapping, and controlled
motion of microscopic objects. The study of sound waves also presents a unique
opportunity to engage and excite students and the general public through their
basic understanding and natural interest in sound. The CAREER project will
support the development of activities to teach about waves, sound, and
vibrations at Washington University and in the St. Louis region. Undergraduate
researchers and teacher interns will design, make, and test acoustic
microfluidic devices, and create educational materials for K-12 students.
Videos, demonstrations, and teaching modules will be used at local schools,
providing opportunities to engage underrepresented students in STEM. Educational
activities on these topics will be incorporated into the university's Institute
for School Partnership MySci program, which reaches approximately 100,000 K-12
students and is integral to regional STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inadequate metrology is a critical barrier to
the translation of acoustofluidics from the laboratory into practice. However
quantitative prediction of acoustofluidic parameter fields (force, force
potential, and pressure) is challenging, as idealized computational models fail
to accurately capture the complexity of real devices (e.g., manufacturing
tolerances and component interfaces). In addition, current experimental methods
are limited to simple geometries and rely on passive tracer particles that
cannot respond to the changing field as conditions vary. The goal of the CAREER
project is to use the interactions of swimming cells with ultrasonic standing
waves to elucidate and quantify the performance of complex acoustofluidic
devices. Cells of the alga C. reinhardtii continuously probe their environment,
yielding a comprehensive, real-time picture of the acoustic field throughout the
fluid domain. By calibrating these micro-swimmers (i.e., establishing their
acoustophysical properties and propulsive capability), the dynamic evolution of
their spatial distribution can be correlated to the evolving field shape. This
technique can be used to characterize performance and identify optimal operating
conditions. Conversely, these field-particle interactions will provide
opportunities to investigate how micro-swimmers respond to external force
fields. Accurate and rapid performance characterization is critical to the
advancement of acoustofluidics, and thus the CAREER project will accelerate
realization of the full potential of these
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.