* 1944807
* CAREER: Breaking the Tradition of Silence through Conocimiento and Consciousness Raising among Latinx Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Joel Mejia, University of San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Grant
* 11/30/2021
* USD 320,827.00

Latinx underrepresentation in engineering is a topic that has been widely
discussed in engineering education circles for many years. Although the Latinx
population continues to grow and more Latinx are attending college, the degree
attainment for this population in engineering continues to be low. Different
scholars have argued that Latinx students do not pursue engineering careers
because the cultures of students do not fit the “cultures of engineering.” The
narrow conceptualization of who belongs in engineering has failed to recognize
and acknowledge the material realities and lived experiences of Latinx students
and their contribution to knowledge construction in engineering. Oftentimes, the
conocimiento and testimonio of Latinx students is perceived as a deficit rather
than an asset that belongs in engineering. While there is a broad range of
research that addresses Latinx students in engineering, the current approaches
are devoid of the insider perspectives and methodologies needed to (re)frame and
(re)define the ways of doing research about and with Latinx from an asset-based
perspective. Without understanding the language, culture, practices, or belief
systems of Latinx students, researchers in the past have come to deficit views
of Latinx and other marginalized student groups’ thinking and academic work. To
counter these deficit views, it is necessary to validate the everyday life
experiences of Latinx engineering students and recognize them as holders and
creators of knowledge. This study seeks to provide a pathway for the development
of more culturally responsive educators and researchers that attend to the lived
experiences of Latinx engineering students. The goal is to provide more
information on how to support marginalized engineering students by designing a
framework that supports learning through transformation while acknowledging
conocimiento and testimonio as forms of knowledge generation in engineering.
This work contributes to the growing body of knowledge related to student-
centered initiatives, the diversification of the engineering field, and the
identification of institutional practices that may perpetuate or alleviate the
adversity faced and perceived by Latinx students in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-phase multi-sited ethnographic study seeks to
(1) explore the concept of conocimiento as Latinxs make sense of adverse
experiences in engineering, (2) identify and analyze the structural barriers and
modes of exclusionary discourse in engineering, and (3) develop a model that
integrates Latinx epistemologies and methodologies to expand asset-based and
culturally responsive approaches to engineering education research and teaching.
Phase 1 of the study focuses on the collection and analysis of the testimonios
of Latinx engineering students to unravel traditional academic ideas of who may
be considered a producer of knowledge. This analysis addresses how Latinx
engineering students negotiate and make meaning of their lived experiences as
they go through their engineering journey while documenting their conocimiento.
Phase 2 consists of an analysis of institutional norms and how these are
communicated and (re)produced to identify the different forms in which
institutional practices may perpetuate or alleviate the adversity faced and
perceived by Latinx engineering students. Finally, Phase 3 involves the
development of methodologies that contribute to the (re)framing of asset-based
approaches to engineering education research and teaching. This study provides
methodological approaches written by and for Latinxs to theorize and analyze
systemic barriers, resistance, persistence, and agency as a way to foster a
culture of inclusivity in engineering education, and broaden the participation
and academic attainment of Latinx engineering students. The testimonios,
conocimiento, and methodologies emerging from this study support advocacy work
for Latinx engineering students across the nation, and help dismantle the myth
of the Latinx monolith to prevent reproducing the narrative that Latinxs have
fixed social configurations, which interferes with the effectiveness of
initiatives to increase the number of Latinxs in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.