* 1944978
* CAREER:  Controlled Dopant Migration by Atomic Trapping for Site-Specific Doping in Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Weiwei Zheng, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2025
* USD 631,462.00

Dopants are impurity atoms that are intentionally introduced into host materials
to improve physical properties and behavior (or functionality). Professor Zheng
and his research group at Syracuse University are developing reliable methods
for the effective incorporation of dopants into nanocrystals (of dimensions
about 1/1000 times the width of human hair) at specific locations. This project
represents a detailed investigation of dopant movement and migration behavior
inside nanocrystals. The research addresses fundamental questions about the
composition-dependent properties of nanomaterials. The results of this research
could have implications in many emergent technologies such as solar energy
harvesting, solid-state lighting, and quantum computing. The research performed
under this project will be used as a tool to initiate anannual program of
Materials Chemistry behind Table Tennis at the East Syracuse Minoa High School.
The research on the dopant location dependent properties of nanocrystals will be
linked to the micro-composition-dependent performance of table tennis gear. By
discussing the science behind sport, the program will be highly interactive and
make materials chemistry more approachable to students. The educational plan
improves the active learning process among middle and high school students,
fosters interest in STEM education at their early ages, and develops science
teaching skills for STEM undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Zheng is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry to explore directional dopant migration behavior and systematically
control dopant location and distribution inside host semiconductor nanocrystals.
The goal of the project is to determine how the dopant spatial distribution is
modified under the influence of local lattice composition and strain during
surface shell passivation and functionalization in core/shell nanocrystals. The
team is utilizing local nanocrystal lattices with relatively small cationic size
mismatch relative to that of the dopants as an "atomic trap". They initiate fast
dopant migration inside nanocrystals under moderate temperatures. Controlled
dopant migration for specific dopant locations inside core/shell NCs can fine
tune the host-to-dopant coupling, which offers new opportunities to design novel
nanomaterials with unprecedented properties for applications in dual-band
optical sensors, white light emitters, and solar energy
harvesters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.