* 1944134
* CAREER: Deconstructing Proton Transport through Atomically Thin Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Piran Kidambi, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,372.00

Membrane technologies have the potential to play a transformative role in
addressing energy scarcity, which impacts the lives of millions of people.
Atomically-thin two-dimensional (2D) materials represent a new kind of membrane
material. 2D materials allow subatomic particles (e.g., protons) to selectively
pass through the membrane while blocking even small gas atoms such as helium.
The ability to separate protons from other atoms and molecules will enable
disruptive innovations in energy generation and conversion, chemical processing
and separations, electronics, and environmental protection. The project aims to
develop fundamental understanding of proton transport through 2D materials.
These scientific insights will be leveraged to develop novel catalytic and
separation processes that serve to advance the U.S. economy and national
security. A comprehensive education and outreach plan will complement and aid
research efforts by a) reinforcing positive public perception towards science,
engineering and mathematics and b) training the next-generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomically-thin 2D materials such as graphene
and hexagonal boron nitride offer fundamentally new opportunities to probe and
control mass-transport. Pristine monolayer graphene and hexagonal boron nitride
are impermeable to helium atoms but allow for proton transport. Selective proton
transport through 2D materials offers transformative opportunities for fuel
cells, isotope separations, hydrogen purification, photo-detectors, and
artificial photosynthesis. However, a comprehensive understanding of proton
transport mechanisms through 2D materials remains elusive. The overall objective
of project is to develop fundamental understanding of the mechanisms governing
proton transport through 2D materials. State-of-the-art advances in in-situ
metrology will be used to study proton permeation through 2D materials. These
fundamental insights on proton transport will be used to develop novel catalytic
and separation processes that are of interest to the U.S. economy and national
security. The research is integrated with a comprehensive education and outreach
plan that focuses on i) providing under-represented and under-served groups with
research internships for undergraduate and high-school students and engaging
with their high-school teachers; ii) collaboration with professionals to develop
content for outreach and dissemination of research findings via social media
platforms; and iii) community engagement with hands-on science experiments via
outreach activities at Vanderbilt University and the Nashville
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.