* 1944843
* CAREER: Elucidating and Harnessing Metal-Support Interactions using Designer Nanoclusters as Functional Models
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Alexandra Velian, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 01/31/2025
* USD 727,705.00

Many industrial processes involve chemical reactions that take place on the
surface of metallic solids. While solid materials are very effective in
converting one chemical to another, they do not dissolve in liquids that
commonly are necessary for many reactions and that can slow the reaction speeds.
The synthesis of small molecules that mimic the behavior of solid surfaces in
speeding up reactions while dissolving in solution could improve chemical
manufacturing. In this project Professor Alexandra Velian, Chemistry Department,
University of Washington, is supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the
Chemistry Division to prepare small molecule species that address this
challenge. Her synthetic targets are small clusters of atoms that contain an
exposed metal site where chemical reactivity can occur. These materials can be
dissolved in solution and thus, they may improve the selectivity, stability, and
tunability of the reactions they promote. The research gives a fundamental
understanding of how reactions at a single metal atom occur. This knowledge then
may be used to determine the basic steps in important industrial-scale chemical
conversions. The research is integrated with a broad-based outreach effort to
engage, enable and retain first-generation, underrepresented or low-income
students in the STEM pipeline, and empower them to attain their professional
potential. To achieve these goals, Professor Velian provides one-on-one
mentorship to students, enables hands on research via “Chemistry Frontiers” - a
new course to inform and engage students in contemporary research early in their
undergraduate careers, and connects faculty with research active students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The surface functionalization of Co6Se8 clusters is used
to synthesize nanoclusters with surface-embedded, tunable single atom active
sites. These systems serve as functional models for metal–support constructs.
The parameters that govern how metal–support interaction and vicinal active site
activity alter the reactivity profile of key intermediates in typical reaction
cycles are evaluated. This leads to a synthetic paradigm to design and prepare
modular single atom materials from surface-functionalized Co6Se8-based
nanoclusters. Concurrent with these research efforts Dr. Velian and her team
actively work to promote diversity, inclusion and equity in science through an
initiative that integrates mentorship, engagement in research, and immersion
into the research community, with a focus on disenfranchised students at the
University of Washington and in the greater Seattle area. The team also engages
and educates the broader scientific and non-scientific community about the
significance of heterogeneous catalysis on industrial
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.