* 1944249
* CAREER: Ultrahigh-Resolution Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopic Imaging for Label-Free Molecular Imaging of the Brain
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Fan Lam, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 01/31/2025
* USD 517,286.00

Understanding how the brain works, including how to effectively treat brain
disorders, is one of the most exciting scientific frontiers. Neuroimaging has
significantly advanced this frontier by allowing noninvasive mapping of the
brain’s anatomy and activity in unprecedented detail. However, new tools are
needed to visualize molecular-level information in a living brain. Current
methods are limited by several fundamental challenges, including the need of
radioactive tracers or contrast agents, limited molecule recognition, noisy
signals, long imaging time, and poor spatial resolution. The overall goal of
this CAREER project is to develop a new generation of imaging technologies to
address these challenges and enable label-free molecular imaging of the brain at
unprecedented resolutions in space and time using magnetic resonance
spectroscopic imaging (MRSI). Success of the research planned will significantly
advance the field of molecular neuroimaging and enable new capabilities by
simultaneously mapping many physiologically important molecules in the brain.
These capabilities could revolutionize diagnosis and management of neurological
diseases and mental disorders. The educational activities will integrate the
research with curriculum innovation at the intersections of imaging science,
machine learning and computational science and engineering. Activities include
development of a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program to create
unique training and professional development opportunities in biomedical imaging
for underrepresented minorities in engineering and a new high-school student
research internship program centered on neuroimaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator’s long-term research career goal is to develop a new generation of
imaging technologies to enable label-free mapping of molecular profiles in the
brain at unprecedented spatiotemporal resolutions and explore the potential of
these technologies for studying brain functions and diseases at the molecular
level. Towards this goal, building on the investigator’s expertise and previous
contributions on fast MRI and MRSI, the goal of this CAREER project is to
develop an innovative imaging framework to model, acquire and process MRSI data
and enable new MRSI based molecular imaging capabilities. MRSI is a potentially
powerful imaging modality that allows for simultaneous mapping of many
physiologically important molecules in the human body without the need of
radioactive tracers and contrast agents. However, to date, the development of
MRSI still remains at its infancy because of its low signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR), slow speed, poor spatial resolution, and susceptibility to system
imperfection. The Research Plan is organized under five objectives: (1)
Discovery of accurate and efficient low-dimensional models for high-dimensional
MRSI signals by integrating biological priors, physics-based modeling and
machine learning, to reduce the dimensionality of the imaging problem and enable
better tradeoffs in speed, resolution and SNR; (2) Development of unconventional
ultrafast data acquisition and data processing strategies that exploit the
reduced dimensionality to achieve fast MRSI of the whole brain at the resolution
level of functional MRI; (3) Development of novel mathematical formulations and
efficient algorithms that work synergistically with the new models and
acquisitions for optimal spatiospectral processing; (4) Integration of the new
modeling, acquisition and processing methods to enable whole-brain mapping of
metabolites and neurotransmitters and their biophysical properties, such as
relaxation and diffusion parameters, for molecule-specific microstructural
imaging of the brain and (5) Introduction of new dimensions into the proposed
MRSI framework to map molecule dependent biophysical properties in 3D. These
synergistic developments will transform MRSI from a slow, low-resolution
modality to a powerful, high-resolution in vivo molecular neuroimaging tool and
open up tremendous opportunities in studying brain biochemistry, microstructure
and their connections to functions and disease
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.