* 1944187
* CAREER: Quantification of the kinetic energy of particles in complex flows using magnetic particle tracking
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Huixuan Wu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Particulate flow is ubiquitous in nature and many aspects of human life. For
example, sandstorms have severe environmental and economic consequences, and the
efficiency of a fluidized particle reactor determines the production rates in
many chemical and food industries. A critical issue is that particles in nature
are usually non-spherical and may behave differently from theoretical
predictions as existing theories are largely based on spherical particle models.
Furthermore, the problem is challenging because dense particulate flows are
usually opaque and cannot be measured with advanced optical flow diagnostic
technologies. The objective of this experimental project is to develop a novel
magnetic-based technology to measure the particle shape and motion and provide a
better understanding of complex particulate flows. This project will also
encompass significant educational and outreach activities, including museum
exhibitions and visits to under-represented minority communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to quantify the kinetic energy
and shape effect of non-spherical particles in complex flows using magnetic-
based particle tracking. Magnetic fields can penetrate opaque materials, thus
the proposed technique works with particles of any shape or concentration. For
higher accuracy, a highly-accurate magnetometry based on photoluminescence of
quantum bits will be employed to reconstruct the motion of multiple magnetic
particles in a shear flow. The Lagrangian trajectory orientation and angular
velocity of the particle will be obtained with this technique. The results will
be used to test the hypothesis that a large particle aspect ratio leads to
energy equal partition, to measure the influence of sphericity, and to examine
the energy transfer among translational and rotational degrees of freedom.
Finally, this project contributes to experimental fluid dynamics by developing a
non-optical particle tracking technology that can be used in a variety of
multiphase flow studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.