* 1944745
* CAREER: Tailoring the Synergy between Catalyst Design and Reaction Engineering for Direct Conversion of Methane to Aromatics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Sheima Khatib, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 11/30/2022
* USD 486,328.00

The vast abundance of methane in natural resources makes it an attractive
chemical feedstock for conversion into higher hydrocarbon fuels and bulk
chemicals of industrial interest. However much of the natural gas is found in
stranded locations and is flared due to high transportation and processing
costs. Direct transformation routes of methane into liquid chemicals can reduce
processing costs but are currently not economically viable due to unanswered
scientific challenges. The proposal targets catalytic methane
dehydroaromatization (MDA) for the direct conversion of methane to benzene and
hydrogen, both mainstays in the chemicals industry. The proposed study seeks to
integrate catalysis and reaction engineering to overcome technological
challenges arising during MDA. The research results will be integrated with
educational and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two major challenges
currently prevent the implementation of MDA at an industrial level: (1)
thermodynamic limitations leading to low methane equilibrium conversion; (2)
rapid catalyst deactivation. While processes involving removal of the hydrogen
product from the reaction medium are successful in shifting the equilibrium to
the right and increasing methane conversion to benzene, they also accelerate
coking. Thus, catalyst deactivation in MDA is a ubiquitous issue that must be
addressed. Molybdenum (Mo) oxide supported on HZSM-5 zeolite is the most
commonly studied catalyst for the MDA reaction. It is agreed that during an
induction period Mo oxide species transform to Mo carbide species that are
responsible for the conversion of methane to aromatics. Adding oxidant co-
reactants can help the process thermodynamics, however, only low oxidant
concentrations can be used since the active Mo carbide phases will otherwise be
oxidatively destroyed. At low oxidant concentrations benzene yields are improved
but the oxidant distribution in a packed-bed reactor (PBR) is not even, thus
kinetic measurements are not representative of the entire catalyst bed.
Distributed-feed membrane reactors (DFMR) can overcome the reactor heterogeneity
problem and increase benzene yields, but catalyst coking is not fully prevented.
The PI has discovered a method to increase catalyst resistance to coking by
preparing Mo carbide phases ex situ in the presence of a second metal X (X= Fe,
Co, or Ni), but the nature of the Mo-X interaction remains unknown. The proposed
project includes studies of stable Mo-X/HZSM-5 catalysts in a DFMR with an
oxidant (oxygen or carbon dioxide) as co-reactant to determine the role of Mo-
X-C interactions on the reaction and catalyst deactivation pathways. Model
catalysts will be prepared by ensuring that the metals (Mo and X) are located
inside the zeolite channels by blocking the anchoring sites on the external
surface. The structure, location and evolution of the Mo-X phases will be
monitored by in situ and Operando experiments using advanced characterization
techniques, including X-ray absorption and high-resolution powder diffraction.
DFMR operating conditions will be tuned to ensure even axial distribution of the
oxidant and maximum enhancement in benzene yield. Kinetic testing will be
performed with the DFMR and compared to a PBR as reference. The combination of
the kinetic tests, in situ structural characterization and theoretical
calculations will result in the determination of the reaction and deactivation
pathways of MDA in the presence of oxidants and will provide the basis for the
rational design of catalysts tailored for a DFMR. The PI will develop two new
graduate courses focused on an integrated interdisciplinary approach to
catalysis and an interdisciplinary Science, Technology, Engineering, Art,
Mathematics (STEAM) project with the School of Theatre and Dance at Texas Tech
University to use storytelling to increase the awareness of the public on the
importance of science and engineering and attract students into STEM careers.
The stories will be propagated in various formats including theatre performances
at local schools, digital stories and podcasts posted on a YouTube
channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.