* 1944981
* CAREER: Migration, Human Rights, and Security
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Lindsay Smith, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 483,884.00

This award supports a CAREER proposal that will unite research and education
towards an in-depth analysis of humanitarian technologies. The PI will examine
the emergence and consolidation of four technologies which straddle state-based
and grass-roots responses to migration: GPS and ICT technologies, forensic DNA,
isotope analysis, and biometrics. The systematic study of these technologies
will provide new insights about migrations as spaces of innovation and
experimentation on the part of migrants, and the rise of hybrid technologies
which fuse human rights and security goals. Although migration is an important
issue for theorizing the state, culture, surveillance, and citizenship, less
focus has been given to it as a generator of scientific and technological
innovation. In analyzing multiple technologies surrounding migrations which
together act as hybrid technologies, deployed within both migrant rights
communities and state-based law enforcement, this research offers a unique
paradigm for empirically understanding migration and responses to it. The
results of this research will offer new insights for technological governance
and ethical practice, and it will serve to foster cross-disciplinary and
transnational approaches to science and migration. The home institution offers
an ideal site for engaging minority scholars and the community and to develop
culturally relevant cross-disciplinary science and technology studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a study of migration as a space of
knowledge production. It seeks to explore a contemporary zone of enforcement,
surveillance and human rights organizing in North America. Drawing on the
science and technology studies, critical studies of human rights, and migration
theory, this study explores the role of innovation within the global migration
and regimesâ€™ concerns related to it. The project will use a layered case study
method that combines ethnographic observation, in-depth interviews,
participatory mapping, and archival research to analyze innovative uses of
multiple technologies surrounding migration and their role in migrant subject
formation. Through ethnographic research with forensic laboratories and law
enforcement initiatives; interviews with scientists, technology developers, and
innovators; and participatory mapping and interviews with migrants, the proposal
seeks to elucidate the technological practices which shape integration. The
results of this project will contribute to the ethnography of the state,
science, and contemporary citizenship from the vantage point of people on the
move. This project adds a new dimension to the theorization of migration,
bringing critical attention to the role of science as a knowledge-making
arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.