* 1944156
* CAREER: Fluid-structure interactions in cytoskeletal assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Ehssan Nazockdast, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The cell is a mechanical machine made of smaller machines that transform
chemical energy to force and motion. Cell mechanics is key to many cellular
processes, including cell shape, cell motility and cell division. The main
component of cell's mechanical machinery is the cytoskeleton, which is a highly
dynamic network of microscopic filaments. The cytoskeletal filaments are
continuously moved by forces from molecular motors that attach to and walk along
them. These movements generate flows inside the cell. These induced fluid-
structures (filaments) interactions are key to the cytoskeleton mechanics; yet
they have been largely ignored in previous studies. The purpose of this research
is to use computer simulations and mathematical modelling to develop a deep
understanding of the role of fluid-structure interactions and cellular flows on
the cytoskeleton organization and mechanics. The research and educational
component are integrated by partnering with the Planetarium and Science Center
(approximately 160,000 annual visitors) at the university, to create an
immersive Virtual Reality experience so that the visitors can shrink down to the
cell size and learn about cell mechanics. The team will develop a curriculum and
hold workshops for high school teachers for meaningful implementation of these
activities in the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cytoskeleton is a dynamic
self-organized assembly of filaments - including actin filaments and
microtubules - and motor-proteins immersed in the cytoplasmic fluid. The
cytoskeleton is key to the cell's response to external mechanical stimuli as
well as many intracellular mechanical processes, including cell motility and
cell division. The nonlocal interactions between the cytoplasmic fluid and the
flexible filaments are key to determining the transient structure and mechanics
of the cytoskeleton. Yet these fluid-structure interactions have been largely
ignored in computational studies of cytoskeletal assemblies. The principal
investigator has recently developed a platform for simulating the dynamics of
large assemblies of polymerizing flexible filaments in Stokes flow and their
associated flows. The ultimate goal of this proposal is to use this
computational platform to understand the effect of fluid-structure interactions
and cytoplasmic flows on the organization and mechanics of cytoskeletal
assemblies. The research is divided into three connected and complimentary Aims.
The purpose of Aim 1 and Aim 2 is to develop a fundamental understanding of the
role of fluid-structure interactions that is less dependent on the physiological
details. This is achieved by in silico recapitulation of simplified in vitro
reconstitutions of microtubule assemblies, and studying the effect of forces
from motor-proteins (Aim 1), and (de)polymerization (Aim 2) on the organization
and rheology of microtubule assemblies. In Aim 3, light and electron microcopy
and particle tracking data is combined with simulations to study the positioning
and assembly of the mitotic spindle in the first cell division of Caenorhabditis
elegans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.