* 1944432
* CAREER: Engineering Light Addressable Electrochemical Sensors for Imaging Chemical Neurotransmission
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Glen O'Neil, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,280.00

Chemical signaling between cells is a fundamental component of life. Decades of
work have made tremendous gains in understanding how the movement of small
molecules called neurotransmitters in the brain influence behavior and disease.
However, there are still gaps in our understanding of neurotransmission
processes because the analytical tools for studying these processes do not have
sufficient resolution. This project will develop tools that will produce
chemical images of neurotransmitters around living neurons with high resolution
in order to better understand neurotransmission at the sub-cellular level.
Semiconductor/metal junctions will serve as sensors for measuring
neurotransmitters with high spatial and temporal resolution. The educational
plan of this research seeks to address retention of community college transfer
students in upper-level chemistry courses. In addition to the scientific
developments, this project seeks to provide research opportunities to
underrepresented groups, provide community engagement through demonstrations and
outreach activities, and provide training to undergraduate and graduate students
in technologically relevant areas. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Chemical
neurotransmission occurs when one neuron releases signaling molecules, called
neurotransmitters, into the small gap between itself and an adjacent neuron,
called a synapse. Once outside the synapse, neurotransmitters are either taken
up by the post-synaptic neuron or diffuse away. Measuring the flux of
neurotransmitters around living neurons is critical to increasing our
understanding of chemical neurotransmission. Unfortunately, analytical tools to
measure these fluxes with both high spatial and temporal resolution are lacking.
The objective of this CAREER proposal is to develop light-addressable
electrochemical sensors for high spatial and temporal resolution detection of
neurotransmitter fluxes excreted from individual living cells in vitro. The two
specific aims of this research are to: (1) Improve the detection limits of
light-addressable electrochemical sensors by maximizing sensitivity and
decreasing background signal, (2) Develop a quantitative imaging platform using
light-addressable electrochemical sensors for in vitro imaging of chemical
neurotransmission. The research aims will be accomplished by performing careful
studies of semiconductor metal junctions using physical and electrochemical
methods, finite element modeling of the semiconductor/metal/solution interface,
and performing localized electrochemical measurements on semiconductor/metal
interfaces. This research makes significant contributions to biosensing,
semiconductor photoelectrochemistry, and light-addressable electrochemical
sensing. The educational plan will integrate research and teaching by providing
a pathway to increase retention of community college transfer students in upper-
level coursework. This approach will enable community college transfer students
to have access to research experience. Students trained on this project will
learn state-of-the-art fabrication, analysis, measurement, and characterization
skills that will assist them when they enter the workforce or graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.