* 1944834
* CAREER: Understanding Bifunctionality in Organic Electro-oxidation Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Adam Holewinski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 601,556.00

Renewable electrical energy from sources such as wind farms, photovolataic
devices, and hydroelectric power can be used to carry out a wide range of
chemical reactions important for fuel cells, wastewater treatment, sensors, and
chemical manufacturing. Currently, the energy for those reactions is derived
primarily from fossil fuels, but renewable electricity offers opportunities to
secure our nation's energy future while dramatically decreasing environmental
impacts. The project will develop and apply new analytical tools to understand
the molecular-level processes needed to make electrochemical reactions
efficient. Focus will be placed on understanding ways to use electricity and the
oxygen in water to directly convert methanol into commodity chemicals such as
formic acid and formaldehyde. The same tools can be applied to the design of
methanol fuel cells for energy generation. Insights from the methanol studies
will provide a framework for applying electrochemical catalysis to a wide range
of organic molecules. The research will be integrated with educational and
outreach activities, including an "Energy Academy" program with a regional high-
school.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Organic electro-oxidation reactions are critical
to applications in wastewater treatment, sensing, distributed-scale chemical
synthesis, and a multitude of direct-organic fuel cells. Many of these
technologies can be built around an interconnected network of single-carbon
molecule chemistries involving oxidation of methanol, formaldehyde, formic acid
and carbon monoxide. A role for "bifunctional" catalysis - in which one catalyst
component selectively activates the organic and the other selectively activates
water to form reactive oxygen species - has been widely promoted in the electro-
oxidation literature, as well as other areas of catalysis. This project seeks to
classify and rationalize the operative mechanisms (bifunctional or otherwise) of
two-component electro-oxidation catalysts, and to demonstrate design principles
for controlling partial or total oxidation of small organic molecules. An
analytical platform, recently developed by the principal investigator, will be
used to perform kinetic measurements on well-defined bimetallic nanostructures
during rapid bulk electrolysis in flow. The system also forms the basis for the
first true liquid electrochemical implementation of steady-state isotope-
transient kinetic analysis, permitting direct measurement of product-specific
active-site coverages (observed via surface isotope exchange during an
otherwise-steady-state reaction) using online electrochemical mass spectrometry.
Further insight will be leveraged from top-atomic layer surface analysis by low-
energy ion scattering and other auxiliary characterization methods including in-
situ infrared spectroscopy and electron microscopy of materials in order to
understand the mechanistic pathways governing bifunctional oxidation, and use
that knowledge to design new catalytic materials. Critical questions to be
answered relate to the determination of the nature of the active sites (e.g.
whether carbon-oxygen coupling steps happen at interfaces as opposed to
spillover phenomena), their distribution, and their resulting interactions (e.g.
how altering one functional component may inadvertently influence the other),
with the ultimate goal to rationally control the activity, selectivity, and
stability of the electrocatalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.