* 1944571
* Hindlimb cortical bone adaptation and locomotion in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Kristi Lewton, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 143,391.00

This project will examine the strength of leg and foot bones in primates and
other mammals in relation to locomotor behaviors. The investigators use high-
resolution three-dimensional imaging to quantify internal features of long bones
of the hindlimb in a broad sample of living and fossil primates, rodents, and
marsupials. Results will contribute new information on how bone responds to
forces produced during locomotion, how early primates adapted to arboreal
environments, and how the postcranial skeleton evolves in response to similar
locomotor regimes in different mammalian groups. The societal impacts of this
research include broadening participation of underrepresented groups in science
and improving STEM education through integrating research and education. An
outcome of this project will be training students traditionally underrepresented
in STEM and preparing educational materials to be shared through public outreach
events and an online data repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leaping is an
important behavior for many living primates and is thought to have been vital to
the origin of the primate body plan. While it is generally accepted that the
earliest primates used some form of leaping locomotion, how and when the primate
skeleton adapted to leaping behaviors is not well understood. This research
compares species that differ in locomotor behavior to 1) identify form-function
links between hindlimb internal bone anatomy and prevalence of leaping
behaviors, 2) determine whether leaping primates, rodents, and marsupials share
similar hindlimb bone strength adaptations due to their similar ways of moving,
and 3) analyze how these measures of hindlimb bone strength evolved in living
and extinct primate groups. Using high-resolution micro-computed tomography,
cross-sectional geometric properties representing measures of bone strength will
be calculated for the calcaneus, navicular, femur and tibia, and compared across
species that differ in the amount of time spent leaping versus using quadrupedal
behaviors. In addition, phylogenetic comparative methods will be used to
evaluate macroevolutionary patterns, adaptive shifts, and convergent evolution
of leaping behaviors in a sample of extant and fossil Eocene
primates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.