* 1944161
* CAREER:Characterizing Mountain System Aquifer Recharge in the Sierra Nevada Mountains of California
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Hoori Ajami, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2025
* USD 526,081.00

More than 16% of Earth's population relies on seasonal snowpack and glaciers for
water supply, yet the mechanisms of groundwater recharge and streamflow in high
elevation mountain ranges are poorly understood. Quantifying groundwater
recharge is essential for groundwater management particularly in irrigated
agricultural regions relying on streamflow and recharge from mountain
watersheds. Precipitation (snow and rain) in California's Sierra Nevada is the
dominant natural recharge mechanism for the Central Valley, a vitally important
agricultural region. Frequent drought and changes in snowpack in the Sierra
Nevada are expected to change recharge rates, posing challenges to water
security, sustainable water management, and agriculture production. This project
will integrate several research methods to investigate the most important
drivers of groundwater recharge in the Kaweah River watershed in southern Sierra
Nevada, and will quantify groundwater response to climate variability, droughts,
and changes in vegetation. The project aims to improve hydrologic sciences
education and problem-solving skills for groups underrepresented in STEM
disciplines by engaging undergraduate and graduate students in research, and
developing online learning modules focused on hydrologic processes of mountain
catchments. The project will train high school teachers and design online
educational resources for STEM teaching in high schools. By involving the Kaweah
River watershed citizens in data collection, the project will increase public
awareness of complex factors that affect water resources in California.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although groundwater recharge supplies 66.5% of streamflow
in arid and semi-arid mountain catchments, understanding of mountain system
aquifer recharge rates and groundwater flow paths from mountains to valley
aquifers is limited. This project will investigate groundwater recharge in a
mountain-valley aquifer system in the Kaweah River watershed of California’s
Sierra Nevada through field data collection, laboratory analysis and numerical
modeling. A suite of hydrometric observations and hydrochemical tracers will
measure catchment water balance dynamics, residence times of surface water and
groundwater, and bedrock groundwater’s contribution to streams. An integrated
hydrologic model informed by multiple sources of observations, will constrain
groundwater flow paths from mountain to valley aquifers, and improve recharge
estimation. Quantifying recharge and understanding the degree of connectivity
between the mountain and valley aquifer system will provide understanding of the
hydrologic contributions from mountain-valley systems for sustainable water
resources. Results will inform development of a computationally efficient
groundwater module of the Soil Moisture and Runoff simulation Toolkit (SMART), a
semi-distributed hydrologic modeling framework. The novel SMART-G computational
framework will investigate surface water-groundwater interactions in mountain
watersheds, and predict impacts of climate variability and land cover changes on
water resources. The project will engage undergraduate students in research and
develop educational materials to prepare skilled workforce in hydrologic
sciences. The project will train high school teachers to prepare students in
STEM requirements for university admission, and involve citizen scientists to
increase public awareness about water resources. Modeling tools will be
disseminated worldwide and will inform policy and groundwater management
decisions at the local and state level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.