* 1944559
* CAREER: Policy-Infrastructure-Community Interdependencies: The Next Frontiers in Dynamic Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Hiba Baroud, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Disasters result from the combined effect of hazards and vulnerability of humans
and infrastructures. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant seeks
to understand the interactions between people and infrastructures in response to
hazards. These interactions often lead to unexpected outcomes during and in the
aftermath of disasters. The failure of an infrastructure system can directly or
indirectly affect other infrastructures and result in crippling effects in
socio-economic sectors. In addition, a lack of consideration of social and
organizational aspects in infrastructure management can lead to unintended
consequences that harm communities. As such, these interactions are uncertain,
and they change over time in response to hazards, development, and technology.
If we can capture the dynamics of such inter-dependencies, we can proactively
intervene to prevent cascading failures, reduce losses, and improve recovery.
The objectives of this project are to (i) develop the next generation of dynamic
networks to model the uncertain inter-dependencies between policy,
infrastructure, and the community, (ii) train future engineering practitioners
and researchers through community engagement and human-centered research
projects, and (iii) increase public awareness of disaster preparedness through
media, arts, and Girl Scouts activities. This project aligns with NSF’s mission
to promote the progress of science and to advance the national welfare.
Specifically, the outcome of this integrated research and education will
transform policy making to ensure the resilience and sustainability of
communities under short- and long-term risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
approach is founded in statistical network models which provide a probabilistic
estimation of future network structures based on partial observation of the
structure or historical data. These models provide an approach to encode latent
parameters that govern network structures, offering advantages for inference and
prediction. This project will develop a new class of statistical network models
that accommodates the dynamics of multiple networks. The models will be informed
by stakeholders and integrated with empirical approaches and modeling techniques
such as decision analysis and Bayesian methods to capture human behavior during
disasters. Incorporation of vertex and edge covariates will be accomplished
using statistical learning methods for predictive analytics. These new models
will be implemented using data-driven scenarios of two cities with increased
urbanization and natural hazards to advance knowledge on the diversity of
sustainability and resilience assessments in different contexts. Algorithms for
network predictive analytics will be developed to quantify sustainable
resilience indicators. Immersive educational opportunities through
interdisciplinary research projects and international experiences will engage
students with communities and enhance their learning experience while
contributing to research and human-centered solutions to
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.