* 1944961
* CAREER: Transnational Lives in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Joseph Ewoodzie, Davidson College
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 232,431.00

The project uses the experiences of a group in movement to examine that movement
along three main lines of inquiry. First, the project investigates the
motivations for movement: what factors motivate a larger grouping and this group
in particular, to leave their home region to come to a new home? Second, it
examines the process: How do home region ideals and destination region policies
affect the movement process? Third, it investigates the consequences of
movement: How does movement shape the life of those who have moved and the life
of family and close relatives left behind? This project situates these
experiences in the transnationalism theoretical framework to explore the global
processes and conditions that are significantly shaping the lines of
citizenship, culture, economic development, and the structure of society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three lines of inquiry will be addressed with three
different methods: using an archive of 2000 letters, oral histories of 100
families with two interviews per family, and ethnographic data collected over 14
months from three relevant communities. Coding of these data will be organized
according to eight domains: education, economics, identity, housing, intimate
life, health, and other important social domains. Students will assist in this
research after being trained to conduct research across
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.