* 1944638
* CAREER: Angstrom-Precise Manufacturing Guided by Incommensurate Interfaces and Surfaces in Two-dimensional Layered Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Michael Cai Wang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2025
* USD 657,131.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports the investigation
of scalable additive and subtractive manufacturing processes with extreme (sub-
nanometer, Ångström-scale) precision in two-dimensional layered materials. Novel
materials processing methods stemming from this research will broadly benefit
U.S. advanced manufacturing through newfound ability to deterministically and
scalably manipulate matter at unprecedented length scales, thereby greatly
impacting high-technology sectors such as biopharmaceuticals, optoelectronics,
and semiconductor manufacturing. The resulting new knowledge from this
fundamental research advances capabilities to manufacture materials with
Ångström-precise features, such as highly-uniform nano-pore, nano-channel, and
nano-island arrays, achieving ultimate resolution and scales not currently
attainable through state-of-the-art techniques. The integration of research with
educational and outreach initiatives, including the development of children’s
read-along books and research engagement with underrepresented/underprivileged
middle-school, community college and veteran students, collectively help foster
the training of a diverse and globally-competitive advanced manufacturing
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ever-growing diversity of two-dimensional
layered materials (2DLMs) endows their versatility as the ultimate Ångström-
scale building blocks for bottom-up, layer-by-layer additive and subtractive
manufacturing with atomic precision and nearly limitless configurations.
Uniquely, the atomically-thin, anisotropic nature of 2DLMs enables arbitrary
engineering of Moiré domains via incommensurate interfaces, which opens novel
routes for Ångström-precise feature patterning with deterministic control over
the exact lattice geometry, atomic/molecular terminations, and local
stoichiometries. Generalizable to arbitrary 2DLMs beyond the prototypical
graphene, hexagonal boron nitride, transition-metal compounds, and numerous
(M)Xenes, this research investigates the fundamental process-structure-property
relations of highly-periodic, Ångström-precise features engineered via
deterministic rotational/translational turbostratic misalignment. Empirical
studies elucidate the mechanisms underlying the self-limiting and spatially-
selective chemical functionalization (additive) and etching (subtractive)
reactions with energetic plasma species that yield massively-parallel features,
such as large-scale arrays of highly monodispersed nano-pores, nano-channels
(subtractive), and nano-islands (additive). Scalability of this methodology is
investigated through translating phenomena observed from nano/micron-scale
samples to the processing of centimeter-scale 2DLM sheets, with the desired
Ångström-precise morphologies informed through inverse design guided by machine
learning models trained on process parameters and metrology data. The resulting
capabilities to manipulate and manufacture Ångström-precise features in 2DLMs
provide new pathways toward tailored molecular sieves and ultra-high-density
devices and instrumentation platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.