* 1944715
* CAREER:Long-distance quantum network of long-lived rare-earth qubits
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Tian Zhong, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The advent of quantum technologies fundamentally shifts the paradigms of
established science and engineering disciplines, including computing,
communication and sensing. Quantum Internet is a long-dreamed vision that could
afford internet users the power of quantum computing by distributing
entanglement and exchanging quantum information over a global scale. Quantum
Internet consists of stationary nodes where entanglement is generated and
stored, and the nodes are connected via photons as quantum links. Today
distribution of quantum-secured cryptographic keys over a network link has been
realized, but only at distances no greater than ~200 km due to the loss of
optical fibers. One solution to overcome this limit is to develop quantum
repeater nodes, where quantum information - in the form of a qubit - is sent
between nearby nodes, and qubits are faithfully stored in quantum memories at
each node for later use. This proposal envisions building long-distance quantum
networks atom by atom, node by node. We leverage highly coherent rare-earth-ion
doped solid materials and nanophotonic technologies to realize modular quantum
light-matter interfaces and memories to bring Quantum Internet one step closer
to reality. Once deployed, such a network will enable many applications ranging
from quantum cryptography that promises secure communication, blind quantum
computing to enhanced quantum sensing. Global-scale entanglement will allow more
accurate timekeeping and improved long baseline telescopes. Ultimately, Quantum
Internet will enable vastly connected quantum computers, which unlocks computing
capabilities that are even beyond individual quantum processors. This highly
interdisciplinary project will provide a unique opportunity for training
graduate and undergraduate students as new generation quantum scientists and
engineers, and fully equip them for their future academic or industrial careers.
The project also highlights outreach activities to inspire and engage women and
underrepresented students in Chicago public high schools. In conjunction with
“Entanglement” theatrical productions, museum performances and public lectures,
the proposed broadening participation efforts use an innovative platform to
raise public awareness about the transformative potentials of quantum technology
on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of this proposal aims
to generate remote entanglement of individual rare-earth qubits connected by
long-distance telecommunication fiber as the first step towards a scalable
quantum network. The concept of Quantum Internet was proposed a decade ago.
However, its physical realization has remained elusive. The outstanding
challenges lie in the development of stationary qubits that simultaneously
possess long-lived coherence and efficient light-matter interfaces, ideally in
the fiber-compatible telecommunication wavelengths. To that end, rare-earth
dopants in solids have emerged as a promising candidate. In particular, erbium
(Er) has a narrow and stable optical transition around 1535 nm. Erbium nuclear
spins are shielded from environmental noise by outer shells, giving rise to long
spin coherence exceeding 1 second at cryogenic temperatures. Exploiting these
outstanding properties, the long-term goal of this integrative research-
education program is to realize a scalable quantum network of individual erbium
qubits over the existing fiber-optic telecommunication infrastructure. We
accomplish this goal by adopting a bottom-up approach with the following
objectives: (1) Engineering long-lived Er qubits at the wafer-scale by
synthesizing rare-earth doped oxide thin films using molecular beam epitaxy. (2)
Developing nanophotonic devices based on a heterogeneous rare-earth-silicon
architecture for efficiently interfacing Er qubits with telecom photons. (3)
Integrating two devices in a testbed to generate entanglement between remote Er
qubits via a long-distance, real-world fiber network. The successful outcome of
this program will be the first solid-state quantum network operating on long-
distance, fiber-optic telecommunication infrastructure, and constitutes a major
scientific milestone towards practical quantum
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.