* 1944752
* CAREER: Machine Learning Based 4D Decomposition and Distributed Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Amin Kargarian Marvasti, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 02/28/2025
* USD 503,870.00

Distributed optimization arises in a broad range of applications in engineering
systems, including electric power systems. While distributed algorithms have
been proposed in the literature, comprehensive frameworks are incomplete for
decomposing optimization problems on a multi-dimensional basis, such as space
and time. In addition, because of deficiencies and challenges in decomposition,
coordination, and modeling steps, the majority of existing algorithms suffer
from lack of scalability and become computationally expensive when applied to
large real-world problems. This proposal focuses on fundamental research on
scalable distributed optimization. Several combined machine learning and
mathematical models and methods are proposed to create highly scalable, fast,
and efficient four-dimensional distributed optimization algorithms for power
systems operation and planning. The project will involve diverse students,
particularly underrepresented minorities, and significantly improve engineering
education, STEM curriculum, workforce training, and K12 students involvement in
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
establish machine learning and mathematical-based decomposition and distributed
algorithms, which not only reform power system operation and planning but also
open new avenues of research to solve computational deficiencies of distributed
optimization. Through this project, a temporal decomposition will be developed,
and then a comprehensive four-dimensional decomposition will be created. Machine
learning-based strategies will be developed to optimally decompose optimization
problems. In addition, learning and mathematical approaches will be devised to
create highly efficient and scalable asynchronous distributed algorithms. To
further reduce computational costs, iterative methods are proposed to reduce the
feasible space of optimization problems taking advantage of classification and
regression techniques. Furthermore, the project team will develop methods to
make distributed algorithms robust against the choice of initial values of
optimization variables and objective functions and will devise innovative
information-sharing approaches to reduce the computational complexity and
enhance the accuracy of the proposed algorithms when integrated into power
system operation and planning. The project team will implement the developed
models and algorithms on various synthetic test systems and data sets, as well
as real-world practical power grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the ECCS division / EPCN program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCOR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.