* 1944513
* CAREER: Protecting Buildings and Structures from Vibration Damage using Variable Inertance Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Nicholas Wierschem, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2025
* USD 537,406.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will advance understanding
of passive control strategies for structural protection from vibration damage
due to natural hazards, such as windstorms and earthquakes, by investigating
methodologies that utilize variable inertance mechanisms. Variable inertance
mechanisms are nonlinear devices that transfer one kind of energy (in this case
vibration) to another (in this case rotation). The result is an added mass
effect that variably changes the system frequencies, which protects the
structure by disrupting harmful interactions between the structure and applied
dynamic loads. This mechanism of protection differs significantly from current
state-of-the-art passive structural control methods that seek to mitigate damage
with precisely tuned devices or dissipate energy through dampers or devices
designed to absorb damage. This project will enable new variable inertance-based
designs that allow for safer and more economically constructed buildings, thus
advancing public welfare and prosperity. The research will be integrated as
hands-on curriculum into undergraduate and graduate courses to stimulate
interest and advance training in structural engineering. Additionally, outreach
activities will help close a critical gap in the training of engineering
students by promoting the transition of community college students to four-year
engineering programs. Data from this award will be archived and made publicly
available in the Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). This award supports the National
Science Foundation role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
(NEHRP) and the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program
(NWIRP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rotational inertial mechanisms feature the
transformation of the translational motion to the rotational motion of a
flywheel and can produce large effective mass, known as inertance, with small
physical mass. This project will evaluate the hypothesis that variations in
effective mass achieved by variable inertance rotational inertia devices can be
used to protect structures from dynamic loads. Variable inertance in structures
will be considered through state-switching mechanisms in which the rotational
mechanism passively engages and disengages with a structure and functionally
varied inertance mechanisms in which the inertance passively varies as a
function of the response of the mechanism. This research will include analytical
modeling, numerical simulations, and experimental testing. Specific intellectual
contributions will include: 1) determination of state-switching and functionally
varied inertance mechanisms that can be used to produce variable inertance
devices, 2) characterization of the effect on natural frequencies of variable
inertance strategies, 3) evaluation and characterization of the structural
control effectiveness of variable inertance strategies, and 4) assessment of
effectiveness of variable inertance strategies in realistic building
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.