* 1944318
* CAREER: Directed Information Theory for Networked Control Systems in Big Data Regime
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Takashi Tanaka, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Modern control systems supporting todayâ€™s critical infrastructure (e.g.,
transportation network, power systems) are comprised of a large number of
computational devices interconnected over communication networks. Such systems
are commonly called Networked Control Systems (NCSs), and have been the subject
of research interest over the last two decades, both from theoretical and
practical perspectives. The maturation of technologies in both wireless and
wired communication made various NCS concepts realizable (e.g., connected cars,
remote surgery, cloud-based control), and the roles of NCSs will further grow in
the future. Recently, however, the advancements of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
technologies are increasing demand for AI-powered control algorithm
implementations over NCS architectures. While these new trends exemplify the
remarkable capabilities of NCSs, they raise unprecedented challenges to the
current form of NCS technologies in terms of: (1) capacity to incorporate Big
Data contents that support emerging AI-based control schemes, (2) scalability to
accommodate a large number of players within limited network resources, and (3)
security against and privacy from potential adversaries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this CAREER proposal is to apply a novel
information flow optimization technique, termed Optimal Information Flow (OIF)
synthesis, to address a few selected, yet representative, technological
challenges in each of the three areas identified above. The key enabler, as well
as the uniqueness, of the proposed approach is the novel use of directed
information, an information-theoretic quantity that allows for the
identification and prioritization of task-relevant information flow over the
network. Our starting point is the zero-delay rate-distortion theory and its
successful applications to single-channel NCSs. To address (1), we apply
directed information to develop a real-time, task-dependent data compression
algorithm for high-volume data streams. Our target applications include cloud-
based visual servoing for autonomous driving, where we study the extent that
data-rate reduction from video streams is possible without deteriorating control
performance. To tackle (2), we pursue new approaches to multi-channel NCS design
by blending the existing NCS theory with network information theory. We will
demonstrate that an appropriate control-communication co-design effectively
reduces fuel consumption of autonomous vehicle platoons. For (3), we will study
both cryptographic and non-cryptographic privacy preserving mechanisms for
cloud-based control systems. We propose design principles for achieving the
optimal utility-privacy balance based on the OIF synthesis. Instead of carrying
out these three research tasks in a domain-specific manner, we emphasize the
underlying roles of directed information in each task, thereby contributing to
the well-recognized academic challenge of integrating control theory with
information theory. This CAREER proposal also involves innovative educational
activities, including the development of a unique graduate-level curriculum on
NCSs, in order to maximize the synergistic effects between research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.