* 1944188
* CAREER: Tissue engineering hematopoietic trabecular bone marrow
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Jungwoo Lee, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2025
* USD 559,710.00

Every day, the human body’s pool of adult stem cells, termed hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs), develop into nearly one trillion mature blood cells, including red
blood cells, white blood cells, platelets and immune cells. These blood cell-
forming HSCs primarily reside in trabecular bone marrow (TBM), which is the
tissue in the porous end of long bones such as femurs. HSC transplantation is
the most successful stem cell therapy, but its clinical impact has been limited
by the availability of HSCs. HSC’s are difficult to grow outside the body where
they tend to change (differentiate) and lose their ability to develop into any
blood cell type. To address the need for a scalable method to grow HSCs without
allowing differentiation, the goal of this CAREER project is to develop
biomaterial models that mimic the microenvironments of TBM for HSC growth and
maintenance. Once developed, the biomaterial models will be combined and
integrated into a TBM model in bioreactor designed to growth HSCs. Successful
TBM models will advance understanding of bone remodeling associated with aging
and the progression of diseases such as osteoporosis and bone cancers, and they
may also serve as an alternative to animals during preclinical drug testing.
Furthermore, the project will be used to recruit and educate students with
diverse backgrounds to face emerging challenges at the intersection between
engineering and medicine. Activities include an integrated lecture and lab
curriculum for a tissue engineering course, an interdisciplinary team-based
(engineering and biology) capstone projects for undergraduate students, and a
summer research program for high school girls aligned with the existing
Engineering the Cell program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term
research goals are to deliver translational bioengineered solutions that can
advance our understanding of the trabecular bone marrow (TBM) in health and
disease and harness the regenerative potential of the TBM. Toward this goal, the
aim of this CAREER project is to elucidate the dynamic structure-function
relationship that maintains hematopoietic activity in the TBM and to apply this
knowledge to design a scalable bioreactor for expanding hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs). Two observations, (1) that blood-forming HSCs primarily reside and
function in cavities that maintain comparable bone thickness and cavity
diameters while undergoing constant bone remodeling and (2) that aging-
associated decrease in trabecular bone thickness and increase in cavity
diameters are related to a decrease in hematopoietic activity, suggest a
possible relationship between anatomy and function that maintains hematopoietic
activity in the TBM. Thus, the project’s central hypothesis is that there exist
optimal dimensions and spatial arrangement that effectively coordinate
bidirectional crosstalk between the endosteal and vascular niches, which are the
two important anatomical and functional niches in the TBM. The project builds on
the investigator’s development of (1) inverted colloidal crystal (ICC) hydrogel
scaffolds that closely emulate anatomical and physical features of the vascular
niche and (2) demineralized bone paper that preserves intact biochemical and
structural aspects of the endosteal niche and exhibits biological significance
in reproducing the surface and subsurface bone tissue complexity of bone,
including osteocytes. The Research Plan is organized under four Objectives: (1)
To develop an endosteal niche model that recapitulates bone remodeling-related
HSC biology by refining an endosteal niche model in which osteocytes buried in
layers of demineralized bone paper under mechanoculture re-create physiological
aspects of bone surface and subsurface; (2) To develop a vascular niche model
that emulates vascular perfusion-related HSC biology by refining the model of
the vascular niche to mimic molecular gradients under perfusion within a
microfluidic hydrogel scaffold that supports culture of bone marrow stromal
cells (BMSCs); (3) To combine the endosteal and vascular niche models into an
integrated TBM model by integrating individually optimized models into a single
platform to re-create the differentiation-suppressing quality of the endosteal
niche and the proliferation-stimulating quality of the vascular niche and (4) To
assemble multiple TBM models into a scalable bioreactor that will maintain a
stable level of molecular and mechanical interactions between the endosteal and
vascular niches to support the expansion phase of HSCs. To determine the
competitive advantages and weaknesses of the ex vivo HSC expansion bioreactor
compared to other solutions, a limiting dilution assay will be conducted to
determine the in vivo repopulating potential of the culture-expanded HSCs by
intravenous injection into sublethally irradiated
mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.