* 1944887
* CAREER: Nonequilibrium Physics in Drying Soft Matter Solutions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Shengfeng Cheng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2025
* USD 408,889.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational and
theoretical research, and education on the physics of evaporative drying of soft
matter solutions. Paint is an example of soft matter solution. Paint is a
particle suspension, which is a heterogeneous mixture of little particles
suspended throughout the bulk of a solvent. A polymer solution is another
example, which is a mixture of a solvent and polymers, long-chain molecules,
dissolved in it. The drying process of these soft matter solutions provides a
way to fabricate materials and a way to investigate physics in systems out of
equilibrium. A famous illustration is the coffee ring effect, where a spill of
coffee, a particle suspension like paint, leaves a ring-like deposit at its
perimeter after drying. As another example, novel stratification phenomena have
recently been discovered in suspension films containing particles of varied
sizes, where the particles are found to form stratified layers according to
their sizes after the suspensions are rapidly dried. The goal of the research is
to use computer simulation techniques and simple physical models to elucidate
the collective behavior of particles intrinsic to the evaporation processes of
particle suspensions, polymer solutions, and their mixtures, and to map out the
optimized drying conditions under which the resultant materials have desired
structures. Such materials include multi-layered thin films of particles or
polymer and composite materials with particulate fillers dispersed through a
polymer matrix in a controlled manner. Specifically, this project aims to answer
the following questions: How are the dissolved or dispersed components
distributed in the dry film after a solution containing a mixture of solutes is
dried quickly? How do particles and polymers migrate under concentration,
temperature or other gradients that naturally emerge in a drying process? The
findings will be used to guide the design of new solvent evaporation processes
for more efficient material fabrication. The project integrates research into
education and outreach activities that involve high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students, high school and college educators, and the broader public.
Specific goals include establishing a soft matter curriculum at Virginia Tech,
cultivating students and future workforce with this curriculum, fostering the
growth of a soft matter community in Virginia, and promoting the emerging
concept of “material discovery accelerated through complementary efforts in
computation, theory, and experiment” to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports computational and theoretical research, and education on the physics of
evaporative drying of soft matter solutions. Solvent evaporation out of
colloidal and polymer solutions and their mixtures is a tool frequently used to
fabricate thin film materials, but our understanding of how the evaporation
process of the solvent impacts the structures of the final colloidal and polymer
films is largely based on experience and lacks predictive capabilities. The
overarching objective of the research component is to use tools in
nonequilibrium statistical mechanics to map out the optimized evaporation
conditions under which the drying colloidal and polymer solutions yield
materials with desired structures, including stratified colloidal thin films,
layered polymer thin films, and polymer nanocomposites with controlled
dispersion of nanoparticles. Adopting a hybrid computational/theoretical
approach, the PI uses particle-based descriptions of liquids, colloidal
particles, and polymers to probe the rich nonequilibrium, many-body physics
intrinsic to evaporation processes. The main goal is to use molecular dynamics
techniques to model the drying process of various soft matter solutions with an
explicit solvent based on Lennard-Jones liquids or water in coarse-grained
representations, and to reveal the effects of evaporation processes on the
resulting material structures. These effects are challenging to evaluate with
current experiments. Specifically, the PI aims to elucidate the physics of
drying-induced stratification in various multicomponent soft matter solutions
and the phoretic response of particles and polymers to concentration,
temperature, chemical potential, and other gradients that emerge during the
drying process. Studying solvent explicitly enables the PI to identify cases
where an implicit solvent model might be appropriate, which can serve as a
guidance for many other researchers who lack the resources to model a solvent
explicitly for drying solutions. The project integrates research into education
and outreach activities that involve students, educators, and the broader public
and aim to establish a soft matter curriculum at Virginia Tech, to cultivate
students and future workforce with this curriculum, to foster the growth of a
soft matter community in Virginia, and to promote nonequilibrium physics and the
emerging concepts of “computational thinking” and “materials via self-assembly”
to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.