* 1944191
* CAREER: Leveraging the multifunctional redox properties of pyrogenic materials to enable biological transformations of aqueous organic contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Douglas Call, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 392,690.00

Pollution from past releases of toxic organic contaminants continue to plague
the Nation’s water, soil, and sediment. While various technologies and
approaches have been developed to remediate these legacy pollutants, they
continue to present challenges for communities around the country. The overall
goal of this CAREER project is to address these challenges and protect human and
the environmental health by developing treatment technologies that more
completely degrade toxic organic pollutants in a cost-effective manner. The
basis for this technology is a hybrid microbial-material process. In this
approach, microorganisms provide the driving force to enable reactions on the
surface of materials that degrade the organic pollutant. While this process has
shown great promise, there are many gaps in our knowledge of how this process
occurs. The fundamental insight gained will permit the informed design and
optimization of materials that can degrade specific pollutants. These materials
can then be applied to engineered systems such as water and wastewater treatment
plants. The integrated education plan will have significant and broad impacts
and will reach a diverse audience of K-12 teachers and students through a
mentoring program for underrepresented high school students in partnership with
the NC School of Science and Mathematics. These efforts will increase the
scientific literacy of the Nation and help develop the STEM workforce of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this CAREER project is to study
the fundamental mechanisms of how microbial-driven electron transfer from redox-
active materials transform organic contaminants. Conventional methods for the
biological treatment of organic contaminants like chlorinated solvents rely on
the activity of specific bacteria. These bacteria are often low in abundance and
sparsely distributed in the subsurface, and materials that harness the activity
of these bacteria can greatly enhance and sustain contaminant removal.
Geobacter, a group of bacteria that are present in water, soil, and sediment are
extremely metabolically versatile in their ability to utilize insoluble electron
acceptors such as pyrogenic carbonaceous materials (PCMs). Geobacter use PCMs
such as activated carbon and biochar to shuttle electrons through the material
to abiotically degrade contaminants on the material surface. The PI will combine
the tools of electrochemistry, microscopy, spectroscopy, and molecular biology
to address knowledge gaps in our understanding of these interactions at
microbial-material-contaminant interfaces. Three complimentary goals in the
proposed program will be pursued: (1) Determine the role of PCM properties on
microbial and contaminant reactivity, (2) Assess the role of contaminant
adsorption on reaction kinetics and toxicity to the microorganisms, and (3)
Determine the effect of environmental matrix components on the resiliency of
reactions mediated by PCMs. With this information, a new generation of materials
can be designed to degrade organic pollutants in applications including drinking
water, stormwater, and bioremediation systems. The research objectives will be
integrated with innovative education initiatives. K-12 teachers in biology will
learn advanced microscopy and experiment kits to introduce students to
environmental microbiology. Collaboration with the Friday Institute for
Educational Innovation will leverage these activities to reach hundreds of K-12
teachers and students through existing school partnerships with the annual NC
Science Teachers Association Conference. A multi-level mentoring program for
underrepresented high school students will be piloted at the NC School of
Science and Mathematics to provide research experiences to help students pursue
careers in STEM. Finally, a new undergraduate-level lab on PCM microbial
reactivity at will be developed at NCSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.