* 1944020
* Workshop:  Deciphering the Microbiome:  Exploiting theory, cross-system analyses, and innovative analytics to propel advances in microbiome science; Dec. 8-10, 2019; Alexandria, VA
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Linda Kinkel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,000.00

Non-technical paragraph: Every habitat on earth host its own microbiome, which
can include bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protists. Recognition of the diversity
and complexity of microbial communities that colonize humans, plants, animals,
soil, and water has changed in fundamental ways how we think about the
relationships between big and small organisms, as well as our basic
understanding of disease, health, and immunity. Collectively, there is
widespread recognition of the significant roles that microbiomes play in
organismal and ecosystem health and functioning, and significant incentives to
harness this potential. Private investments in microbiome research have expanded
dramatically over the past decade, with hundreds of companies focusing on the
potential manipulation or management of microbiomes in human and animal medicine
and in agriculture. Despite the expanding research footprint, there have been
remarkably few deliberate efforts to engage researchers across the breadth of
microbiome science in discussions of key resource needs?conceptual, technical,
or analytical?to support cross-cutting advances. The project will support a
workshop bringing together 60+ scientists in person, plus another 100+
scientists virtually, including researchers working on plant, animal,
environmental, and human microbiomes. Participants will use ecology and
evolutionary biology as an integrating framework, as they provide a powerful
context for integrative, cross-discipline discussion. Small-group and
interactive sessions will stimulate researchers to identify key resource and
knowledge gaps across microbiome science, conceptual and theoretical foundations
that can advance hypothesis testing, big ideas to drive advances in microbiome
applications, and a path forward for collaborative research and synthetic
analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical paragraph: Significant technical
innovations have propelled exponential increases in the volume of microbiome
data generated over the past decade. Yet development of conceptual, theoretical,
and practical infrastructure to advance our collective understanding of
microbiomes lags behind. Microbiome research suffers from a lack of reliance on
explicit conceptual frameworks for ecological and evolutionary hypothesis
testing, and there have been few attempts to develop generalizable models for
microbiome community dynamics or assembly. Moreover, fragmentation of research
efforts across systems (animal, human, plant, environmental), and even among
researchers using different approaches to study the same system, has restricted
opportunities to identify common principles of microbiome structure or
organization. This workshop will address these gaps, targeting 4 objectives: 1.
Explore cross-cutting themes and key challenges in microbiome science; 2.
Facilitate advances in the development of rigorous ecological foundations and
hypothesis-testing within microbiome research; 3. Stimulate the search for
generalizable concepts, principles, and language for microbiome assembly and
functions; 4. Identify key cross-community knowledge and resource gaps and
opportunities for advancing the field. The workshop will provide significant
opportunities for cross-disciplinary scientific interactions to advance the
microbiome research community. Early-career post-doctoral scientists will be
enlisted to serve as virtual discussion leads, providing an opportunity to
develop skills in distance communication to support new models for scientific
meetings and education. Collectively, this workshop will identify critical gaps
in resources and understanding of microbiomes across disciplines, and stimulate
community-wide, collaborative efforts to address these key resource and
knowledge gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.