* 1944130
* CAREER: Programmable Peptide Nucleic Acid Molecules as Building-blocks for Complex Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Rebecca Taylor, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2025
* USD 525,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports fundamental
studies of the thermodynamic stability, morphology, and mechanics of a new type
of nucleic acid nanotechnology built using a synthetic mimic of deoxyribonucleic
acid or DNA. The programmability and responsive nature of nucleic acid-based
nanostructures, nanomaterials and nanomachines give them the potential to
transform nanosensing as well as manufacturing from the nanoscale to the
mesoscale. However, without protection, DNA-based nanosystems can be unstable in
organic solvents commonly used in polymer and peptide synthesis. This award
investigates the processing-formation-mechanics relationships in novel,
programmable gamma peptide nucleic acid (gammaPNA)-based materials for use in
nanomanufacturing processes that depend on aggressive organic solvent solutions.
This project advances the knowledge of nucleic acid self-assembly in the field
of advanced manufacturing and has the potential to enable sequence-specific
polymer synthesis as well as novel peptide assembly processes in polar organic
solvents. The objective of the integrated education plan is to investigate voice
assistants for advanced manufacturing education, research, and industrial
workforce development. To this end, voice assistants are used in the classroom
and in the laboratory for supportive training and education that demonstrates
the importance of NIST and ASTM standards for
nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to
discover the design rules for building complex nanostructures with a
preorganized synthetic DNA mimic. While preliminary studies suggest that
gammaPNA can successfully hybridize in harsh environments and form filamentous
nanostructures according to molecular programs defined by Watson-Crick base
pairing, the morphology and mechanics of these nanostructures appear to be
modulated by the solution conditions as well as the structural assembly motif
and the gamma chemical modifications. This research investigates the effect of
organic solvent type and concentration on the stability of all gammaPNA
nanostructures. Using total internal fluorescence microscopy and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM), the project investigates how substitution with DNA
affects the thermodynamics of formation and melting of hybrid gammaPNA-DNA
nanotube structures. Using TEM, the nanoscale morphology and “weave structure”
are characterized, and, using persistence length studies, bending stiffness as a
function of solvent and proportion of DNA is determined. Finally, the use of
micropatterned seed features for templated growth and surface coating with these
gammaPNA nanomaterials is investigated. Unlike electronegative DNA-based
systems, PNA-based systems have a tendency to stick together forming bundles. By
leveraging that distinct characteristic, superstructure formation using not only
gammaPNA oligomer sequence but also external conditions like surface
hydrophobicity could be controlled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.