* 1944314
* CAREER: Thermo-responsive absorbent with selective absorption for miscible liquids separation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Gibum Kwon, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2025
* USD 549,996.00

Separation of liquid mixtures is a critical step for a wide range of practical
processes such as wastewater remediation, biofuel production, water
purification, and contaminant removal from groundwater. Conventional separation
methods, such as distillation or liquid-liquid extraction, are often limited
either by their high energy consumption or their inability to separate mixtures
with similar boiling points. This project aims to establish a new technological
platform enabling the rational design of absorbents that can efficiently
separate not only immiscible (heterogeneous mixtures such as oil and water) but
also miscible liquid mixtures (homogenous mixtures such as alcohol and water).
Such absorbents will surpass the technologies currently used in a variety of
environmental, biomedical, and pharmaceutical applications; thus, the outcomes
of this research also have the potential to advance national health and
prosperity. The project will also support outreach and educational activities.
Both graduate and undergraduate students’ knowledge of materials and surface
science will be fostered through a curriculum that is integrated with the
results of this research. Furthermore, a STEM course module for students with
special needs will be developed by collaborating with the Department of Special
Education at the University of Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal
of this project is to establish a fundamental understanding of interfacial
interactions between solids and liquids in miscible liquid separation processes.
This research will describe relationships between interfacial parameters
involved in the selective absorption-driven separation processes, including
absorbent–liquid intermolecular interaction, interfacial wettability, and
selective absorbency. The specific research objectives are to (1) synthesize and
characterize a thermo-responsive absorbent that can selectively absorb a polar
liquid while repelling a non-polar liquid; (2) characterize the intermolecular
interaction between absorbent and liquid based on the Flory–Huggins theory; (3)
quantify the relationship between the intermolecular interaction and the
absorbency; (4) establish a mathematical framework between the intermolecular
interactions, interfacial wettability, and absorbency; (5) validate the proposed
framework by conducting selective absorption experiments on the miscible
polar–polar liquids and the spontaneous release of the absorbed liquid from the
absorbent; and (6) test the possibility of a broader impact for practical
applications. This project will provide fundamental understanding of the
interfacial interactions taking place at the boundary between the absorbent and
liquid by studying the relationships among the three critical interfacial
parameters involved in the absorption-driven separation process: the
intermolecular interaction, interfacial wettability, and the absorbency. The
selective absorbency-driven separation of liquids will be transformative, novel,
and may serve as a viable alternative to the complex, energy-intensive thermal
distillation or liquid-liquid extraction methods currently in use. This project
is jointly funded by the Interfacial Engineering program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.