* 1944496
* CAREER:  Constrained Slip, Cracking and Instability in Extremely Anisotropic Nanolayered Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Ankit Srivastava, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2025
* USD 507,512.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will focus on quantifying
the effects of microstructural deformation mechanisms on the mechanical response
of materials with nanolayered crystal structures, such as zinc, mica, and
certain carbides. These materials hold tremendous promise for technologies where
reliable performance is required under extreme environments, such as at elevated
temperatures. However, their use in critical applications is severely limited as
they exhibit extremely direction-dependent (anisotropic) behavior, cannot
accommodate an arbitrary shape change, and are essentially brittle. On the other
hand, the anisotropy of these materials enables them to undergo macroscale
deformation via crystal slip, cracking, and/or instability at smaller scales,
which in turn can significantly enhance their damage tolerance and ductility.
This research project will provide the fundamental understanding of the
microstructure-based mechanical response of nanolayered crystalline materials,
paving the possibility of microstructural engineering to harness their damage
tolerance and ductility for applications. This objective will be achieved with
an integrated experimental-computational approach, which will result in a
predictive modeling framework and experimental data at several length scales.
The research activities will be complemented with a series of fully integrated
educational and outreach activities. The educational activities will enhance
undergraduate and graduate level engineering education through development of
interactive instructional materials and a new course. The outreach activities
will increase awareness of engineering by engaging Texas high school teachers in
research and students in a summer camp, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is twofold. First, develop an understanding of the
synergistic effects of crystallographic slip, cracking, and instability in
extremely anisotropic nanolayered materials, oxides, carbides and nitrides, via
novel small-scale in-situ experiments. Second, develop and validate a crystal
plasticity-based constitutive model incorporating non-Schmid effects, cleavage-
like cracking, and local instability to predict microstructure-sensitive
mechanical response of these materials. This will provide answers to following
key fundamental questions: (i) What material property or a combination of
properties affect the onset and propagation of slip, cracking and instability in
single crystals? (ii) What are the synergistic effects of slip, cracking and
instability on overall plastic deformation and damage tolerance? (iii) What is
the role of non-Schmid effects on the onset of cracking and instability? (iv)
How does intergranular cracking affect the damage tolerance of polycrystals of
these materials?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.