* 1944844
* CAREER: Capillary flows of particulate suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Alban Sauret, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 03/31/2025
* USD 394,557.00

Many industrial and environmental processes involve thin liquid films to
transport and deposit solid particles. However, the particles can destabilize
the film, reducing the transport efficiency and resulting in an ill-controlled
deposition and contamination of substrates. The classical description of films
of pure liquid fails to capture the interplay between the air-liquid interface
and the particles. This CAREER project will characterize and model the role of
interfaces in suspension dynamics, using state-of-the-art experimental studies
coupled with numerical simulations. The results will advance the fundamental
understanding of suspension flows under confinement, establishing when and how
particles disturb thin liquid films. The proposed work will provide a framework
to model and control advanced coating, aerosol-based treatments, and transport
in porous media. As a result, this CAREER project will have a broad
environmental and economic impact. The research will provide educational
opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, in
particular from under-represented groups. An integrated curriculum on water
contamination will inspire the participation of local K-12 and undergraduate
students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER award is to
develop a new understanding of capillary dynamics when solid non-Brownian
particles are dispersed in a Newtonian liquid phase. This configuration
encompasses a variety of fundamental problems and practical situations. Past
studies have focused on surface tension effects during the formation of liquid
films and drops of a pure Newtonian liquid. However, when the liquid contains
solid particles, the rheological description of a suspension fails to capture
the interfacial dynamics at play when the thickness of the liquid becomes
comparable to the particle size. The experimental approach bridging different
length and time scales will describe how the bulk behavior and local
heterogeneities contribute to the dynamics of capillary objects. More
specifically, the study will consider model thin films, self-suspended or bound
by a solid surface. First, the formation of a thin-film of suspension on a
substrate will illustrate how the particles are entrained and deposited
depending on the dynamic wetting and stability of suspension films. The
researchers will then examine suspension sheets and their atomization to provide
guidelines to describe sprays. The fundamental knowledge obtained through the
proposed work will lead to a better description of multiphase flows involving a
solid dispersed phase during the formation, flow, and fragmentation of
suspension films and sheets. In addition to improving process efficiency, the
knowledge should bolster the development of new coating processes and inspire
further research on heterogeneous capillary flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.