* 1944664
* CAREER: Humanizing Engineering and Resilience: An Integrated Research and Education Approach to Understand and Enhance Infrastructure Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Christine Kirchhoff, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 544,829.00

Societies depend on resilient infrastructure and the uninterrupted provision of
drinking water, electricity, and wastewater treatment; when infrastructure is
not resilient, hazards and disasters can disrupt these services causing enormous
economic losses and human and environmental impacts. Improving the resilience of
the nationâ€™s infrastructure to current and future hazards is vital for society
and a grand engineering challenge. While much is known about the physical and
technical dimensions of resilience, there are fundamental gaps in our
understanding of the human dimensions of resilience. In particular, we cannot
explain why infrastructure managers overwhelmingly focus on building resilience
to the past, bouncing back from disruption, rather than bouncing forward or
building resilience to future hazards and surprise. This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) grant supports fundamental research that will address this
gap in knowledge to: advance resilience theory to include human dimensions,
identify the different human dimensions factors necessary to bounce back as well
as bounce forward, produce actionable knowledge that will enhance resilience of
U.S. infrastructure systems, and develop curricula to educate students and
professionals about human dimensions of engineering. The novel integrated
research and education approach offers unique opportunities for students to
engage in research, prepares them to help solve societal problems, and helps
diminish the gender gap in engineering. In addition to training a postdoctoral
researcher and graduate and undergraduate students, this project will engage a
broad audience including 150 students and 200-250 infrastructure managers and
public officials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances fundamental
understanding of resilience and resilience theory to enable researchers to
assess human dimensions factors of resilience across a range of critical
infrastructure not previously possible. It also advances novel methods and
applies experimental techniques to demonstrate the effectiveness of tools for
improving resilience and of a new educational model for enhancing student
understanding and commitment to engineering. Results from this research will
provide scholars with a new theory and methods for assessing human dimensions of
resilience and will give practitioners concrete guidance on how to measure and
improve infrastructure resilience to present and future hazards. Unique
quantitative and qualitative datasets, interactive graphic displays, and
professional and undergraduate engineering curricula will be produced and made
widely available. Broad dissemination will occur through publications and
conferences as well as webinars, trainings, and presentations to partners,
infrastructure managers, and their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.