* 1944557
* CAREER: Oxygen Transport in Heterogeneous, Nonoxide Ceramics - Toward Durable New Composite Constituents
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* David Poerschke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2025
* USD 444,421.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Strong, tough, and lightweight ceramic composites
based on carbides, borides, and nitrides can enable new high performance and
energy efficient transportation and energy conversion technologies including
turbine engines, hypersonic vehicles, and solar-thermal energy systems. However,
in-service reactions with oxidizing species such as oxygen and water vapor can
significantly reduce the durability of these materials at high temperatures.
This degradation is particularly problematic when the penetration of the
oxidizing species into the material occurs in an unpredictable way due to local
variability or defects in the material structure originating during the
manufacturing process. This project addresses this challenge by developing new
experimental and modeling approaches to systematically understand how oxidizing
species are transported within these heterogeneous ceramic microstructures.
These insights are used to understand the reasons that some state-of-the art
materials perform better than others, while parallel efforts leverage this
understanding to accelerate the discovery of new materials and processing
pathways to achieve improved performance. The undergraduate and graduate
students trained as part of this program will find employment in industries
supporting aerospace and defense technology
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project combines
experiments and modeling to understand how microstructural heterogeneities in
single-and multi-phase nonoxide ceramics impact oxidant transport mechanisms,
and how the resulting spatial variations in internal oxygen activity impact
local oxidation reactions at the transition between diffusion- and reaction-
controlled processes. New experimental tools including embedded chemical markers
and solid-state electrochemical oxygen pumps and sensors are being developed to
support these objectives. The program is initially focusing on crystalline Si,
SiC, and SiC-C systems and Si-(O)-C polymer derived ceramics (PDC). Insights
about the behavior of these systems is then being applied to discover advanced
PDCs, active fillers, and multi-principal element borides and carbides offering
superior high temperature performance. This research directly impacts efforts to
address many critical societal challenges at a point in time when development of
many systems is impeded by inferior material performance and durability at
higher temperatures and in more extreme environments. This work is especially
timely given the current industrial interest in implementing ceramic composites
in commercial products. The efforts is also working to fill the pipeline of
next-generation STEM leaders by developing a ceramic science outreach program
for high school students that builds interest in the ceramic sciences through
connections to the ceramic arts, and by implementing writing-based assignments
in the materials science curriculum to improve retention of underrepresented
students with broader interests and verbal abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.