* 1944131
* CAREER: Characterizing the Mechanobiological Response of Endothelial Cells to Ultrasound
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Ryan Pedrigi, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 543,020.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will study endothelial
cells. Specifically, this work will measure how these cells respond to
mechanical stimuli generated by ultrasound, and will also investigate if
ultrasound can be strategically used to promote normal cell functions.
Endothelial cells form the inner lining of arteries and are constantly exposed
to mechanical stimuli from blood flow and pressure. Blood flow has been shown to
be a key regulator of normal endothelial cell functions. The more turbulent the
blood flow, the more function is impaired. When the function of these cells is
impaired, the artery is primed to develop diseases including heart disease. The
knowledge gained about endothelial cells and their response to specific uses of
ultrasound may someday lead to a novel therapy to prevent, or even reverse,
diseases. This award will also enable the development of new learning modules
that seek to excite students, particularly from underrepresented groups, about
engineering. K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students will learn how
engineering concepts can be used to solve problems in medicine. Dissemination of
these learning modules at the K-12 level will be facilitated by collaborations
with the Engineering Ambassadors Network and Nebraska 4-H. Together, the
research and education goals of this award will advance our understanding of
endothelial cell behavior and create a scientific learning and mentoring
environment led by the Principal Investigator that will continue to broaden
participation after the award has ended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal
of this award is to characterize mechanosensitive signaling in endothelial cells
exposed to low intensity pulsed ultrasound over a range of acoustic pressures
and frequencies. This will be accomplished through two objectives, (1)
identification of the ultrasound parameters that induce endothelial cell
expression of the same mechanosensitive genes as laminar flow, and (2)
assessment of the efficacy of ultrasound to rescue a normal phenotype in
endothelial cells exposed to inflammatory stimuli. These objectives will be
performed in vitro with arterial endothelial cell monolayers and gene expression
will be evaluated from a panel of markers known to be sensitive to laminar flow.
This research will create new knowledge on endothelial cell mechanobiology that
introduces a shift in focus from physiologic mechanical stimuli to that
generated through an artificial mechanism, which could underlie the development
of new avenues of translation to the clinic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.