* 1944881
* CAREER: The evolution and development of cognitive control
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Alexandra Rosati, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 01/31/2025
* USD 529,353.00

Cognitive control is a defining characteristic of intelligent, flexible
behavior. These regulatory cognitive processes coordinate behavior so it aligns
with current goals and is appropriate for a given context; for example, by
turning off reflexive responses (such as reaching directly for a reward) and
exerting self-control in service of long-term goals (such as planning for better
rewards in the future). Why do some individuals exhibit more robust cognitive
control than others? This project will develop novel experimental tasks,
spanning multiple core components of cognitive control, to assess its emergence
across species and over maturation. To do so, the project will leverage the
strengths of several large, naturalistic populations where primates (here,
chimpanzees, macaques, and lemurs) are semi-free-ranging but controlled
cognitive experiments are also possible. By integrating data across multiple
species, the project will examine when and why flexible forms of cognitive
control emerge and test different proposed pathways that may promote cognitive
control. Training, education, and outreach aimed at students from elementary
school through graduate school will be integrated throughout the project. The
project will develop an educational outreach program on primate cognition,
behavior, and conservation for children, implemented in Michigan, Puerto Rico,
and Uganda. Undergraduates will grain hands-on research experience through
internships and course work integrating data science training, including through
a new a summer internship program in primate cognition and behavior aimed at
broadening student representation and access to the field. Finally, research
teams will be led by postdoctoral researchers and graduate students, providing
key international research experiences for trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has three specific aims. The first aim is to identify unique aspects of
cognitive control in humans and compare this with chimpanzees. There have been
few standardized assessments of cognitive control in non-human primates. Here
the research team will develop a battery of experimental tasks comprising key
measures of working memory, inhibition, updating, performance monitoring, and
planning to assess the structure of cognitive control in chimpanzees. The second
aim is to test the hypothesis that the emergence of flexible cognition is linked
to slow life histories with an extended period of juvenile development. The
project will adapt the cognitive control battery to compare the ontogeny of
cognitive control in chimpanzees (with slower life histories) and macaques
(faster life histories). The third aim is to examine the general evolutionary
pathways shaping the emergence of cognitive control by contrasting two major
hypotheses about intelligence: the social intelligence hypothesis predicts that
cognition evolves in response to complex social life, whereas the ecological
intelligence hypothesis predicts that dietary ecology is more important. By
comparing cognitive control capacities across eight closely-related lemur
species that vary widely in natural history, the project will tease apart the
relative contribution of social versus ecological complexity the emergence of
intelligent, flexible behavior. This project will bridge evolutionary and
developmental perspectives on cognition by leveraging the strengths of several
naturalistic populations of chimpanzees, macaques, and lemurs varying in age.
Together, this work will address the ultimate function and proximate mechanisms
building robust executive control abilities across species. This project is
jointly funded by the Behavioral Systems Cluster in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and the Biological Anthropology Program in the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.