* 1944403
* CAREER: Duality and Stability in Complex State-Dependent Networked Dynamics
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* S Rasoul Etesami, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Many of the current challenges in science and engineering are related to complex
networks, and multiagent network systems are currently the focal point of many
new applications. Such applications relate to the growing popularity of online
social networks: the analysis of large-scale network data sets; problems that
arise from interactions among agents in political, economic, and biological
systems; and the expansion of power and wireless networks in our daily lives.
Despite conventional methods for the analysis of multiagent network systems, the
existing results have shortcomings to address realistic situations where there
is a strong interdependence between the communication network structure and the
agentsâ€™ behavior/decisions. This work promises to bring together several
engineering and mathematical tools such as control, optimization, and game
theory, to undertake a systematic approach to the analysis of the behavior of
agents interacting over complex dynamic networks. The proposed work will provide
key technologies to enable the deployment and analysis of large-scale, secure
and efficient multiagent networked systems. The techniques to be developed are
expected to provide an unprecedented understanding of the influence of
heterogeneity in multiagent networked systems, such as opinion formation in
social networks and robotic rendezvous. Research to be undertaken will lead to
new economic and engineering design policies such as efficient resource
allocation and optimal security decisions. The outcome of the research will
advance the state of knowledge in several areas, including distributed control
and optimization, socio-economic networks, and network security. This project
will contribute toward enhancing our ability to understand the evolution of
strategic relationships in dynamic networks and to ensure cyber-physical
security by safeguarding networks against malicious adversarial interventions,
thus benefiting long-term US defense interests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be focused on duality-based stability and convergence analysis of
multiagent networked decision systems with state-dependent switching topologies.
These systems become further complicated once one accounts for asymmetry or
heterogeneity of the underlying agent-network dynamics, and this class of
problems have entailed longstanding challenges in control, social sciences, and
many other related fields. This transformative research will provide the
necessary mathematical foundations to extend the existing results on multiagent
systems from the static homogeneous setting to highly dynamic heterogeneous
environments. The results will be leveraged to analyze several major
applications such as devising efficient resource allocation algorithms and
developing security strategies over highly dynamic networks. Specific goals of
this research include i) unconventional analysis of multiagent networked
systems, such as construction of novel Lyapunov functions; ii) analysis of the
strategic behavior of heterogeneous networked agents via novel game-theoretic
techniques; and iii) development of efficient algorithms for computing
equilibrium points and conducting convergence rate
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.