* 1944512
* CAREER: CAS: Radical Cascade-Driven Polymerization and Depolymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Jia Niu, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 04/30/2025
* USD 675,000.00

With this CAREER Award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Jia Niu at Boston College is
designs and develops new techniques for the synthesis and degradation of
plastics. The method uses highly reactive molecules and catalysts based on
copper, ruthenium, and iridium. Professor Niu's research is also using
computational methods to better understand how these reactions work and how to
improve them. Ring-opening and ring-closing polymerization reactions provide
unique benefits in sustainability because of their ability use environmentally-
friendly building blocks and degrade under mild conditions. This research has
the potential to develop next-generation materials that are used in temperature-
stable soft matter, stimuli-responsive materials, and targeted drug delivery.
The project contributes to the training of a diverse group of students in a
highly interdisciplinary research environment. The undergraduate course “Design
Your Own Pet-RAFT” trains undergraduate students in a laboratory setting.
Professor Niu also implements outreach activities centered on the minicourse
“Polymers and You." This course is designed for 6th-9th grade urban homeless
children in the greater Boston area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
focused on developing a new strategy for polymer synthesis that employs radical
cascade reactions that provide the key driving force for the controlled
synthesis of polymers and stimuli-triggered degradation of precision main-chain
polymers. There are three main objectives associated with the project. The first
objective focuses on structure-function relationships in radical ring opening
polymerizations and couples experimental and computational techniques aimed at
optimization of several important reaction parameters. In the second objective,
polymers featuring gamma-lactams in the main backbone are prepared using ring-
closing cascade polymerization. The last aim concentrates on the synthesis of
self-immolative polymers via step-growth and ring-opening metathesis
polymerizations techniques. Research associated with this award enables the
synthesis of macromolecules that contain functional groups in the main backbone,
rather than side chains which is the traditional approach associated with other
polymerization techniques. The research is highly transformative and it could
lead to a new exciting platform for industrially-relevant controlled radical
polymerizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.