* 1944095
* CAREER: Toward sub-60-mV/decade steep transistors using Dirac-source carrier injection and high-mobility 2D monochalcogenides
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Huamin Li, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 02/28/2025
* USD 508,000.00

Proposal Title&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional high-performance steep transistors
using Dirac-source carrier injection and high-mobility
monochalcogenides&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation quantum technologies demand for novel
nanoelectronic devices that can operate at faster switching speed and with less
energy consumption. Currently, silicon-based metal-oxide-semiconductor field-
effect transistors, driven by thermionic emission, require at least 60 mV of
gate voltage to increase the current by one order of magnitude at room
temperature. Steep slope transistors such as tunneling transistors and
ferroelectric negative capacitance transistors are capable of switching faster
than the limit of 60 mV/decade, but they suffer their own challenges and issues
for practical applications. To address these challenges, the proposed research
focuses on investigation of a novel steep-slope device concept, known as the
Dirac-source transistor, which is composed of two-dimensional graphene and
emerging high-mobility monochalcogenides. Specifically, (i) fundamental
understanding of a graphene-based Dirac-source carrier injection mechanism, (ii)
investigation of synthesis technology and electronic properties of the
monochalcogenides as the channel materials, and (iii) demonstration of a steep-
slope Dirac-source transistors. The proposed solution governed by quantum
mechanics on the nanometer scale is foreseen as a promising technique for
extending Moore’s Law well into the quantum era. This project proposes events
and involves entities across the university and local communities through close
integration of research, education, and outreach programs with the focus on
quantum nanomaterials and nanoelectronics. The proposed fundamental and
multidisciplinary project will not only represent the state-of-the-art
technology in the 2D material research field, but also provide an excellent
training initiative for educating both undergraduate and graduate students, and
for outreaching to K-12, women, and underrepresented minority students in STEM
disciplines to fulfill the nation’s workforce
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;As the miniaturization
of complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) approaches its physical
limitation, new technologies are critically needed to extend the performance of
electronic systems in terms of power, speed, and density, etc. The proposed
Dirac-source steep transistor is considered as a novel device concept, which is
capable of working at a supply voltage less than 0.5 V and switching faster than
the limit of 60 mV/decade. Such excellent performance is attributed to a
synergetic combination of two-dimensional graphene and semiconducting
monochalcogenides through the unique Dirac-source carrier injection mechanism in
their van der Waals heterostructure. The research approach combines both
theoretical simulation and experimental demonstration to pursue the final
deliverables: (i) a fundamental understanding of the Dirac-source carrier
injection mechanism; (ii) a high-resolution database and engineering principle
of the emerging 2D semiconducting monochalcogenides; and (iii) a prototypical
demonstration of the logic devices with steep subthreshold slope and low energy
consumption. The intellectual significance of the proposed research includes
providing innovative solution (Dirac-source carrier injection) to address the
need of energy-efficient electronic devices, exploring the untapped potential of
emerging two-dimensional semiconducting channel materials (monochalcogenides)
based on their unique structure and properties, and representing a major
breakthrough in quantum science and technology for extending Moore’s law well
into the quantum era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.