* 1944478
* CAREER: New Catalytic Methodology Enabled by Superbase Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Jeffrey Bandar, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 02/28/2025
* USD 670,000.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Bandar at Colorado State University.
Professor Bandar and his students are developing new chemical reactions and
reagents that provide scientists with more efficient and sustainable access to
compounds integral to the pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries. To
accomplish these objectives, the research group is using neutral organic
compounds that possess strong basicity, termed superbases, to address
longstanding challenges in synthetic chemistry. In one application, the Bandar
lab is employing superbases as catalysts for reactions that directly transform
commodity chemicals, such as alcohols, amines and olefins, into highly valued
product classes. In another application, the Bandar lab is addressing the
practical challenge of using highly reactive bases by developing air-stable
starting materials that provide chemists on-demand access to superbases. These
reagents have the potential to improve the practicality and sustainability of
many of the most-used reactions in the chemical industry. As the educational
component of this project, the Bandar lab is creating informational materials on
the properties of strong bases and their compatibilities with different classes
of chemicals. These materials will provide chemists with useful guides for base-
promoted chemistry and help undergraduate students learn acid-base concepts from
a real-world perspective. Professor Bandar is also preparing and distributing
media that highlights Colorado-based chemistry careers in an effort to increase
the number of local students pursuing postsecondary STEM degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bandar lab is developing a variety of new synthetic
capabilities that are enabled by the unique properties of organic superbases. In
one application, the Bandar lab is developing base-catalyzed additions of
heteroatom nucleophiles to styrene derivatives as a direct route to aryl-
containing ethers, alcohols and amines. Although superbases are emerging as an
attractive and often uniquely effective class of base in modern synthesis, their
cost and air sensitivity prevents their widespread use. To address this
challenge, the Bandar lab is creating air-stable reagents that release
superbases when desired for general use in deprotonation reactions. In another
goal, the lab is optimizing catalysis of superbase-promoted alkylation and
substitution reactions, thus eliminating the need for stoichiometric quantities
of superbases. These targeted developments could greatly improve the
practicality and applications of organic superbase chemistry, thus improving
access to valuable organic compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.