* 1944312
* CAREER: Development of AlInN Nanostructures for Advanced Ultraviolet Light-Emitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Hieu Nguyen, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical description: This project aims to develop a new form of ultraviolet
light-emitters. Through a detailed theoretical and experimental study of AlInN,
this project will identify solutions for the growth of AlInN nanostructured
ultraviolet light-emitters. The proposed new generation nanowire light-emitters
are promising candidates in solid-state lighting sources, as part of data
storage, high-speed communications, information processing, optical
interconnects, optical recording sterilization/water purification, medicine and
biochemistry, air purification equipment and zero emission automobiles. This
research program will offer unique interdisciplinary research opportunities to
students at New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) to gain experience in
epitaxial growth techniques, hands-on device fabrication and characterization of
semiconductor devices. Located in Newark, New Jersey, NJIT has a diverse student
populating with a large percentage of African-American, Hispanic and women
students. This research program will provide strong opportunity to our
undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, experiments related to this
research program will be modified and introduced to the outreach program planned
for K-12 students and teachers through the Center for Pre-college Program at
NJIT. This research program encourages students from underrepresented groups, in
particular women, minority candidates, veterans and individuals with
disabilities to participate in developing new device applications of the III-
nitride nanowire semiconductors. Furthermore, research activities will be
developed throughout this CAREER program and will be introduced to students in
the U.S. and globally to benefit the broader community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Significant progress has been made
in the area of InGaN and AlGaN semiconductors for near ultraviolet and
ultraviolet photonic devices, respectively. Nevertheless, the approach of using
different III-nitride alloys for ultraviolet light-emitting diodes (LEDs) is
relatively unexplored. This CAREER program will focus on fundamentals and
quantitative understanding of the epitaxial growth and properties of AlxIn1-xN-
based nanostructured ultraviolet LEDs operating in the wavelength range of 210 -
355nm. These nanowire ultraviolet LEDs will be grown by molecular beam epitaxy.
The specific research will include: (1) design and simulation of novel nanowire
LED structures and geometries; (2) fundamental investigation of the molecular
beam epitaxial growth of AlInN nanowire ultraviolet LED structures; and (3)
development of AlInN nanowire ultraviolet LEDs implementing unique structures.
Detailed structure, optical, electrical, and reliability characterizations will
be performed. This research program will enable a first demonstration of
nanowire LEDs operating in the ultraviolet regime using AlInN nanostructures.
The success of the proposed project will establish a foundation to develop high
efficiency and high-power photonic and electronic devices that utilize the full
potential of III-nitride nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.