* 1944921
* CAREER: Investigation of Laser-driven Chemical Reactions by Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Dmitri Kilin, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

Dmitri Kilin of North Dakota State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry for theoretical research focused on the control of chemical reactions
driven by light, called photoreactions. Light can activate, direct, and speed up
chemical reactions otherwise inaccessible by conventional reaction conditions
like heat. The goal of this research is to study and simulate the control of
photochemical reactions through the tuning of specialized laser light. These
researchers develop distributable software with which users can explore light-
driven chemical reactions. The software will help advance a wide range of
technologies, including energy conversion and storage, and chemical sensing.
This work will contribute to theory-guided optimization of thin-film deposition
technology, which is important for the miniaturization of electronic circuits
towards nano- and sub-nano scales. The educational mission includes the
participation of graduate and undergraduate students in professional activities.
Outreach activities are focused on providing to tribal college students at
Native American reservations research experience via participations in the
Nurturing American Tribal Undergraduate Research and Education (NATURE) Program
at NDSU, which will specifically benefit from remote/distant
learning/training/research opportunities. Dr. Kilin will also mentor high school
students participating in PICNICS (Parents Involvement with Children, Nurturing
Intellectual Curiosity in Science) program hosted at
NDSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational description of dynamics under the
electromagnetic field remains challenging due to coupled electronic and nuclear
degrees of freedom. There are known approaches for independent treatment of
subsequent contributing processes: photoexcitation, reorganization and
dissipative interaction with electronic degrees of freedom, and molecular and
reaction dynamics of nuclear degrees of freedom. However, on a short timescale,
all three are coupled. The Kilin group is developing first-principles molecular
dynamics approaches for coupled electrons, nuclei, and light to fill the gap in
computational investigation of laser-driven chemical reactions. The approaches
rely on the combination of Rabi theory and surface hopping approximations. The
research program includes an effort for validation of utilized approximations. A
hypothesis driven search of acceptable approximations showing accuracy versus
numerical cost facilitates an effort of establishing standard approaches for
reactions at extreme conditions. Various corrections are being implemented
accounting for the quantization of nuclear degrees of freedom, the higher level
of electronic structure calculations with increased precision, and the treatment
of coherent superposition of quantized states. The practical applications of the
improved methodologies focus on photofragmentation of metal-organic compounds,
photopolymerization of silicon containing compounds, photografting, and
photodesorption of covalent functional groups on carbon nanotubes. The
theoretical tools being developed can be applicable to interpret and predict
reaction mechanisms and distribution of products for various classes of
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.