* 1944516
* CAREER: Understanding Sensitization and Corrosion Mechanisms in Additively Manufactured Metals for Improved Surface Finish, Mechanical Properties and Corrosion Resistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Owen Hildreth, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2025
* USD 515,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant focuses on identifying,
quantifying, and exploiting sensitization and corrosion mechanisms in metals and
alloys produced using powder-bed fusion additive manufacturing. Sensitization
refers to the precipitation of carbides at grain boundaries in a metal alloy,
causing the alloy to be susceptible to intergranular corrosion. Metal additive
manufacturing or three-dimensional printing allows companies to manufacture
complex parts with improved performance and shorter production times. To reduce
the costs of additive manufacturing and expand design freedom, this project
establishes the understanding necessary to exploit corrosion phenomena to create
a scalable and uniform etching process to dissolve supports and trapped powder
while improving surface finish. Specifically, this research project establishes
the fundamental relationships between the as-printed microstructure,
sensitization kinetics and corrosion mechanisms in these materials. This new
understanding allows manufacturers to control the amount of material removed
while improving surface finish and mechanical properties. By replacing expensive
post-process machining operations with simple chemical dissolution to remove
support structures, this new approach reduces manufacturing costs and provides
U.S. manufacturing with a competitive advantage. The awardâ€™s STEM educational
components include curriculum development and K-12 outreach partnerships with
groups serving underrepresented minorities and students with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to
understand how the microstructure of powder-bed fusion-processed metals and
alloys control sensitization kinetics and corrosion mechanisms. To achieve this
understanding, the research objectives of this project are to: (1) understand
microstructure evolution during sensitization; (2) understand how the depth-
dependent sensitized microstructure changes the corrosion behavior and
associated self-terminating etch-stop mechanism; and (3) quantify the impacts
that sensitization and dissolution have on mechanical properties and corrosion
performance. To achieve these research objectives, this project explores
carburization and sulfidation-based sensitization of stainless steel, nickel-
based superalloys, and titanium alloys as model systems to test the following
hypotheses: (i) carbon-based sensitization depth decreases as the diffusion path
for passivating elements increases; (ii) dealloying increases with decreasing
diffusion path; and (iii) chromium depletion zone decreases faster with
increasing sensitization rate. The overarching focus is to obtain a better
understanding of the kinetics of microstructure evolution in high temperature
corrosive environments along with increased understanding of the microstructure-
dependent corrosion mechanisms in sensitized metals in aqueous environments.
This new knowledge is used to guide the design and manufacturing of powder-bed
fusion metallic parts towards efficient support structure removal, improved
surface finish and increased fracture and fatigue resistance. This project
allows the PI to advance the knowledge base in materials science, corrosion, and
mechanical behavior while supporting a career in advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.