* 1944568
* CAREER: Interaction of Turbulence with Flexible Surfaces: Coherent Structures and Near-Wall Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Yulia Peet, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The project will investigate the interactions between the flexible surfaces and
turbulent flows. The analysis will be based on the combination of computational
fluid dynamics simulations and theory. Surfaces that deform under the influence
of fluid forces occur in many practical situations, such as vibrations of
aircraft wings, human blood vessels, and compliant coatings. The goal of this
project is to develop new theories that help explain how these interactions will
change the structure of the flow. Simple demonstrations of the fluid-structure
interactions in an everyday life will be designed for the outreach activities
targeted to females and minorities conducted in collaboration with the
university office of education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the current
project is on investigation of the mechanisms involved with the interaction
between the flexible surfaces and the near-wall turbulence. Particular emphasis
is on understanding of 1) how passive and active wall motions alter the near-
wall turbulence cycle, 2) whether and why these alterations lead to a turbulence
reduction, and 3) what factors are responsible for changing the mode of
interaction. A comparison between the isotropic and anisotropic wall motions
will be made to investigate the potential differences of the influence of these
motions on the near-wall turbulence cycle. The above goals will be accomplished
via a combination of high-fidelity Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS) of a
coupled fluid-structure interaction problem, and a suite of analysis tools,
including a resolvent analysis, and a linear stochastic estimation approach.
Resolvent analysis will provide a-priori and a-posteriori estimates of the
effect of certain flow and material parameters on a likelihood of achieving a
desired mode of interaction. The educational objectives of the current project
are devoted to attraction and retention of female researchers to the field of
engineering, accomplished via local outreach activities, as well as a
development of interactive fluid flow visualizations for the Internet and iPhone
applications, targeted to elementary and middle school
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.