* 1944777
* Envisioning Workshops for Computing in Undergraduate Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Clayton Lewis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 748,433.00

Northwestern University, partnering with Purdue University and the University of
Colorado, proposes a series of three Envisioning Workshops for Computing in
Undergraduate Education with the goal of sparking a national dialog about the
role of computing in undergraduate education. The recent surge in non-major
enrollments in Computer Science (CS) courses -- even relatively advanced courses
-- has been challenging for many departments that offer curricula designed for
traditional CS majors, and that may have limited experience working with faculty
in other disciplines on curricula and courses. These workshops will open a
large-scale discussion on the role of computing and CS in non-computing
disciplines, and on how CS departments can develop new interdisciplinary
pathways and curricula to better meet the educational needs of the growing and
increasingly diverse student body open to learn more about computing and
CS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such a national dialog has the potential to:&lt;br/&gt;
-- Show departments a way forward and models for engagement; what is already
being done, and what is working?&lt;br/&gt; -- Spark research that can help
address the challenge.&lt;br/&gt; -- Create recommendations, and even templates,
that will help guide departments and institutions.&lt;br/&gt; -- Provide
credibility to the effort and the resulting
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the workshops will be aimed at
beginning the process of understanding, in more specific and more actionable
ways, the general challenge of incorporating computing into degree pathways
across universities and colleges. Attendees will be drawn from a wide range of
institutions serving diverse student populations, and include both CS and other
faculty. The workshops are expected to produce a greater alignment within the CS
research and educational community, and stakeholder communities based in other
disciplines, leading to a better understanding of the challenges, and how they
might be addressed more comprehensively and more
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.