* 1944207
* CAREER: Adaptive Sonification to Improve Balance during Everyday Mobility
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Antonia Zaferiou, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2025
* USD 854,200.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will use machine learning
and wearable technology to identify balance and gait deficits in fall-prone
older adults and to deliver personalized auditory biofeedback ("sonified
biofeedback") designed to improve dynamic balance while walking. Turning has
been linked to recurrent falls in older adults because it imposes mechanical
conflict between balancing and changing direction. Falls in older adults
frequently lead to injury and sometimes death. By some accounts, turning-while-
walking can comprise up to 50 percent of steps taken in any given day.
Retraining balance strategies used during turning-while-walking has potential to
reduce fall risk. This project will identify relationships between person-
specific balance strategies used during turning and other factors including
physiological and cognitive capabilities - such as strength and capacity for
spatial reasoning - as well as environmental factors such as the presence or
absence of obstacles. This information will be used to design personalized
auditory biofeedback tuned to convey information about movement kinematics and
foot forces in a way that facilitates dynamic balance during walking. An initial
set of experiments will test human perception and motor responses to sonified
biofeedback of dynamic balance information. Additional experiments will test the
ability of fall-prone older adults to use personalized biofeedback to improve
dynamic balance during turns. This project advances the national health by
developing a machine learning approach to the diagnosis of balance deficits in
older adults as well as a novel sonified biofeedback approach to improving
dynamic balance in that population. The project includes an education and
outreach plan, including an innovative “Artist in Residence” program, that will
expose underrepresented groups to cutting edge engineering and scientific
research in a way that is engaging for engineers and young artists alike.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that interactive
sonified biofeedback can improve balance strategies used by fall-risk older
adults during turning-while-walking. This project has three research objectives.
In the first, the PI will conduct human subjects experiments to characterize
person-specific relationships between dynamic balance strategies used during
turns, physiological and cognitive capabilities, and environmental factors.
Participants will walk and turn within the controlled setting of the research
lab and outdoors while wearing technology that can sense and transmit movement
kinematics and ground reaction forces in real-time. For the second objective,
the PI will establish how sonification can be used to train specific balance
strategies and the extent to which those strategies can be retained and used
without dependency on concurrent biofeedback. Working in conjunction with a
sound designer, the PI will develop soundscapes that sonify balance metrics
during unconstrained body movements, evaluate their ability to modulate measures
of stability in real-time during repeated training sessions, and test their
ability to elicit long-lasting behavioral change. In the third objective, the PI
will test the ability of machine learning models to diagnose person-specific
balance deficits during turns compared to clinician diagnoses, and to design
personalized biofeedback soundscapes that can mitigate clinician-diagnosed
balance deficits. Here, the PI will use Factored Conditional Restricted Boltzman
Machines to generate person-specific, turn-type specific, and deficit-specific
models that will be able to generate personalized sonified biofeedback to
improve balance during turns. This project will advance fundamental
understanding of an intelligent machine can communicate intent or otherwise
shape the behavior of its human user through physical
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.