* 1944464
* Impact of dissolved organic matter on phenolic contaminant oxidation by manganese oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Matthew Ginder-Vogel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 335,118.00

Manganese (Mn) oxides are naturally occurring minerals found in soil that have
shown great promise to transform toxic waterborne contaminants less hazardous
byproducts. However, natural dissolved organic matter (DOM) may dramatically
limit this transformation capacity. Given that DOM is present in natural waters,
the impacts of DOM must be understood to further develop Mn oxides as a
treatment technology. This research project will address this issue through
detailed analysis of contaminant transformation in the presence of DOM using
state-of-the-science chemical analysis. Successful completion of this research
will allow assessing the feasibility of Mn oxide-based remediation of
contaminated water and guide efforts to increase the efficiency of the process.
Additional benefits to society will come from supporting women and
underrepresented minorities in the research, thus broadening the diversity of
the Nation’s STEM workforce. Additional educational outreach to K-12 students
will increase understanding of environmental pollution and increase the Nation’s
scientific literacy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manganese (Mn) oxides are
ubiquitous, strong oxidants capable of reacting with inorganic and organic
contaminants. The use of natural or synthetic Mn oxides in engineered systems
and for in situ treatment of contaminated waters is currently being explored.
However, a fundamental understanding of how organic contaminants interact with
Mn oxides is in its infancy. The ubiquitous nature of dissolved organic matter
(DOM) in natural environments adds to the complexity of determining the rates
and mechanisms of organic contaminant degradation by Mn oxides. Not only does
DOM sorb and react with Mn oxides, it also may stabilize dissolved organic and
inorganic reaction products. Previous work indicates that DOM may therefore
increase, decrease, or have no effect on phenolic contaminant degradation by Mn
oxides. A better understanding of these interactions is needed to apply Mn
oxides for water treatment. Thus, the overall goal of the proposed project is to
identify the key mechanisms that govern the interactions of DOM, Mn oxides, and
phenolic contaminants in engineered systems designed to oxidize contaminants.
This goal will be achieved through the following research objectives to: 1)
characterize the interactions of DOM with Mn oxides using six model DOM isolates
and three whole waters that cover a wide range of DOM composition; and 2) assess
the impact of DOM on organic contaminant transformation by Mn oxides using six
phenolic contaminants that have different rate-limiting steps. Together, this
novel approach combining surface and aqueous chemistry will facilitate
understanding the mechanisms by which DOM alters contaminant transformation
rates and the interactions between DOM, Mn oxides, and phenolic
contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.