* 1944833
* CAREER: Facilitating Human Interaction with Assistive Robots Through Intent Signaling and Inference
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Wenlong Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2025
* USD 567,839.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will develop a
novel game-theoretic framework addressing the emerging challenge of joint intent
inference during physical human/machine interaction. Physical human-machine
interaction has become ubiquitous in collaborative manufacturing, robot-aided
rehabilitation, and robotic surgery. However, most existing robots lack high-
level intelligence to reason about, adapt to, and potentially shape human
actions within the context of collaborative tasks. This interdisciplinary
project merges game theory, optimal control methods, and ideas gleaned from
cognitive hierarchy theory to address the joint inference problem within the
exemplar application of a powered knee exoskeleton used for gait rehabilitation.
This project will promote the progress of science and advance the national
health by developing a novel control framework that will enable an embodied
machine intelligence to understand noisy human motor actions, thereby
facilitating human learning of motor tasks. In doing so, this project will
improve user experience and the productivity of future human-robot teams. The
impact of this project will be broadened by developing new curriculum on human-
robot interaction, through joint workshops with healthcare partners, and by
offering summer internships for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
(STEM) teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses significant
challenges pertaining to joint intent inference during human-machine physical
interaction. The application is that of a powered knee exoskeleton used for gait
rehabilitation. The project pursues three specific research activities. The
first creates a model of the human's cognitive state when interacting physically
with a robot. The model explicitly considers human-machine interaction dynamics,
mutual learning, and multi-level intent inference. The second formulates a
motion planning and control problem, which will allow the robot both to signal
its intents and to facilitate human motor learning based on the identified
cognitive and biomechanical models of the human. The third will quantify human
performance variability and use it to improve intent inference and signaling
performance. Human subject experiments will provide the data needed to build the
model of human cognitive state (including intent), to demonstrate improved
human-robot team performance over existing robot controllers, and to help
understand fundamental mechanisms contributing to effective physical human-robot
interaction. A key innovation of this project is the creation of a task-agnostic
framework that leverages models of human cognitive and motor dynamics such that
an intelligent machine can dynamically adjust its behavior to simultaneously
facilitate human learning and provide physical assistance when
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.