* 1944880
* CAREER: The influence of turbulence to mass transport in complex aquatic habitats
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Kelly Kibler, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 05/31/2025
* USD 405,226.00

Economic and ecosystem resilience are closely connected in coastal regions,
where development as well as hydrologic hazards (storm surge, flooding, erosion)
are intensifying. Ecosystem-based protections near waterbodies, such as living
shorelines, oyster reef and mangrove forest, are increasingly sought to enhance
resilience to these climatic hazards; however, restoration projects and
ecosystem-based defenses often fail because current understanding of erosion and
sediment transport is based on simplified models of non-vegetated channels. This
research will develop new scientific knowledge to illuminate effects of three-
dimensional canopies (oyster reefs, seagrass beds, mangroves) on turbulent flow,
movement of sediments, and sequestration of Blue Carbon (peat deposits). Using
both laboratory flume and field experiments, the PI will test novel sediment
transport theory within these complex natural habitats. Societal benefits of
better understanding of erosional processes at vegetated river banks and
shorelines are vast and transferable to aquatic systems around the world,
allowing managers of vulnerable areas to plan impactful restoration projects and
management strategies to mitigate effects of flooding, bank erosion, or sea
level rise. The project will engage diverse students in an experiential ‘boots
in-the-mud’ study of aquatic systems by integrating research and field-based
learning with classroom instruction at a variety of educational levels,
including middle/high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, and
professionals. A Living Ecohydraulics Laboratory on an island in the field study
area is where the next generation of student scientists will be trained at the
intersection of ecology and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop and test cutting-edge sediment transport theory,
elucidating the roles of shear stress and turbulence on mass transport within
diverse, complex aquatic habitats. In the field, the PI will test the
hydrodynamic and sediment transport effects of 1) submerged, rigid canopies of
oyster, 2) submerged, flexible canopies of seagrasses, and 3) emergent canopies
of mangrove. Mass transport within these functionally diverse canopy types will
be related to turbulence through field-coupled laboratory experimentation.
Better understanding of shear stress-turbulence relationships for sediment
transport across varied canopy types and flow regimes will fundamentally change
the way that sediment transport is modeled in complex canopies and will
significantly advance predictive ability regarding erosional and depositional
processes in natural waterbodies. Newly-developed sediment transport
understanding will be linked to its applications in ecosystem restoration and
design of nature-based infrastructure to promote greater resilience to climatic
hazards. Educational activities include establishment of an island Living
Ecohydraulics Laboratory to engage over 1400 learners and immerse 250 students
into aquatic research sites over the life of the project. The integrated
research-educational field experiences are targeted at influential academic
stages, including middle-high school science research programs and summer camps,
to attract and retain students who may have otherwise not chosen STEM careers.
Display of middle and high school research projects in high-traffic community
spaces will effectively engage community members in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.