* 1944167
* CAREER: Smartphone-Based CRISPR Biosensor for Point-of-Care HIV Viral Load Testing
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Qingshan Wei, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 02/28/2025
* USD 400,000.00

One treatment of HIV/AIDS is antiretroviral therapy (ART). Antiretroviral
therapy helps people with HIV live longer, healthier lives and reduces the risk
of HIV transmission. Clinical trial data have shown that once-a-month long-
acting injectables suppress HIV comparably to the standard daily oral regimens.
To accurately monitor the therapeutic progress and to assure patientsâ€™
confidence in the long-period treatment, a technology that is capable of testing
certain biomarkers for HIV is essential. This CAREER proposal seeks to study the
fundamental properties of the CRISPR technology for applications in
ultrasensitive molecular diagnostics and to design and develop a chip-based,
smartphone-readable CRISPR biosensor for monitoring the therapeutic progress of
HIV treatments. The success of the project will significantly improve the
quality and outcome of long-acting HIV treatment. By integrating research and
education, this project will increase a diverse STEM workforce by attracting,
retaining, and training students in the interdisciplinary field of engineering
and biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this CAREER
proposal is to study the unique characteristics of CRISPR trans-nuclease and
convert the genome-editing CRISPR-Cas platform into next-generation, rapid, and
ultrasensitive biosensors. In pursuit of this goal, the enzymatic activity and
kinetics of CRISPR Cas proteins will be systematically studied, and a new
kinetic model for the one-pot CRISPR diagnostic reaction will be proposed. This
project will also explore the transformation of the solution-based CRISPR assay
into a chip-based biosensor that can be optically detected by a smartphone
fluorescence microscope to ensure high detection sensitivity to the sub-
attomolar level. This new sensing mechanism on a chip will eliminate the need
for pre-amplifications of the samples to significantly simplify and shorten the
steps of current CRISPR diagnostics. The smartphone-integrated HIV testing
platform will allow for both viral load measurement and computational
predication, through the incorporation of a viral dynamic model into a custom-
developed smartphone application interface. The project will innovate the
current toolbox for POC HIV viral load testing, which is one of the major
roadblocks in halting the HIV epidemic and enhancing treatment. The results of
this project will provide new insights into the detailed mechanism of trans-
cleavage of CRISPR Cas proteins. The successful development of such distributed
and connected POC sensors will be very timely in the new wave of long-acting
injectable and implantable HIV drugs. We expect the developed sensory
methodology can also be broadly applied to the detection of many other diseases
in resource-limited settings in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.