* 1944614
* CAREER:On the Coupled Nature of Highly-Flexible Plates Subjected to Fluid Loads: An Exploration of Structural Response and Reconfiguration
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Christine Gilbert, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 530,940.00

The swimming motion of rays in the ocean involves the flapping of two flexible
fins. As a result of the fins changing shape, the surrounding flow field is
altered. Another example of this type of fluid-structure interaction is that of
seagrass. In a current, the seagrass will flex and become streamlined with the
flow. These flexible structures cause a net reduction in drag. This project
takes inspiration from these two examples with its goal being to identify how
the flow field changes as a result of the shape reconfiguration of a highly
flexible plate near an air-water interface. Drag reduction will also be
demonstrated by actively controlling the plate stiffness. The results of this
work have the potential to improve propulsion methods and mixing processes.
Another component of this project includes an annual summer educational program
for middle school students, complete with small table-top experiments. Local
undergraduate and high school students will also have an opportunity to
participate in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
project is to understand the fluid-structure interaction of a highly flexible
plate near a free surface. Scaling laws will need to be developed to explain the
reduction in drag coefficient due to the reconfiguration of the plate in the
proximity of the free surface. These scaling laws will be achieved primarily
through experimentation and compared with theory and simulation. Particle image
velocimetry measurements will yield velocities and pressures. Stereoscopic
digital imaging and high-speed photography will be used to measure plate
deflections at the water-structure interface. Pressure and force sensors on the
plate will measure fluid loads. A new method based on measurements of the water-
contact line along with theory will allow for the prediction of the pressure on
the plate without artificially stiffening the plate with traditional pressure
transducers. The project will advance our understanding of flow around a highly
flexible plate due to: 1) the influence of the free-surface, 2) vertical
oscillatory motion, i.e. flow around the body that periodically changes
directions, 3) the combination of vertical oscillatory motions and forward
speed, and 4) active control of the plate stiffness to attain pre-defined flow
conditions. By leveraging active and passive structural reconfigurations, drag
can potentially be reduced on undulatory propulsors and
vessels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.