* 1944009
* CAREER: A Non-local Mathematical and Computational Paradigm for Failure in Unsaturated Soils: Integrated Research and Education through High Performance Computing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Xiaoyu Song, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2025
* USD 508,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will address
fundamental knowledge gaps preventing the accurate characterization of
multiphysics conditions driving failure (e.g., shear bands/cracks) of
unsaturated soils. Unsaturated soil mechanics plays a vital role in geohazard
assessment, as well as energy, environmental, and coastal geotechnics. Advances
in these fields are hindered by unsaturated soil failure mechanisms that are
poorly characterized and thus difficult to predict and mitigate. Such failures
involve coupled multiphysics processes and arbitrary shear bands/cracks at
multiple space and time scales. With recent advances in high-performance
computing (HPC), computational modeling is becoming increasingly crucial for
advancing our ability to characterize, predict, and mitigate such failures. This
powerful tool must be coupled with new and robust numerical methods that are
designed to harness and optimize this capability. This CAREER project will
develop a novel non-local mathematical and computational paradigm for modeling
failure phenomena in non-isothermal unsaturated soils through HPC. The
hypothesis is that material heterogeneities and environmental loads are the
critical triggers for failures (shear bands/cracks) in unsaturated soils, and
that the prediction of such failures can be achieved via coupling HPC with new
physics-based numerical tools. The rigorous integration of unsaturated soil
mechanics, interface physics, poromechanics, thermodynamics, non-local vector
calculus, and HPC can potentially revolutionize our modeling techniques for
multiscale, multiphysics problems. Integrated research and educational
activities through HPC will foster the interest of high-school and
underrepresented students in STEM educations and careers and engage graduate
students in globally collaborative research and effective dissemination of
scientific knowledge to a diverse audience. The cultivated diverse collaboration
network, including NSF Centers, U.S. national laboratories, leading consulting
firms, and top global institutions, will increase the national and global
impacts of this project and has the added benefit of exposing students to a
dynamic team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this CAREER grant is to
better characterize and predict failures in unsaturated soils under
environmental loads. This project will (i) formulate, implement, and validate a
novel multiphysics peri-poromechanics (PPM) paradigm using non-local vector
calculus and basic principles of physics and mechanics, and (ii) conduct
extensive computational experiments through HPC. The new knowledge generated by
this project includes a fundamental mechanistic understanding of multiphysics
conditions driving failures of unsaturated soils that is crucial for building
sustainable and resilient civil infrastructure. A significant outcome of this
project is expected to be a novel multiphysics PPM paradigm that can potentially
transform mathematical and computational modeling of failures in unsaturated
soils due to its physical and mathematical consistency across multiple spatial
scales. Original contributions expected are: (i) A novel physically,
mathematically and computationally consistent paradigm for better modeling soil
multiphysics; (ii) Next-generation non-local constitutive models for unsaturated
soils; (iii) A validated open-source HPC tool for predicting unsaturated soil
failures; and (iv) A new mechanistic understanding of multiphysics conditions
driving failures in unsaturated soils. The educational plan will challenge and
prepare next-generation engineers and scientists with a diverse knowledge base
by integrating fundamental principles of mathematics, physics, mechanics, and
HPC. This project will implement a series of initiatives, including two course
modules on key concepts in unsaturated soil failure analysis and the vital role
of HPC in basic scientific research, a cloud computing app, a dedicated wiki
page, and NSF SimCenter and ASCE webinars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.