* 1944974
* CAREER:Beyond Ideal Quantum Materials: Understanding the Critical Role of Disorder and Electron-Electron Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Hanna Terletska, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 04/30/2025
* USD 396,443.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional quantum materials, such as
high temperature superconductors, colossal magnetoresistance materials, and
dilute magnetic semiconductors, are at the forefront of condensed matter physics
research. These materials are being actively explored for transformative
technological applications, including efficient energy generation, storage, and
transmission. Understanding the fundamental mechanisms behind the exotic phases
of matter emerging in these quantum materials is a grand challenge, which must
be overcome to maximize technological advancement. Due to the complexity of the
many-electron problem, analytic theories often become unreliable, and numerical
treatment is required. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
computational and theoretical research and education aimed at better
understanding and description of electron localization and phase transitions in
quantum materials, properties of which are governed by strong electron-electron
interactions and disorder. So far, most of the theoretical and computational
research on such quantum materials has been performed on idealized systems,
often based on overly simplified toy models, which do not take into account the
intrinsic complexity of real materials. Understanding exotic phases of matter in
newly discovered quantum materials requires going beyond such simplifications.
This research will extend the existing numerical tools to confront material
complexity and enable in-depth study of electron localization and phase
transitions in quantum systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important component of
this project is education and outreach for a diverse body of K-12 and college
students. The goal of this effort is to develop a diverse and competitive
quantum smart workforce by integrating research and education. This goal will be
met through: 1) training graduate and undergraduate students in research and
high-performance computing; 2) developing an innovative undergraduate material
physics course with an emphasis on recent advances in condensed matter physics
and computation; 3) conducting computational workshop for graduate students; 4)
providing mentoring and outreach activities for women and other groups
underrepresented in physics, and targeted outreach to engage young women at the
middle- and high-school levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
that focuses on theoretical and computational study of functional quantum
materials with strong electron-electron interactions and disorder. Much of our
present knowledge of correlated electron quantum materials is built on studies
performed for idealized and simplified toy models that do not take into account
the intrinsic complexity of real systems. The overarching goal of the proposed
research is to enhance understanding of quantum materials by conducting studies
of quantum materials beyond ideal models, via the inclusion of disorder, multi-
orbital structure, and long-range Coulomb interactions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop new theoretical approaches and many-
body numerical tools that will extend the capabilities of the existing Monte
Carlo and quantum cluster embedding methods. Specifically, the research will
focus on several fundamental open questions of electron localization and metal-
insulator transition in two-dimensional electron systems that have emerged in
the context of recent experimental discoveries. Examples include: 1) determining
the fate of Mott metal-insulator transition in two-dimensional electron systems
by systematically studying the effect of non-local correlations and long-range
electron-electron interactions; 2) investigating the interplay between disorder,
electron-electron interactions, and quantum criticality near the Mott metal-
insulator transition in single band and multi-orbital systems; 3) exploiting
disorder to localize electrons in intermediate band semiconductors and
topological insulators using ab-initio based effective Hamiltonian
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the educational and outreach
components is to develop a diverse and competitive quantum smart workforce by
integrating research and education. This goal will be met through several
components: 1) designing an innovative quantum material undergraduate material
science course with the emphasis on recent advances in condensed matter physics
and computation; 2) conducting computational workshops for graduate students on
the modern quantum many-body numerical techniques for strongly interacting and
disordered systems; 3) training undergraduate and graduate students in quantum
material research and high-performance computing. A strong emphasis of the
proposed outreach is targeted towards mentoring and encouragement of
participation of women and other group underrepresented in scientific
disciplines by the PIâ€™s established Women in Physics Group. The PI will organize
various outreach physics demonstration workshops for middle and high school
students as well as networking and professional development mentoring
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.