* 1944597
* CAREER: The Mechanics of Hierachically Multistable Metastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Andres Arrieta Diaz, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2025
* USD 541,629.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support research
investigating the mechanics of a new class of material systems exhibiting
intrinsic reshaping and property adaptation. Conventional engineering materials
have fixed macroscopic properties that are derived from specific atomic
compositions. This limits the available design possibilities when compared to
biological systems that exhibit many unconventional and time-varying properties,
like inherent self-shaping. This biological characteristic can be attributed to
unique microstructures comprising hierarchical geometrical arrangements,
spanning several length scales. A unique geometrical characteristic enabling
property adaptation is multistability; i.e. a system’s capacity to exhibit
several coexisting states. Pursuing this concept, this research aims to derive
models to harness (locally) multistable arrangements, or metastructures, that
display macroscopic adaptability from changes at the local scale. Understanding
the mechanics of such multistable structures will facilitate the development of
advanced structures and robotic materials relevant to the aerospace, biomedical
and robotics industries. This will expand the U.S. scientific and technological
edge, ultimately benefiting the economy and society at large. Furthermore, this
effort’s multidisciplinary (engineering and material science) nature allows for
promoting STEM education. This is pursued by establishing teaching strategies
for courses with multidisciplinary content and offering design experiences
partnering undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel
concept of hierarchical multistability in material systems entails the
appearance of multiple coexisting global configurations for a single combination
of local (multistable) states, thereby breaking the one-to-one correspondence
between local and global states commonly found in multistable metamaterials. The
objective of this project is to understand the fundamental mechanics responsible
for the manifestation of hierarchical multistability. Specifically, this effort
aims to determine the local (unit-cell) and global (metastructural) interaction
mechanisms responsible for the appearance of hierarchical multistability. The
central hypothesis is that long-range effects in the strain field develop
compliant deformation modes in the metastructure due to local distortions
introduced from changes of state at the unit scale. Building on this hypothesis
and departing from considering nearest-neighbor coupling, this research aims to
derive long-range interaction models between unit cells. The characteristics of
hierarchical multistability opens novel avenues for designing programmable
structures that couple sensing, computation and property adaptation. The
resulting metastructures are relevant to the aerospace, biomedical and robotic
industries. Furthermore, the results from this effort are leveraged to develop
an educational plan to encourage multidisciplinary STEM education and research
by: 1) offering multidisciplinary design experiences partnering with Purdue
University’s EPICS program; and 2) establishing pedagogical strategies for
teaching courses with multidisciplinary content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.