* 1944142
* CAREER: Enabling Operational Resilience in Decentralized Electric Power Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Anamika Dubey, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,638.00

The staggering cost of power system outages due to natural disasters, an
estimated $18-33 billion per year, and its adverse effects on personal safety
and security due to extended loss of critical services call for improving
resilience in the electric power grid to extreme weather events. The need for
resilience is particularly critical for the aging mid- and low-voltage power
distribution systems, responsible for an estimated 90% of the outages. This
CAREER project proposes a transformative approach to manage disruptions and
improve the operational resilience of the distribution systems by leveraging
upon the recent smart grid advances. The proposed innovations add the required
flexibility for island formation and bottom-up restoration using distributed
energy resources (DERs) and enhanced distribution automation capabilities, thus,
allowing for a faster recovery of critical services during a natural disaster. A
successful completion of this project will: 1) improve public safety and reduce
the cost of natural disasters to US economy using automated and distributed
solutions for resilience, 2) help develop new standards to tap into the
potential for growing levels of DER penetrations for grid resilience, and 3)
encourage DER integration and help reduce US carbon footprint by setting new
value propositions for DER technology. The models and results of this effort can
be potentially extended to other critical infrastructures. An equally important
component of this project focuses on addressing the critical need for a skilled,
interdisciplinary, and inclusive workforce to support the future power
distribution grid with the help of a well-integrated education plan. This is
accomplished through innovative classroom and online courses on power
distribution systems, introducing undergraduate students and underrepresented
minority students to challenging interdisciplinary problems, and targeted
outreach to high-school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this CAREER project is to realize the full potential of the emerging
distribution grid to manage rarely occurring disruptions that are high-impact
low-probability (HILP) events by decentralization of infrastructure and
operations. The core idea is that enhanced resilience will be attained through
innovations in employing DERs for islanded operation and allowing distributed
decision-making during a disaster situation. The project goals are achieved by
(1) strategic resource planning to enhance the ability to restore critical
services using DERs; (2) distributed decision-making for DER-driven service
restoration that allows for a faster service recovery during a disaster; and (3)
characterizing graph-theoretic and algebraic conditions that relate to the
small-signal stability of DER energized islands and their design parameters;
these conditions are used to guide service restoration process such that the
restored islands are not only operationally feasible but also stable. The
novelty of our approach stems from a closely interwoven planning and operational
framework that prioritizes the use of DERs to enable new and transformative ways
of operating the power distribution grid during disruptions. Theoretical
contributions are expected on the characterization of HILP events towards
resilience and risk-averse planning methods; distributed optimization methods
for a combinatorial, non-convex, and large-scale problem for service
restoration; the analytical characterization of network-level properties for a
lossy DER energized island that relates to its small-signal stability; and
implications of structural properties and design parameters on the stability of
low-inertia systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.