* 1944678
* CAREER: Machine-Learning Assisted Process Systems Engineering: Hybrid modeling for process optimization, design and synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Fani Boukouvala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2025
* USD 432,495.00

Process Systems Engineering (PSE) has historically been advanced by using
physics-based mathematical models and computer algorithms to design, optimize
and control complex systems. Recent advances in the broad field of Data Science
and Artificial Intelligence have led to a series of breakthroughs in the
development of Machine Learning (ML) tools that can be used to derive
mathematical models from large data sets. However, ML-based models can be
limited in their ability to give insight into the physical origins of the
systemâ€™s behavior and can result in poor predictions outside of the range of the
original data set used to create the model. This CAREER project aims to develop
hybrid modeling approaches that preserve what we already know about system
behavior to make data-driven ML models more reliable leading to more accurate
medical diagnoses, smarter autonomous vehicles, and safer chemical plants.
Curriculum development activities are proposed aimed at introducing data science
concepts into Chemical Engineering courses and high school statistics classes.
Proposed outreach activities are aimed at increasing the number of female
engineers in the field of PSE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed methodology
aims at developing algorithms that will enable the simultaneous training of
modern ML models (i.e., Neural Networks and Gaussian Process Models) with
physical constraints that are derived from discretization of first-principles
based models. The proposed research will involve a systematic study of pre-
processing and integration of data, identification of low-dimensional
descriptive feature spaces, hybridization of ML models with first-principles
based models and quantification of the uncertainty of hybrid model predictions.
The specific research aims are: (1) Theoretically advancing mathematical
techniques for training nonparametric ML models to satisfy first-principles
based model predictions (hybrid modeling); (2) Quantification of the uncertainty
of hybrid models in the presence of noisy and incomplete data sets; (3)
Algorithmic development for mixed-integer nonlinear optimization problems for
design and synthesis with embedded hybrid models. A series of case studies that
include production of pharmaceuticals, polymers and chemicals will be used to
develop a benchmarking library for testing various hybrid modeling
architectures. The design and optimization of bioprocesses will be studied using
hybrid modeling to connect gene-level control to macroscale process
optimization. A set of hybrid modeling and optimization teaching modules,
suitable for incorporation within existing core courses of the Chemical
Engineering curriculum, will be developed and broadly disseminated. Outreach
activities are proposed that are aimed at introducing data-driven decision-
making to high-school students through statistics classes and increasing gender
diversity in the field of PSE. A high-school teacher will be hosted by the
Principal Investigator in collaboration with the Center for Education
Integrating Science, Mathematics, and Computing (CEISMC)at Georgia Tech and the
Georgia Intern Fellowships for Teachers (GIFT) program, which provides paid
summer STEM internships in industry workplaces and University laboratories for
K-12 science, mathematics, and technology teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.