* 1944823
* CAREER: Commercial Building Indoor Greenery Systems' Effects on Thermal Environment and Occupant Comfort under Climate Change
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Liping Wang, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2025
* USD 433,139.00

1944823 (Wang). This research will quantify the contribution of indoor greenery
systems to building energy efficiency. Indoor living wall systems are becoming
increasingly popular in modern commercial buildings, and this research will
create a model to simulate the thermal interactions between indoor greenery
systems and the local environment, where evapotranspiration from indoor living
plants plays an important role. The research will quantify the effects of indoor
greenery systems on building energy consumption and the effects of leaf-to-floor
area ratio and evapotranspiration on occupant thermal
comfort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the research objectives, the PI will
create first a thermal model for indoor greenery systems that predicts
evapotranspiration rates and the thermal interactions with the indoor
environment and validate the model based on measurements from lab experiments.
Second, the PI will identify the relationship between thermal comfort and leaf-
to-floor area ratio and evapotranspiration for spaces with indoor greenery
systems through thermal comfort experiments. Third, the PI will quantify the
influence of indoor greenery systems on building performance through a coupled
modeling approach that combines building energy simulation and indoor greenery
system models. The knowledge gained is targeted to form the scientific
foundation of design guidance for architects, interior designers, and engineers
on indoor greenery systems and promote the integration of indoor greenery with
HVAC systems for energy efficiency in future buildings. The developed thermal
model for indoor greenery systems and the integrated modeling approach may
contribute to other domains, such as vertical farming and horticulture. The
research topics will be incorporated into curricula for middle/high school and
university students through hands-on activities, experiments, and design
competitions. The PI will develop a web-based design tool for undergraduate
students to perform integrated energy simulations for buildings with indoor
greenery systems. By hosting summer camps for middle/high school students and
teachers, the project will have a direct impact on education for approximately
1,000 students. The higher education activities through thermal comfort
experiments, the web-based design tool, and design competitions for indoor
greenery systems will engage 300 university students. In turn, research can
benefit from these educational activities and industry partners’ feedback based
on periodic updates of the project. The results generated from this project will
be disseminated through journal publications, the PI’s group website, national
and state conferences, the Society of Building Science Educators, and the
American Institute of Architects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the CBET Environmental Sustainability program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.