* 1944602
* CAREER: Body-Wire: Transforming Healthcare using Secure Human Body Connected Intelligent Nodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Shreyas Sen, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/28/2025
* USD 388,635.00

Continually rising cost of healthcare and side-effects of drugs, such as opioid
addiction, could be reduced through remote health monitoring systems and closed-
loop electroceuticals, which rely on large amount of data continuously traveling
around human body from low-energy wearable and implantable sensors to an on-body
hub then to the cloud. Today's standard technologies rely on electromagnetic
wave for communication around the human body, which is not physically secure and
consume orders of magnitude more power than needed by a typical sensor node,
making the communication link the energy bottleneck for ultra-low-power body
sensor nodes. This research project will lead to a fundamentally new way of
thinking about using human body as a "wire" to achieve orders of magnitude lower
energy used for communication around the human body while being physically
secure (i.e., signals cannot be snooped without physical contact). In addition,
this project will use edge-analytics to reduce data volume for efficient Human-
Intranet smart sensor nodes. The project will develop the fundamental
understanding for designing the smallest (less than one cubic millimeter) body-
connected node for connected healthcare. With simulation tools and hardware
verification, backed by concrete mathematical model development, this work will
open new research directions in Human-Intranet for Healthcare, Human-Computer
Interaction and Brain-Machine Interfaces. The outcome of this research will be
integrated with undergraduate and graduate courses on Digital Design and Mixed-
Signal Design. Mathematical models representing circuit/system level information
and energy trade-off will be disseminated through research website. Such
experimentally verified models are expected to provide significant impact by
serving a broad community of students, researchers, and engineers. Educational
prototypes of the research will be used to engage students in educational
workshops. The strong engagement through undergraduate research mentorship and
minority student mentorship will strengthen the interest of science and
technology from underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to transform data communication around the human body by
using the human body as a wire to achieve orders of magnitude reduction in
communication energy in the body area network and combining it with in-sensor
analytics to reduce data volume without significant reduction in information to
further improve energy/information efficiency. The project will develop the
foundations of energy-efficient and physically secured network of energy-sparse
sensor nodes for Human-Intranet. The research exploits the low-loss human body
channel itself to power the sensor, perform edge-analytics to compress the data
and extract information before transferring the compressed data using the same
low-loss human body channel. The body-wire research is expected to solve the
problem of high data traffic by achieving &gt;1000x reduction in
energy/information, allowing longer-lasting, smarter, smaller (new form-factors,
better patient compliance), and lower cost healthcare. The energy reduction and
improved physical security (in addition to encryption) will open possibilities
of many new sensor nodes with new form factors (e.g., connected patch) for
human-centered healthcare networks. Along with developing bio-physical circuit
models for human body as a communication medium, optimized transceiver circuits
and systems for lossy broadband electro-quasistatic human body channel will be
developed and demonstrated through integrated circuit fabrication and
measurement. A system-on-chip with sensing, in-sensor analytics, and human-body-
communication transceiver will be designed, fabricated, and measured to
demonstrate the end-to-end improvement in energy/information efficiency. The
project will develop mathematical models verified by experiments for future
design space exploration and information/energy analysis for Human-Intranet. If
successful, the project will develop the fundamental understanding of designing
the smallest body-connected node for connected
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.