* 1944635
* CAREER: Spin-Magnon based Hybrid Quantum Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Pramey Upadhyaya, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum systems show fascinating counterintuitive properties of superposition,
i.e. the ability to be simultaneously in multiple states, and entanglement, i.e.
the ability to develop long-distance many-body correlations. These properties
present opportunities to build quantum technology, such as sensing,
communication and information processing, with capabilities not achievable in
the classical domain. In recent years motivated by this promise, tremendous
progress has been achieved to engineer and control a variety of individual
quantum systems. Among these, spin defects in insulating materials, i.e.
microscopic spin quantum bits (qubits) are particularly promising. Spin
interacts with the environment through their magnetic dipole moments: a fact
utilized for quantum sensing of magnetic fields with unprecedented spatial
resolution and sensitivity. On the other hand, the environment in typical
materials hosting spin qubits produces weak magnetic fields, consequently the
quantum states encoded in the spin qubits survive for long times, a fact that
makes spin qubits attractive candidates for quantum memory and information
processing. The next frontier aims at scaling the functionality of spin-based
quantum hardware, which includes developing the ability of spin qubits to:(i)
sense signals beyond magnetic fields for developing novel quantum sensors, and
(ii) controllably interact beyond few proximally-placed spin qubits while
retaining individual addressability, for quantum information processing. This
has however proved challenging due to the lack of a mediator which can
controllably and strongly couple to spin qubits as well as to a wide range of
external signals. In this project, the principle investigator will exploit
magnons (i.e. the collective excitations in magnets), as a fundamentally novel
mediator to address this challenge. In tight integration with research, the
principal investigator will also develop a quantum engineering course for
training undergraduate, graduate and industry professionals for enhancing the
United States quantum-smart workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research aims at unraveling novel magnon spin-qubit hybrid devices by
integrating theory with proof-of-principle experiments. In particular, the
principal investigator will pursue the following device types. (a) Sensing-type
devices- the central aim of these devices will be to enhance sensing capability
of spin qubits for signals, such as, electric fields, temperature. This will be
achieved by using magnons as transducers of external signals to a magnetic
signal. (b) Information processing-type devices- the central aim of these
devices will be to address the challenge of designing a scalable information-
processing architecture for spin qubits, where qubits can be coherently coupled
across varied length scales while maintaining local addressability. For this
purpose, theoretical schemes and proof-of-principle experiments will be
demonstrated for coherently coupling classical signals to spin qubits locally
via electrical pumping of designed magnon resonance modes. In addition, schemes
will be developed for transferring information between spin-qubits and magnons
in the quantum regime by designing the magnetic resonance modes. To achieve
above goals, the principal investigator will translate the well-established
design principles for photon/phonon-qubit hybrids (i.e. cavity and circuit
quantum electrodynamics) to the proposed magnon-spin-qubit systems. Beyond these
similarities, magnons also offer unique capabilities, such as condensation into
superfluid-like, as well as, soliton-like modes, and inherent chiral
propagation. The proposed research is thus expected to uncover fundamentally new
device concepts unique to magnonic system, such as unidirectional chiral spin-
spin coupling. Exploring such device concepts theoretically will also form an
integral part of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.