* 1944180
* CAREER: Computational modeling to predict subject-specific osteoarthritis risk and facilitate treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Clare Fitzpatrick, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2025
* USD 563,139.00

Osteoarthritis is a costly and widespread degenerative condition with no cure –
more than one third of the population over age 65 will suffer from this disease.
The goal of this research project is to develop a holistic understanding of the
factors that contribute to osteoarthritis onset and progression. Knowledge
resulting from this study will enable personalized osteoarthritis risk
predictions and assist clinicians in developing custom treatment plans to best
prevent or slow the disease on a patient-specific basis. An integrated education
and outreach plan will build technical communication skills within engineering
student populations in Idaho, while simultaneously improving computational
literacy in trainee clinicians and encouraging local elementary and high school
students to engage in science, technology, engineering and
math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project, jointly managed by the
Disability and Rehabilitation Engineering Program (DARE) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), aims to develop a
computational framework with the potential to transform patient-specific
diagnosis and treatment decisions about osteoarthritis. The results of this
research will advance scientific understanding of the primary structural,
biological, and mechanical predictors of osteoarthritis onset and progression.
Preventing or reducing osteoarthritis progression would have significant impacts
on patients and on the healthcare system. Currently, there is no holistic
framework for understanding osteoarthritis disease mechanisms. To address this
need, the PI will build an analytical, data-driven framework to determine how
multivariate factors contribute to osteoarthritis risk. The research objectives
of this proposal are to (1) develop automated algorithms for rapid generation of
subject-specific finite element knee models from medical images, (2) develop a
statistical shape-function model for real-time prediction of knee joint
mechanics, (3) determine the primary structural, biological, and mechanical
predictors of osteoarthritis progression, and (4) develop an interactive
computational platform to predict the longitudinal progression of knee
osteoarthritis. This work promises the potential for transformative subject-
specific diagnosis and treatment and illustrates the insight researchers across
many domains can gain by combining computational tools with high-volume data
from large-scale databases or probabilistic and statistical
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.