* 1944796
* CAREER: Probing Chemistry of Surface-Supported Nanostructures at the Angstrom-Scale
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Nan Jiang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2025
* USD 708,131.00

Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) technology was invented nearly 40 years ago.
STM produced the first images of single atoms on a surface. Around the same
time, it was discovered that light signals emitted from a vibrating molecule
could be amplified more than a million times if the molecule was on the tip of a
nanometer-scale metal tip. In this project funded by the Chemical Structure
Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Nan Jiang of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois at
Chicago is developing a state-of-the-art technique that combines scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) with tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) to study
bond stretching in an individual molecule with angstrom-scale spatial resolution
(an angstrom is one hundred millionths of a centimeter). Using his TERS
technique, Professor Jiang and his students study how individual molecules align
relative to each other on surfaces. The Jiang research group seeks to uncover
the details of how single molecules interact with surfaces. This research may
ultimately provide fundamental knowledge that will able the control of surface-
supported molecular structures and reactions. As part of this CAREER project,
Professor Jiang and his group are bringing the excitement of chemistry research
opportunities to community college and local high school students by offering
them hands-on research experience in physical chemistry at the single molecule
level. Dr. Jiang improves the participation of undergraduate students in
experimental chemistry research by establishing a One-Week Physical Chemistry
Workshop at UIC. In this workshop, Chicago City Colleges students from diverse
backgrounds are exposed to scientific career paths. Dr. Jiang's group provides
handheld Raman equipment to community college students in the Chicago area with
online training materials and data analysis procedures. This sharing of
equipment and data enriches the general chemistry laboratory
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on interrogating the
mechanisms of forming and breaking chemical bonds at the angstrom-scale in
various chemical environments using novel approaches. The combination of STM
imaging with the detailed chemical information provided by Raman spectroscopy
allows the interactions between organic adsorbates and specific binding sites on
solid surfaces to be probed with spatial and spectroscopic resolution.
Furthermore, Raman one-dimensional (1D) line profiles and two-dimensional (2D)
mapping achieved with angstrom-scale spatial resolution provide the location of
these vibrational modes on the surface, and hence, define the interactions
between these molecules and specific binding sites. Detailed mechanistic studies
of the elementary steps of surface-supported structure formation are expected to
lead to improvements in designing new atom- and energy-efficient materials and
molecular assemblies with tailored chemical properties. The students engaged in
this research and education project gain valuable experience in both scanning
microscopy and optical spectroscopy, as well as quantum mechanics theory
calculations which aid in the interpretation of experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.