* 1944329
* CAREER: Estimating and Addressing Disaster Survivors' Unmet Needs: A Social Vulnerability and Social Infrastructure Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Michelle Meyer, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 598,384.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will further the
understanding of how communities can effectively leverage philanthropic
resources to meet housing-recovery needs after disasters. As disaster costs and
disaster displacement increase, governmental assistance to individuals and
private insurance often are inadequate to ensure full recovery for all affected
people. Philanthropic resources can address unmet needs of disaster survivors if
used effectively and efficiently. Locally led nonprofit “long-term recovery
groups” are often charged with distributing these resources, but little is known
about these organizations’ efforts or what makes their operations more or less
effective in promoting community recovery and resilience. This project will
assess how philanthropic housing-recovery practices affect individual unmet
needs, post-disaster equity, and the overarching philanthropic ecosystem of
affected communities. This project will use the research results to inform and
test a training program for locally based nonprofits, government officials, and
foundations that will improve their effectiveness in managing philanthropic
resources for disaster recovery. Educational outcomes also include undergraduate
research experiences to foster under-represented student engagement in STEM and
graduate student internships coordinated with disaster recovery nonprofits to
further their data management skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds
on past research into nonprofit operations and housing recovery, introducing a
new approach that integrates both. Recent research indicates that governmental
aid processes correlate with increased economic and racial inequality after
disasters. At the same time, social “infrastructure”, like local nonprofits and
especially long-term recovery groups, provide recovery support to socially
vulnerable populations who often have difficulty accessing governmental disaster
aid. Yet, philanthropic response to disaster is understudied. This is the first
attempt to quantify long-term recovery groups’ effectiveness and to identify the
factors that increase their effectiveness in supporting housing recovery across
the United States. The project work will include the development and analysis of
a new dataset of nonprofit disaster recovery operations using secondary and
primary data from recent disasters. While focused on long-term recovery groups,
the findings from this work will have implications for non-disaster situations.
The project will increase understanding of how practices undertaken in disaster
situations can be institutionalized into organizations, thus addressing how
sudden change in mission and capacity affects organizational operations. The
research findings will also point to how disaster resilience can be integrated
into daily operations of all types of nonprofits and how resilience affects
their overarching operation and mission. Further, this work will evaluate the
effects of philanthropic response to disasters on a community’s broader
philanthropic safety net.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.