* 1944725
* CAREER: Interactions between 2D particles at fluid-fluid interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Joseph Samaniuk, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2025
* USD 534,044.00

Two-dimensional (2D) materials have properties that are unique because they are
atomically thin. Properties such as electrical conductivity, mechanical
strength, and optical transparency can be significantly enhanced in these
materials compared with their “bulk” material counterparts. There is a growing
list of 2D materials, the most common examples being graphene, molybdenum
disulfide (MoS2), and hexagonal boron-nitride (h-BN). These materials and others
are used in a wide range of consumer products including electronic devices and
composite materials. One of the challenges of utilizing 2D materials is their
fabrication, which is often accomplished by assembling a collection of 2D
particles at the microscopic scale to create a larger material with the desired
properties. This project will help understand how 2D particles interact with
each other when confined to a fluid-fluid interface, a type of confinement that
can be used to assemble 2D particles “edge-to-edge”. The project will also
develop techniques for fabricating model 2D particles of controlled size and
shape, which will advance the experimental work needed to understand these
systems. Results from the project will provide fundamental insight about the
interactions of 2D particles that scientists and engineers can use to process 2D
particles into advanced films, coatings, and composites. In addition, the
project team will work with the Summer Multicultural Engineering Training
Program (SUMMET) at the Colorado School of Mines to introduce high school
seniors to opportunities in undergraduate research. The goal is to increase
awareness of undergraduate research as an opportunity available to these
traditionally underrepresented students in science and engineering, and
ultimately to encourage their participation in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction potential
between 2D particles of controlled size, shape, and thickness at air-water
interfaces will be measured from direct observation of particle trajectories and
particle assemblies. The model 2D particles will be fabricated in-house using
photolithography to selectively pattern 2D material films grown via chemical
vapor deposition on copper foil. The foil will be placed at the fluid-fluid
interface and removed with etchant solution in a sub-phase exchange cell, and
the remaining particles will be visualized with interference reflection
microscopy. Contact line undulations around particles will be probed with
various forms of gel trapping in conjunction with electron microscopy to
understand the nature of capillary forces on the particle-particle interactions.
The influence of particle-particle interactions on the macroscopic film
structure and strength will be investigated with interfacial rheological tools.
The overall goal of the project is to understand the nature of the interactions
between 2D particles confined to a fluid-fluid interface, and in particular how
the low-dimensional morphology of 2D particles plays a
role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.