* 1944802
* CAREER: Making a Difference in First Generation and Underrepresented Students' Education through Research: Quantum Coherence in a Bose Thermal Gas
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Hyewon Pechkis, Chico State Enterprises
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 04/30/2025
* USD 394,141.00

Cold atomic gases are promising candidates for applications in quantum computing
and precision sensors, owing to their wave-like, coherent nature exhibited at
low temperatures. Fully-coherent samples, so-called “quantum gases”, are
achieved when cooled to near absolute zero, but this is technically challenging.
Recent work, though, has demonstrated that internal quantum coherence can
persist even in thermal gases whose temperatures are well above those required
to create a quantum gas. The first goal of this project is to determine the
limiting conditions for which quantum coherence is preserved in these thermal
gases. As such, it will probe the boundary between the classical and quantum
regimes and may aid in the development of low-cost quantum technologies. The
second goal is to investigate such a gas as it transitions from a thermal cloud
to a quantum gas. Depending on the conditions of the experiment, the quantum
properties can be either suppressed or enhanced, affecting the complexity of
computations and the precision of measurements. The third goal of this project
is to integrate quantum science research into undergraduate education. If
successful, this will provide a model to make quantum science research more
accessible to undergraduate-only institutions, providing enhanced learning
opportunities to underrepresented groups in physics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
experimental research program will measure ultracold atomic spinor gases with
three main goals. The first goal of the project is to determine the maximum
temperature for a Bose thermal gas to exhibit coherent spin-changing collisions.
All-optical trapping of spinor gases will be utilized to probe the spinor
dynamics of samples as a function of temperature. A thermal gas will be
coherently prepared with the desired initial spin state, and the resulting
population oscillations will be measured through absorption imaging of the
magnetic sublevels. Second, the project will investigate coherent spin-changing
collisions in the temperature regime as a thermal gas transitions to a Bose-
Einstein condensate. Although the limiting cases are well-understood, there is
currently no theoretical model to describe this intermediate regime. It has been
argued that spin-locking between the thermal and Bose-condensed components, for
example, can lead to either an enhancement or suppression of the coherence of
the thermal cloud. The loss of coherence limits the complexity of computation in
quantum information systems and the precision of measurements. Experimental
studies will provide needed measurements to develop accurate theoretical models.
Third, the project will integrate education and research in quantum physics with
reduced technical requirements suitable for primarily undergraduate
institutions, providing enhanced learning opportunities for underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.