* 1944068
* CAREER: Integrative Resource Optimization Framework for Large-scale Drone Delivery Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Yanchao Liu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the advancement of national prosperity and economic welfare by promoting safe,
efficient and equitable use of low-altitude airspace for drone delivery
operations. Drone delivery has the potential to reduce last-mile delivery time
from hours to minutes and eliminate billions of individual trips that are
otherwise unsafe, polluting and wasteful. However, safety and scalability
challenges exist that currently impede commercial deployment at scale. This
award supports research toward a fundamental understanding of how diverse
resources can be managed to enable efficient city-scale drone delivery services.
The design and operational challenges include optimal location of depots and
rally points, capacity planning, fleet management, and dynamic vehicle routing
under battery, traffic, and weather constraints. The research will support
integration of aerial vehicle logistics, vehicle onboard intelligence, and air
traffic management. The education program aims to generate new curricula, train
new STEM talent and inspire new entrepreneurs in a new field at the intersection
of aviation, robotics and operations research. The education program will also
create undergraduate research opportunities, particularly for under-represented
minorities in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce a general,
optimization-based framework for modeling complex decision-making processes in
aerial logistics operations, as well as new algorithms for solving problems
modeled in such a framework. Three safety-critical resources, including ground
stations, batteries, and the airspace, will be studied comprehensively and
modeled holistically: the location and configuration of ground stations are
informed by a suite of battery power prediction models, and in turn, determine
the feasible paths of drones and hence the optimal dynamic allocation of
airspace corridors. The research will develop (1) decomposable mathematical
programs to tackle robust network design and continuous location problems, (2)
new algorithms that combine evolutionary computing with convex optimization for
solving nonlinear combinatorial problems, (3) a new framework for modeling
stochastic multi-agent systems based on innovative extensions of Markov decision
processes, and (4) improved algorithms for in-flight battery power management.
The research approach integrates theoretical developments with practical
implementation and is heavily informed by commercial application potential.
Software apps will be developed and flight trials will be conducted to deliver
practical relevance and impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.