* 1944957
* CAREER: Coherent Phonon Control in Iron-Based Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Wanzheng Hu, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 501,612.00

Nontechnical Abstract: High-temperature superconductivity is a remarkable
phenomenon found in quantum materials. To understand and control
superconductivity is the key to next-generation devices to handle information or
harvest energy. The physical properties of high-temperature superconductors are
extremely sensitive to their crystal structures. Tailored laser pulses can
selectively control structural features which are crucial for materials
properties. In certain cases, laser excitation can create crystal structures
hosting novel functionalities which are impossible to achieve by other methods.
This research uses tailored laser pulses to optically engineer the structure of
iron-based superconductors. The goal is to advance our knowledge on the relation
between crystal structure and high-temperature superconductivity, and to
identify the most efficient knob to control superconductivity. This project also
includes broad education and outreach programs for female graduate students in
physics, local female high school students, and K-12 students. These activities
aim at inspiring excitement about experimental physics, and helping students to
recognize opportunities for future education and academic careers in materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Controlling the physical
properties of quantum materials along non-invasive and ultrafast pathways is the
key for developing next-generation devices. Small structural perturbations
created by laser excitation of phonons can directly and selectively modify
structural parameters which are crucial to the physical properties of quantum
materials. This project aims at optically investigate and manipulate
superconductivity and competing orders in iron-based superconductors by
modulating the iron-arsenic/selenium distance. The project uses long-wavelength
laser excitation directly targets lattice modes which control the iron-
arsenic/selenium distance to realize novel phases which do not exist at
equilibrium. A desirable outcome of this approach is stabilizing transient
superconductivity at high temperatures. This research will advance our knowledge
on the relevant degrees of freedom that can be tuned, and novel and exotic
phases which can be generated by coherent terahertz fields. The methods used for
iron-based superconductors can be applied to a broad category of materials
including cuprates, ferroelectrics and multiferroics to identify the most
efficient knob to steer quantum materials to desired phases. The research also
has industry impacts on the development of next-generation optoelectronic
devices, such as superconducting devices which can be optically engineered using
coherent terahertz radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.