* 1944552
* CAREER: Investigating the source, transport and deposition of economically important metals in the lower continental crust
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Marek Locmelis, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2025
* USD 546,648.00

Metals are critical components of modern society. Aside from recycling, metals
are recovered from ore deposits such as magmatic sulfide systems that often
formed close to the surface and thus provide relatively easy access to metals
like nickel and copper. Because ore deposits are non-renewable, we must find (at
least) one new deposit for each exhausted resource to guarantee a steady metal
supply in the future. Currently, mineral exploration efforts focus mostly on the
upper crust because this approach has worked well over the past century.
However, a recent decline in new discoveries implies that most of the deposits
near the surface have already been found. Consequently, the opening of search
space deeper in the Earth is necessary to guarantee a steady metal supply. This
project will address this issue by investigating the formation of a series of
variably metasomatized magmatic sulfide deposits in the Ivrea-Verbano Zone in
Italy. These deposits formed in the deep crust and were tectonically uplifted to
mineable levels. Although the deposits were previously mined for nickel and
copper, surprisingly little is known about how they (and similar deposits
elsewhere) originally formed. This project will use the deposits in the Ivrea-
Verbano Zone to better constrain how and where such deposits preferentially
form, particularly focusing on the role of mantle metasomatism in deep crustal
ore formation. The findings will provide an important step toward including such
deposits in future exploration models. The research will be integrated with an
educational component that will reach K-12, undergraduate and graduate students.
A high school outreach program in collaboration with Project Lead The Way will
use examples from this project to highlight geoscience career paths that K-12
students may initially not be aware of, particularly in rural Missouri. The PI
will also incorporate aspects of the proposed research into a summer training
program for undergraduate students to help students prepare for a post-
baccalaureate geoscience career. Furthermore, two graduate students will be
actively involved in the research component. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ivrea-
Verbano Zone is a well-preserved cross section of the subcontinental
lithospheric mantle and lower continental crust that outcrops subvertically and
therefore allows for comprehensive studies of deep lithospheric mass transfer.
Previous studies on the Ivrea-Verbano Zone have significantly contributed to our
understanding of the lower continental lithosphere. However, research that
focuses on the source of metalliferous hydrous melts/fluids, and their role in
the transport and local deposition of metals (i.e., ore deposits) is rare. To
address this knowledge gap, this project will investigate different localities
in the Ivrea-Verbano Zone that represent variable degrees of metasomatism and
sulfide mineralization: (1) strongly metasomatized / highly mineralized pipes,
(2) un-metasomatized / moderately mineralized sills/intrusions, and (3) a
strongly metasomatized / sulfide-poor mantle peridotite. Field studies will be
integrated with petrographic observations, bulk rock, mineral and fluid
inclusion analyses, isotopic (Cu, Sm-Nd) and geochronological studies. The
proposed research will provide new insight into (1) the physical and chemical
processes that produce, transport and concentrate fluids and metals in the deep
lithosphere; and (2) the spatial and temporal scales of such processes. The PI
is actively recruiting K-12 teachers, undergraduate and graduate students to be
involved in this project. The goal of the K-12 outreach program is to raise
awareness for geoscience disciplines and to encourage students to consider
geoscience or other STEM career paths. Undergraduate and graduate student
projects will be individually tailored to prepare each student for a career path
of their choosing in academia, federal/state agencies, or the private
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.