* 1944680
* CAREER: Cathode Materials for Aluminum Batteries: Understanding Factors Influencing Al Ion Intercalation into MXenes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Majid Beidaghi, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2025
* USD 544,586.00

Advanced batteries for vehicle transport and renewable electricity grid storage
applications could improve domestic energy security but performance gaps and
cost limit use. In addition, it is desirable to use earth abundant and
domestically plentiful resources for these new battery chemistries. This CAREER
project will conduct fundamental research on advanced battery chemistries and
battery components that have the potential for greater energy density and
cycling performance while operating safely. Among the considered options,
rechargeable Aluminum batteries (Al-batteries) are appealing as aluminum is
lightweight and abundant. Aluminum has low flammability and and can be easily
handled in the air for simpler battery fabrication techniques. Furthermore, Al
ions are trivalent, and this property can be potentially harnessed for higher
energy density. The main technology challenge of Al-batteries is finding cathode
materials that can reversibly store Al ions. This project addresses this crucial
problem by providing a fundamental understanding of the properties of a new
class of layered and two-dimensional (2D) materials, called MXenes, as cathode
materials for Al-batteries. The research efforts in this project are focused on
understanding factors that influence the kinetics and thermodynamics of Al ion
intercalation into the structure of several MXene compositions. The fundamental
knowledge gained through this project will enable the design of an entirely new
family of cathode materials for Al-batteries. This project also includes
outreach and educational activities that are designed for middle and high school
students in Southeastern Alabama to succeed in science and engineering fair
competitions. Educational modules focused on defining and performing science
fair projects will be developed and disseminated to local schools through
teacher training workshops. In addition, the educational plan utilizes "science
and engineering as art" projects to foster creativity in science communication
and dissemination of scientific concepts and discoveries among undergraduate and
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project addresses the need
for battery chemistries beyond Li-ion, and its expected outcomes will enable a
rational design of cathode materials for Al-batteries. There are three research
objectives in the project. Objective 1 involves elucidating the role of
composition and surface chemistry on the charge transfer kinetics and Al ion
transport properties of MXenes. M2CTx MXenes (where M is Ti, V, Cr, or Mo, C is
carbon, and Tx represents surface functional groups O, F, or OH) will be
synthesized and used to study the dependence of Al ions intercalation on the
interfacial and structural properties of the cathode. Objective 2 involves
studying the effects of nanoconfined interlayer water on the intercalation of Al
ions into MXene structures. The main focus of research under this objective is
to gain a mechanistic understanding of Al ion transport into MXenes with
nanoconfined interlayer water and investigate the structural and electrochemical
stability of hydrated cathode materials. The final Objective 3 involves
understanding the effects of cation pre-intercalation on the properties of MXene
cathodes and establishing the principles of designing multilayered and
heterolayered MXene cathodes through a cation-induced assembly process. The
research under this objective seeks transformative advances in designing
aluminum battery cathode materials with controlled interlayer environments and
efficient electronic and ionic transport pathways. The insight obtained through
studying each factor will be connected into a cohesive picture of charge
transfer and Al ion transport in the structure of
MXenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.