* 1944412
* CAREER: Gravitational Wave Discovery Space
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Joey Key, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 11/30/2024
* USD 420,270.00

We have learned from the history of astronomy to expect the unexpected when
opening a new window with which to observe our universe. In order to maximize
the discovery potential for the new field of gravitational wave astronomy, we
need to make progress in our data analysis methods to identify and characterize
gravitational wave signals. This project supports research in critical areas of
gravitational wave data analysis for the LIGO, NANOGrav, and LISA collaborations
while training undergraduate students who are typically underrepresented in the
fields of physics and astronomy in gravitational wave astronomy research methods
and science communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives
for this project are to develop Bayesian data analysis methods for astrophysical
searches for LIGO, NANOGrav, and LISA. By coordinating and combining analyses
across the full gravitational wave spectrum, ranging over 12 decades in
frequency, this project will accomplish science beyond what could be done in any
individual band alone. LIGO: development of a Bayesian search for gravitational
wave signals from cosmic string cusps, detector characterization and instrument
noise studies including optimization of data analysis for the full network of
ground based gravitational wave observatories, and a comprehensive data analysis
method for detecting and characterizing unexpected gravitational wave signals.
NANOGrav: apply Bayesian analysis methods developed for LIGO data analysis to
NANOGrav searches including noise and signal modeling. LISA: application of
Bayesian analysis methods to optimize the science capabilities and discovery
potential for the LISA mission including Extreme Mass Ratio Inspiral (EMRI)
signals. The PI provides opportunities for students at a primarily undergraduate
institution who are traditionally underrepresented in physics and astronomy to
engage in forefront scientific research and outreach programs. The breadth of
potential research projects for undergraduate students is critical for the
educational experience, with interdisciplinary research teams supported through
peer mentoring and student leadership roles. Student educational experiences
will be assessed to inform and evaluate the undergraduate research and outreach
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.