* 1944826
* CAREER: Searching for Dark Sectors from Earth to Sky
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Chiu-Tien Yu, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 325,000.00

This CAREER award funds the research activities of Professor Tien-Tien Yu at the
University of Oregon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After many years of increasingly
compelling observational evidence, scientists have come to believe that most of
the matter in the Universe is unlike the ordinary matter that we see and
interact with every day. This matter is called “dark matter” as it cannot be
observed directly. Instead, the existence of dark matter is deduced through its
gravitational effects on astrophysical objects such as stars and galaxies, which
hints that it could be either a new type of particle or several different types
of particles that together comprise a dark sector. The fact that dark matter
interacts gravitationally suggests that it has a mass, but the range of possible
dark-matter masses is unknown. In recent years, research has facilitated an
explosion of ideas and experimental efforts aimed at searching for dark-sector
candidates across a wide range of masses. In anticipation of the plethora of
data and potential discoveries that will be enabled by these experimental
efforts, Professor Yu will conduct an original research program focused on
searching for and understanding a wide range of dark-sector theories in which
she will elucidate the possible interpretations of a putative experimental
signal. Research on dark-sector physics advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
discovery and understanding of new physical law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, Professor Yu will unravel the dependence of dark-matter direct-
detection rates on astrophysical uncertainties by applying a variety of
different astrophysical models to dark matter-electron scattering calculations.
In addition, she will develop a framework for presenting dark matter-electron
scattering rates in a manner that is independent of the underlying astrophysical
model, thereby circumventing the limitations on interpretation set by
astrophysical uncertainties. She will also uncover the potential of sub-GeV dark
matter experiments by exploring the signatures of a broad range of theoretical
models. Her work will allow for more robust interpretations of the experimental
data and provide the foundational research for potential transformative
discoveries. She will also explore in more detail the interplay between dark
matter and gravitational waves, starting with a thorough calculation of neutron-
star superradiance. This project is also envisioned to have significant broader
impacts. Professor Yu will integrate her research and educational goals by
developing a unique scientific communication program that aims to increase the
accessibility of complex physics concepts through visual media. Comics and
visual media provide a unique and accessible format to engage diverse audiences.
Professor Yu will develop a new program in visual scientific communication
through collaboration with the University of Oregon’s strong Comic Studies
program. By integrating visual media as the primary framework, this program aims
to build skills and attitudes among underrepresented minority students in
physics to enhance retention while simultaneously providing engaging, informal
STEM education to a broad audience including humanities and design
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.