* 1944551
* CAREER: Multi-dimensional synthetic approach toward alkali-transition metal intermetallics guided by theory and in-situ studies
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Julia Zaikina, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2025
* USD 542,942.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;Material synthesis and discovery has enabled
current technological advances, such as lithium-ion batteries, solar cells,
smartphones, microprocessors, medical imaging, and turbines for harnessing wind
energy. Despite significant progress in material synthesis, there are many
compounds that remain inaccessible by standard synthetic routes. For instance,
synthesis of compounds containing ductile and soft alkali metals and powdery
non-metals is challenging. Researchers encounter issues with reactants mixing,
similar to mixing chocolate chips and cookie dough. With this CAREER award
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, the principle investigator and her research
group develop unique synthetic pathways by utilizing innovative salt-like
starting materials. The synthesis is guided by real-time reaction monitoring and
theoretical predictions. This approach yields unique alkali metal compounds with
potentially useful properties for energy conversion and storage. Additionally,
as an education aspect, the PI promotes dissemination of scientific results to
the general public, facilitates involvement of undergraduate students into
research, and assists graduate students with their job search through video
tutorials. These short educational, yet entertaining videos are created as part
of the new ICON program (Iowa Chemistry Outreach
Network).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, advances a synergistic
theoretical-experimental synthetic approach to a high level of complexity by
aiming at ternary systems with distinctly dissimilar reactivities of elements,
such as highly reactive and volatile alkali metals A, refractory and kinetically
sluggish transition metals M, and p-block element E. Until now the phase spaces
of such systems have remained essentially unexplored, in a stark contrast with
similar R-M-E ternary systems (R = rare-earth metal). From the synthetic point
of view, elemental alkali metals are challenging precursors. Because of their
ductility, volatility, and reactivity, homogeneous mixing of metal/metalloid
reactants involving an alkali metal is difficult, while traditional high-
temperature treatments, such as arc-melting, are not applicable. This
comprehensive experimental approach utilizes salt-like mixable alkali metal
hydrides as precursors and is coupled with in-situ reaction monitoring by
variable temperature X-ray diffraction and theoretical predictions of structure
stability. The research objectives include the targeted and controlled
preparation of new ternary compounds, which are unavailable by standard solid
state chemistry routes, paving a way to solid state synthesis by design. This
research project contributes to the basic knowledge in the field of solid state
and materials chemistry, in line with the NSF-DMR program mission. Additionally,
as an education aspect, the PI promotes dissemination of scientific results to
the general public, facilitates involvement of undergraduate students into
research, and assists graduate students in their job search through video
tutorials. These short educational, yet entertaining videos are created as part
of the new ICON program (Iowa Chemistry Outreach
Network).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.