* 1944374
* CAREER: Photovoltaic Devices with Earth-Abundant Low Dimensional Chalcogenides
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Feng Yan, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 06/30/2025
* USD 516,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sun provides abundant sources of
renewable energy such as wind, solar, and hydro power. Solar cells, also known
as photovoltaic devices, directly convert sunlight into electricity. Dramatic
efficiency improvements and cost reductions have led to widespread adoption of
solar power. There are still problems that limit further adoption. These include
incorporation of expensive or toxic raw materials as well as the need for energy
intensive, high temperature production processes. This project will investigate
an emerging solar technology based on low dimensional chalcogenides as light
absorbers. These materials are earth abundant, non-toxic and stable upon
exposure to sunlight under ambient conditions. They can also be processed at
relatively low temperatures with fewer raw materials consumption and less carbon
footprint, making this emerging solar technology potentially cost-competitive
and sustainable. This project aims to significantly improve the efficiency of
solar cells based on low-dimensional chalcognides through advanced device
engineering. The aim is to pave the way to commercialize this newly developed
solar technology to provide more affordable solar electricity. This project will
impact the community through a long-term partnership with local elementary
schools. The PI will reach out to young students to introduce and foster clean
energy concepts and solar technologies. The PI will also participate in an on-
campus material summer camp for the local secondary school teachers, giving
introduction lectures and providing hands-on demonstrations of solar
technologies. Teachers can then implement these lessons in their home schools to
attract more students, especially those from minority and underrepresented
groups, to pursue science and engineering careers. This project is jointly
funded by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices program of the
Division of Electrical, Communications, and Cyber Systems and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program of the Office of
Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to understand the electronic and photonic
properties of a new class of thin-film photovoltaic (PV) devices based on earth-
abundant low-dimensional noncubic chalcogenide absorbers to achieve highly
efficient, sustainable, and affordable solar energy. Polycrystalline low
dimensional chalcogenide absorbers possess anisotropic atomic chains and
intrinsically benign grain boundaries, which provide unique anisotropic carrier
transport behaviors and great grain boundary defect tolerance. Considerable
fundamental material and device challenges will be addressed in this project to
achieve high-performance low dimensional chalcogenides based PV devices. The
following four tasks with a combination of device-level characterization will be
carried out: (1) understand the anisotropic growth mechanisms of the low
dimensional chalcogenide absorbers layer, and how they impact the carrier
transport in the atomic chains and device performance; (2) tailor bandgap of low
dimensional chalcogenide absorbers by the alloying approach to maximize the
photovoltage with optimized bandgap and minimize the photocurrent loss; (3)
engineer defects and interfaces in the low dimensional chalcogenides based PV
devices to reduce the carrier recombination sites and increase carrier
extraction with a guide of theoretical prediction using first-principle density
functional theory calculation; (4) conduct extrinsic doping engineering to
increase the photogenerated carrier density and carrier lifetime of the low
dimensional chalcogenides based PV devices. Fundamentally, this project will
elucidate the relationship between absorbers material microstructure,
photogenerated carrier transport properties, and device performance in low
dimensional chalcogenide-based PV devices. Eventually, this proposed project
will pave the way for the future development of next-generation high-efficiency
low-cost thin film PV technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.