* 1944448
* CAREER: Remodeling and Damage of the Tendon Attachment During Postnatal Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Megan Killian, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2025
* USD 612,663.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will control the remodeling
of tendon and its attachment to bone during growth. Postnatal growth places
unique mechanical stresses on bones and muscles. As skeletal muscles get
stronger and motor skills improve, the flexibility of connective tissues like
tendons and attachments decreases. Tendons and their attachments transmit muscle
loads to bone, so changes in their flexibility affect bone loading and movement.
Muscle unloading occurs during postnatal growth. This unloading has detrimental
effects on the structure and function of the tendon attachment. However, the
effect that muscle overloading has on the growing skeleton remains unknown. This
is because the ability to control skeletal muscle activation during periods of
rapid growth and development is challenging. Optogenetics has emerged as a
powerful technique for spatial and temporal control of cells, including muscle
cells. The research group will use optogenetic techniques to control muscle
contraction by the exposure of blue light through skin. This will allow them to
precisely increase mechanical loading at the tendon attachment during the early
stages of postnatal growth. They will then evaluate the effect of increased
muscle loading on the tendons and their attachment. Specifically, they will
measure outcomes of remodeling and damage during growth and aging. Findings from
this work will inform rehabilitative strategies to maintain musculoskeletal
health across the lifespan. This award will also support a partnership between
the investigators and the regional teachers for the presentation of seminars on
the Science of Movement and development of K-12 curriculum units by local area
teachers. The investigators will work with K12 teachers to implement, assess,
and publish curriculum units. Furthermore, the investigators will improve their
own university teaching by learning from the K12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER project, the PI will use an in
vivo optogenetic platform to measure structural, mechanical, and molecular
changes induced by remodeling and damage of the tendon attachment that are
driven by frequency-, magnitude-, and duration-dependent changes in muscle
loading, both during postnatal growth (Objective 1) and in the mature and aging
attachment (Objective 2). This work is transformative in nature because the
experiments merge together cross-disciplinary approaches using innovative
techniques from neuroscience (optogenetics), chemistry (collagen like peptides),
life sciences (laser capture microdissection), biomechanics (in vivo isometric
joint torque), and the investigatorâ€™s expertise (mechanobiology of the tendon
attachment). This program will evaluate the effect of inducible muscle loading
on measurable outcomes of remodeling and damage of tendon attachments during
growth and aging. Findings from this CAREER will fill a knowledge gap in our
basic understanding of attachment mechanobiology across the lifespan and reveal
biomechanical adaptations associated with mechanically-induced remodeling and
damage. The investigator will engage with local K12 educators and continue to
mentor PhD, undergraduate, and high school students in engineering research
focused on the mechanisms of tissue remodeling during growth and
aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.