* 1944642
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Neurovascular structures of the trigeminal nerve and their relationship to diet in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Claire Terhune, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 29,800.00

This doctoral dissertation project will examine the quantity and path of nerves
that run through the jaws and teeth of mammals to establish if the size of these
nerves is related to diet. The investigator will focus on humans and non-human
primates, to determine if different diets correspond to the concentration of
soft tissues (like nerves, arteries, and veins) in specific sections of the
mouth and teeth. The research will advance knowledge about the relationships
between soft tissues, bony tissues, jaw function, and diet, and may also inform
our understanding of craniomandibular plasticity in modern humans. The project
will support undergraduate and graduate STEM training, create an open, online
database of scan data, and be used in a variety of science outreach projects and
blog posts aimed at K-12 and general public audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primates use sensory mechanisms to choose foods based on
color, taste, size, and texture. These sensory mechanisms are controlled by
nerves in the skin, eyes, mouth, teeth, and other structures that allow a
primate to determine if a food is safe for eating. The primary nerves that
supply sensation to the mouth are branches of the trigeminal nerve that pass
through the maxilla and mandible. Previous research indicates that larger nerves
relay more sensory information at faster speeds, suggesting that it is important
to know the size of nerves to understand their functions. It has also been
established that primate diets are intimately tied to tooth shape and chewing
function, suggesting that the properties of teeth and their accompanying nerves
are selected for simultaneously in relation to how they sense the properties
(i.e., toughness, stiffness) of foods. The proposed work will use microCT
scanning and iodine staining methods to examine the relationship between tooth
shape and the nerves of teeth, with a focus on how these structures vary in
relation to primate diets. Teeth of primates that are adapted to leaf- or
insect-eating are predicted to need more nerves in the back of the mouth (under
the molars), while fruit-eating primates are expected to have more nerves at the
front of the mouth. This hypothesis is supported by data showing that
individuals eating tougher diets manipulate food objects within their mouth more
than individuals that consume softer food objects. This manipulation is partly
due to how primates use nerves to assess material properties of an object to
ensure that the individual does not damage their teeth during
chewing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.