* 1944599
* CAREER: Additively Manufactured 3D Reconfigurable Antennas
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Eduardo Rojas, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 516,000.00

Antennas are key components of ubiquitous wireless communication, radar, and
navigation systems that affect widespread societal needs, such as aerospace
systems, healthcare, and space exploration. Most of the antennas used in a
variety of applications including cellular phones to unmanned aircraft systems
(UAS) are based on flat planar structures or wire geometries that are developed
using traditional manufacturing technique. This approach does not allow
designers the opportunity to fully leverage the geometry, space, and materials
available to design better performing antennas. The focus of this CARRER
development project is on an emerging antenna fabrication technique that
combines additive manufacturing (AM) and pulsed laser machining that has the
potentials to fundamentally alter the existing state of the art. The proposed
research will allow engineers to implement smaller, efficient, lighter, and
reconfigurable antenna embodiments in three-dimensions (3D) for future
applications with increasing complexity. The research proposed in this project
is fully integrated with an education and outreach plan. The educational plan
will impact the next generation of professionals by exposing high school
students to hands-on activities and videos to explain basic antenna engineering
concepts. The videos will be made by accomplished engineers in the engineering
field to have a strong role-model-based motivational component to stimulate them
to pursue STEM careers. An advanced cellular phone-based teaching tool that
allows engineering undergraduate students to visualize complex 3D concepts in
electromagnetics and antenna engineering is also proposed. &lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to pursue the discovery of the next generation
of antennas with reconfigurable performance while conserving size, weight and
cost. Research initiatives include: (a) the investigation of novel additive
manufacturing processes for the fabrication of conformal 3D multiple curved
antennas based on laser-enhanced direct print AM (LE-DPAM) with femtosecond
laser machining and 5-axis kinematics, (b) the study of bio-inspired 3D superior
antenna geometries that are not possible to manufacture using traditional
methods but are conceivable using LE-DPAM, (c) the development of design methods
based on a novel 3D to 2D conformal mapping technique, (d) the study of embedded
material- and IC-based reconfigurability mechanisms including the use of
electrically tunable inks that can be deposited on conformal surfaces, as well
as IC-based switches for reconfiguration of antenna feeds and loads, and (e) the
investigation of the structure-property relationships of commercially available
and custom-formulated inks that provide excellent electromagnetic performance
while addressing the needs for aviation and space
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.