* 1944862
* CAREER: Resolvent Degree, Hilbert's 13th Problem and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2026
* Jesse Wolfson, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2026
* USD 301,858.00

Polynomials are everywhere in science and engineering. They are what we use to
describe, predict and explain how objects move under a force (gravity,
magnetism, etc.). They form the basis of the cryptographic systems which secure
online banking, e-commerce, and electronic communication. They are used to model
mechanical, chemical, biological, social and financial systems. Given a
polynomial, we want to find its solutions. How these solutions depend on the
coefficients is one of the oldest and most fundamental questions in math. The
purpose of this project’s research is to use the full power of modern
mathematics to develop a new understanding of this question. The education
component of this project will build on the PI’s ongoing collaboration with
choreographer Reggie Wilson and his Fist &amp; Heel Performance Group to develop
innovative STEAM curricula for middle school students on the interactions
between math and black/Africanist dance. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Given a
polynomial, we want to find the simplest formula for its solutions, and to prove
no simpler formula exists. Since the 17th century, “simplest” has meant a
formula using functions of the least number of variables. While solutions in
1-variable functions exist for low degree polynomials (up to degree 5), no such
formulas are known beyond this. At the beginning of the 20th century, David
Hilbert conjectured that for polynomials of degree more than 5, no 1-variable
formulas exist (his specific conjecture for degree 7 is 13th on his famous list
of mathematical problems). Call RD(n) the minimal number of variables needed to
write a formula of the general degree n polynomial. In joint work with Benson
Farb and Mark Kisin, and also in solo work, the PI has been working to revive
the study of RD(n), to produce simpler formulas for high degree polynomials, and
to develop methods capable of showing that RD(n)&gt;1 for some n. By broadening
the focus of investigation to encompass analytic and continuous analogues, the
PI and his collaborators aim to bring the full suite of modern methods to bear
on this problem, and shed new light on solutions of polynomials. For the broader
impacts, the PI will build on his long-running collaboration with Reggie Wilson
and the Fist &amp; Heel Performance group to develop innovative STEAM curricula
for middle school students on the interactions between black/Africanist dance
and the mathematics it deploys, including fractals, braids, recursion, and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.