* 1944776
* CAREER: Flow Physics of Transient Rooftop Vortices at High Reynolds Numbers and Bio-Inspired Flow Control Strategies to Mitigate Wind Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Wei Zhang, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/28/2025
* USD 666,249.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will advance scientific
knowledge of the flow physics of rooftop vortices from hurricane-type strong
winds on low-rise buildings and develop bio-inspired flow control strategies to
attenuate the damaging effects of roof suctions on building resilience. Dramatic
damage repeatedly occurs on low-rise building roofs during windstorms, as
observed in recent hurricanes Matthew (2016), Maria (2017), and Michael (2018).
Building roof failure often starts at the windward roof edges and corners, where
extreme peak suctions are induced by flow separation and unsteady vortices.
Improved understanding of vortex dynamics governing the worst roof suction and
smart flow control strategies by learning from nature will contribute towards
more accurate wind load prediction, enhanced wind design provisions, and
reduction of wind-induced damage and economic and life losses, and thus advance
post-windstorm national welfare and prosperity. The bio-inspiration approach
will not only produce cost-effective, high-performance mitigation strategies for
low-rise buildings, but will also motivate new thinking in broader engineering
fields. This research will use the Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Wall of Wind (WOW) facility at Florida International
University (FIU). Experimental datasets will be archived in the NHERI Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org) and be made publicly available for validation of
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models. To strengthen the persistence of
engineering students, first-year undergraduate students will be engaged in a new
learning community by integrating scientific questions into team-based, early
research experiences, as well as weekly open workshops and invited seminars. The
learning community program will improve the STEM infrastructure, broaden
underrepresented groupsâ€™ participation in engineering, and build a pipeline for
the engineering workforce. This project will support the investigator's long-
term career vision focused on fundamental research on wind-structure interaction
and bio-inspired flow control to increase the wind resilience of civil
infrastructure that contributes to community resilience and sustainability. This
award contributes to the National Science Foundation's role in the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
research objectives are the following: (1) quantify three-dimensional, transient
rooftop vortices from hurricane-type high winds of high Reynolds numbers, (2)
correlate the unsteady vortices with roof peak pressures, and (3) utilize bio-
inspiration as an innovation tool to create cost-effective wind mitigation
devices, ultimately enhancing the wind resiliency of low-rise buildings. A
series of well-controlled wind tunnel experiments with unsteady flow and
pressure over a scaled low-rise building model will be conducted at Cleveland
State University and the FIU WOW facility. Systematic measurements of the
unsteady three-dimensional vortical flow at high Reynolds numbers will also be
beneficial to the broader fluid mechanics community to advance understanding,
modeling, and control of a wide class of vortex flow phenomena. The research
will result in (1) vortex flow mechanisms governing the peak roof suctions at
high Reynolds numbers, and (2) bio-inspired, cost-effective mitigation
strategies (porous fractal parapets) to manipulate vortex formation, applicable
to new and retrofit of existing low-rise buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.