* 1944720
* Change in Departments and Institutions via Active Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Chris Rasmussen, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2023
* USD 99,791.00

This project aims to address the national call for broader student participation
and success in mathematics-intensive fields. It will do so by organizing a
conference focused on improving undergraduate mathematics education. Over the
past five years, studies of undergraduate calculus education have shown that
many undergraduate students who initially express interest in STEM majors,
become disheartened and change to non-STEM majors after completing a calculus
course. To address the need for increased student success in STEM, many efforts
have focused on improving instructional practices and high failure rates in the
calculus sequence, in particular for underrepresented groups including women and
students of color. Such efforts have inspired mathematics departments and
university administrators to try to improve mathematics instruction through
professional development, course coordination, instructional materials, and
student supports. This conference will develop and expand a network of partners
to include researchers, mathematics faculty, and administrators. It will also
encourage and support data-informed improvement efforts in undergraduate
calculus education and document lessons learned to share
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference organizing committee has worked
with undergraduate mathematics departments through the NSF-funded Progress
through Calculus (DUE-1430540) and Student Engagement in Mathematics through an
Institutional Network for Active Learning (DUE-1624643, 1624610, 1624628, and
1624639). These efforts identified a strong interest among mathematics faculty
in participating in a Networked Improvement Community that shares resources,
data, and lessons learned regarding implementing and sustaining active learning
in the calculus sequence. Sustaining and expanding such efforts requires
significant shifts in departmental culture. To this end, the conference has
three main goals: (1) Connect conference participants to an existing community
of mathematics faculty, researchers, and administrators dedicated to educational
innovation in Precalculus through Calculus 2 courses; (2) Leverage these
connections to share and generate knowledge of strategies for initiating,
implementing, and sustaining cultural change that supports the improvement of
courses in the calculus sequence; and (3) Foster instructor development by
encouraging participants to share highly effective instructional practices and
tasks for an active learning classroom. Speakers from different institutions
will share their research during concurrent workshop sessions focused on four
major themes: attention to equity, diversity and inclusivity in the classroom;
departmental culture and change strategies; course and curriculum redesign; and
professional development. These sessions will actively involve attendees,
reflecting the conferenceâ€™s commitment to the use of evidence-based
instructional practices to best support learning. In addition to the sessions,
there will be a panel of university administrators who have supported successful
change efforts, to engage participants in a discussion on how to leverage
administrator support when making changes to the calculus sequence. There will
also be two plenary sessions to focus on issues of equity, institutional change,
and the roles of faculty and administrators. This project is funded by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.