* 1944325
* CAREER: An integrated research and education framework for healthy buildings: development and validation of a comprehensive indoor aerosol dynamic model
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Donghyun Rim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 409,907.00

Americans spend a large percentage of their lives indoors in homes, offices, and
schools. Changes in the design and operations of buildings result in
increasingly air-tight indoor spaces to improve energy efficiency. Such
conditions increase the risk of people coming into contact with materials and
consumer products that generate potentially hazardous airborne nanoparticles. It
is not possible to accurately predict indoor exposure to airborne nanoparticles
with the current state of transport models given the complex nature of
nanoparticle aerodynamics. The goal of this CAREER project is to address this
gap by developing a fundamental mechanistic model of indoor aerosol dynamics
that accurately predicts the dynamic behavior of nanoparticles in buildings.
Successful development of this model will help building designers, engineers,
homeowners, and policy makers to understand emission and transport patterns of
airborne nanoparticles in different indoor environments. This will allow
improved decision-making for achieving healthy and smart buildings that protect
human health. As part of this project, the investigator will participate in the
United Nations Sustainable Buildings Program to prepare the next generation of
global leaders in the built environment profession. The goal of this work will
be to develop global standards and guidelines for indoor air quality control and
healthy buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
mechanistic framework for a comprehensive indoor aerosol dynamic model to
predict the emission, distribution, and transport of airborne nanoparticles in
indoor environments. Specific research objectives to achieve this goal are to:
(1) develop a fundamental indoor aerosol dynamic model that characterizes
detailed time- and size-resolved source emission and loss mechanisms based on
indoor activities and heating, cooling, ventilation operation modes; (2)
validate the model and evaluate uncertainties using a series of measurements in
a full-scale test building that will examine transient particle size
distribution due to conventional and emerging emission sources; and (3)
integrate the indoor aerosol dynamic model with Computational Fluid Dynamics
(CFD) simulations to study the spatial distribution of airborne particles and
breathing zone concentrations under representative indoor air flow and source
emission scenarios. This project will open up a new direction for indoor aerosol
research and create new knowledge in coagulation, deposition, and primary and
secondary nucleation in indoor environments. The analytical model will be
validated with measurements in a full-scale test building and integrated with a
CFD model for the first time to enable inclusion of building environmental
conditions. Experimental validation of the model with a full-scale building will
address critical gaps in our understanding of the physical, chemical, and
transport characteristics of indoor nanoparticles. Successful completion of the
research will allow the assessment of human exposure in a wide range of indoor
environments such as residences, schools, and occupational settings. The PI will
participate in the United Nations Sustainable Buildings Program to prepare the
next generation of global leaders in the built environment profession. Through
this effort, the PI will contribute to setting global standards and guidelines
for indoor air quality control and healthy buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.