* 1944728
* CAREER: Cavity-less optomechanics with macroscopic resonances
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Kejie Fang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Cavity-optomechanics faces tremendous challenges of
interrogating quantum mechanical oscillators of suspended structures using light
at low temperature, caused by optical-absorption-driven mechanical heating and
the associated quantum noise. On the other hand, implementation of dynamic
modulation of light based on resonator arrays, which could lead to topological
photonic states and unconventional light guiding, is facing the scaling issue of
inhomogeneous resonators and modulators. Mechanical bound states in the
continuum (BICs) in two-dimensional slab-on-substrate optomechanical crystals
uniquely solve these challenges in the two distinct research areas. Thanks to
the prohibited radiation of these mechanical BICs while being in contact with
the substrate, unparalleled parametric optomechanical coupling might be achieved
without introducing excess quantum noises. The large-scale resonance effect will
also enhance traveling-wave acousto-optic modulations for a new paradigm of
effective gauge field for photons in the continuum without using discrete
resonators, leading to reconfigurable light guiding on chips and topological
photonic states. The achievement of these demonstrations will enable a
significant leap in programmable integrated photonic circuits, implementing
quantum optomechanical protocols, and pushing the boundary between quantum and
classical realms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The goal of this
program is to demonstrate a new on-chip optomechanical architecture for
macroscopic quantum optomechanics and Floquet light guiding by taking advantage
of mechanical BICs. Fundamental physics involving quantum coherence and light-
matter interactions at macroscopic scales are being explored, while theoretical
concepts are translated to experimental demonstrations in integrated devices and
systems. Trapping resonance phonons in large areas while enabling dissipation of
optical-absorption-driven thermal phonons, this cavity-less optomechanical
architecture might provide unprecedented cooperativity between phonons and
photons, transcending the limitation of the prevailing architecture of
optomechanical cavities in suspended structures. The primary focus of the
project is on exploring macroscopic quantum optomechanical phenomena and time-
modulated light guiding. In the first focus, radiation-pressure force will be
used to cool the mechanical BICs for studying quantum phononic coherence beyond
the microscopic scale, and in the second, mechanical BICs with finite Bloch
momentum will be used for strong acousto-optic modulations of photonic band
structure leading to Floquet light guiding. Experimental validations of these
effects will be attained through the combination of physical modeling and device
engineering. New regime of quantum optomechanics and Floquet photonics will be
studied, aiming for fundamentally transcending the current limitations in
manipulating single phonon states and dynamic modulation of light based on
micro-resonators. The outcome of this program, including a new platform for
optomechanics, could have a tremendous impact beyond this program including
programmable optical computing, understanding quantum-to-classical transition,
and enhancing quantum protocols for larger quantum
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.