* 1944199
* Workshop on Analog Computing Opportunities
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jennifer Hasler, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Analog circuits and systems have become more important to mainstream computing
recently due to a multitude of reasons. The foreseeable end of Moore's law in
computing is one such reason where limits imposed by excessive physical power
dissipation in digital circuits play an important role. Analog circuits on the
other hand has been touted as intrinsically low power, thus having the potential
to at least partially alleviate the problem. This award funds a workshop that
will explore the current state of the art in analog computing by bringing
together the leading academics and theoreticians, along with industry
practitioners under one roof for a period of two days. Presentations will be
made by leaders in the field, and brainstorming sessions will be held to chart
the direction of future research in the field. The discussions will be
documented in the form of a report, which will not only form the basis for
future work among scientists and engineers but will also be disseminated in the
form of public websites and NSF projects reports. Selected students will be
invited to participate in the workshop by paying due attention to the diversity
of the group of attendees to include women and other underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in technology enabling larger scale
integration has also made analog circuits and systems more viable. While noise
and attendant uncertainties inherent to the analog circuits still plague them,
newer architectures and problem domains show promise where the deleterious
effects of noise could be minimized. Still newer interest in analog neural
networks (using e.g., deep learning) attests to this emerging trend. Other
technological innovations, e.g., radio frequency techniques, optical, quantum
and other emerging technologies for device and/or interconnect can also exploit
analog techniques. The ultimate power of analog computing, as compared to the
digital circuits is also being investigated. While the Turing machine has been a
idealized model of computation for digital computers and the ultimate
theoretical power of a (digital) computing machine has been assessed in this
framework, similar studies for analog computing have been in nascent in the
literature. For example, results classifying the analog complexity of
computational problems in classes analogous to say, P, NP etc. is an area being
revisited by theoretical researchers due to renewed interest in analog
computing. The impact of this loosely connected body of research to practice -
especially in the design of hardware for solving practical problems - remains to
be seen, and will be central to the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.