* 1944975
* CAREER: Probing Nematic Superconductivity in Topological Semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Yasuyuki Nakajima, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 440,873.00

Non-technical abstract: Understanding and controlling the physical properties of
novel quantum materials is key to future technologies. For example, recent
theoretical studies have predicted that a new type of quantum materials called
topological superconductors may be useful in quantum computing. Despite
intensive efforts to discover such superconductors, only a handful of promising
candidates have been found to date, and little is known about their properties.
The goal of this project is to identify the key ingredients to realize
topological superconductivity, by elucidating the connection between
superconductivity and topology in novel quantum materials through advanced
experimental techniques. The project outcomes will impact fundamental scientific
research, but also future applications in energy, information and electronic
technologies. Integrated with research, this project aims to increase quality,
participation, and retention of students, particularly underrepresented
students, in STEM fields through the American Physical Society-funded Bridge
Program as well as Valencia-University of Central Florida Physics Research
Exchange Program. Education materials will be made available to students,
researchers, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:
Topology and symmetry breaking are key ingredients of novel quantum phases of
matter. Combined with superconductivity that breaks the U(1) gauge symmetry,
topological order can host Majorana fermions arising at the boundaries of
systems. However, a major bottleneck to employ the potential of Majorana
fermions is a lack of prototypical platforms for topological superconductivity.
Recent experimental and theoretical studies suggest that topology is linked to
the unique superconducting gap structures involving electronic nematicity. This
project investigates the interrelation between nematic superconductivity and
topology in superconducting topological semimetals, aiming at identifying key
ingredients to realize topological superconductivity with Majorana fermions. To
achieve this aim, the specific research objectives proposed here are: (1)
engineer the interplay between topology and nematicity in topological semimetals
with controlling various physical parameters by chemical substitutions, (2)
identify nematic superconductivity in topological semimetals via magnetic field
angle-resolved thermal transport and heat capacity measurements, and (3) observe
fractionalized excitations in the superconducting state of topological
semimetals. The elements of close integration of education with research include
the educational content of upper-level undergraduate integrated lab-lecture
course for materials research, training of a strong STEM workforce for materials
research that is needed for future technologies, and enhanced participation and
retention of students, in particular underrepresented students, in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.