* 1944619
* CAREER: Nitrogen Activation: Splitting Kinetic Cycles and Breaking Energetic Barriers with Pulsed Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Andrew Teixeira, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 470,656.00

Many industrial chemical processes utilize catalysts to increase reaction rates
at fixed conditions of feed rates, temperature, and pressure. The project
addresses a new approach to process technology, known as dynamic catalysis, in
which the catalyst temperature is varied on the time scale of reactions
occurring on the catalyst surface. The rapid temperature modulation can
potentially create conditions that dramatically accelerate the overall reaction
rate or change the product distribution in favorable ways. The study will
evaluate the effectiveness of dynamic catalysis by both experimental and
theoretical means, with an ultimate aim of decreasing the energy requirements
for the catalytic synthesis of ammonia. Considering the highly energy-intensive
nature of the industrial ammonia synthesis process, a cleaner and less energy-
intensive alternative will have significant economic and environmental impacts.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the study is to develop a new
catalytic strategy for overcoming thermodynamic and kinetic barriers by
dynamically operating a catalytic cycle at various temperatures and
thermodynamic environments. However, the catalytic nitrogen fixation cycle is
blocked at near-ambient conditions by a lack of energy to overcome
kinetic/thermodynamic barriers (low temperature) or unfavorable binding energies
for surface intermediates (high temperature/low pressure). The study will
investigate the possibility that energetic barriers can be overcome at
catalytically relevant resonant cycle times by rapidly and dynamically pulsing
energy into the system (timescale of approximately 10 milliseconds). The
approach combines 1) multi-scale modeling to demonstrate expected catalytic
enhancement and determine optimal operating conditions, and 2) experimental
testing and reactor design of a pulsed catalysis platform. The expected outcome
is new understanding of the potential for nonequilibrium catalytic turnover from
both theoretical and experimental approaches. Ideally, the fundamental
understanding will lead to the design of catalyst platforms that operate beyond
the theoretical maximum in catalytic turnover suggested by the classic volcano
plot relation. The research will be integrated with a wide range of educational
and outreach activities aimed at elevated engagement in STEM from students and
the public, with particular emphasis on connections between basic research and
societal impacts of the nitrogen cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.