* 1944510
* CAREER: Decoding the Structure and Energy Landscape of Isostatic Glasses by Machine Learning and Enhanced Sampling
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Mathieu Bauchy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and education activities in the field of glass science. When cooled below their
melting point, liquids usually turn into crystals. As an alternative route,
liquids can bypass crystallization and enter a supercooled liquid state if
quenched fast enough. At the glass transition temperature, liquids become so
viscous that their flowing time eventually exceeds the observation time. At this
point, since they are unable to flow, they freeze into solid glasses. Although
virtually the entire periodic table can form a glass if quenched fast enough,
the propensity for a liquid to crystallize or form a glass upon quenching, its
glass-forming ability, depends on its composition. Deciphering how the atomic
composition and structure of liquids govern their glass-forming ability has been
at the very foundation of glass science and has remained largely unresolved thus
far. To this end, the atomic structure of glasses can be described based on the
concept of network topology, that is, the branch of mathematics that studies how
the connectivity of nodes, in this case - the atoms, govern the properties of
networks, the glass atomic structure. Interestingly, glasses exhibiting an
optimal network topology, called isostatic, tend to feature unique properties,
including maximum glass-forming ability. However, the nature of the linkages
between network topology and glass-forming ability remains largely
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, the PI seeks to decode
the relationship between network topology and glass-forming ability, and so,
interrogates the very nature of a glass and works toward understanding the
origin of the anomalous properties featured by isostatic glasses. This will be
accomplished by a combination of molecular dynamics simulations, enhanced
sampling, and machine learning activities, which are closely integrated to
inform and advance each other. This project will focus on chalcogenide glasses,
which are the base material for 3D Xpoint phase-change random access memory. By
storing 3 bits per cell instead of a single bit, this technology is widely
believed to constitute the future of non-volatile
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research tasks are complemented and enabled
by several educational activities. The PI will develop a series of cross-
disciplinary courses to equip students with transversal knowledge, which is a
key skillset to develop integrated solutions that globally address complex real-
world challenges. The PI will also leverage this project to promote data-based
adaptive learning, which offers a unique opportunity to move away from the "one
size fits all" way of learning that does not reflect complex cognitive
processes. To address the gender imbalance in engineering, the PI will develop
an undergraduate research program targeted to female students, which aims to
enhance their retention in graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education activities to
advance fundamental understanding of structural glasses. Based on their network
topology, structural glasses can be classified as flexible (underconstrained),
stressed-rigid (overconstrained), and isostatic (rigid, but free of stress) when
the number of topological interatomic constraints is lower, higher, or equal to
the number of atomic degrees of freedom, respectively. Interestingly, optimally-
constrained isostatic glasses tend to exhibit anomalous properties, including
optimal glass-forming ability and low propensity for relaxation. Such isostatic
glasses have been suggested to exist within an intermediate phase, wherein the
glass self-organizes to exhibit a nearly-reversible glass transition. However,
the existence and origin of the intermediate phase remain debated and no
structural signature of this phase has been revealed thus far. Further, the
origin of the anomalous properties of isostatic glasses remains elusive. To
address these gaps in knowledge, the PI seeks to decode the relationship between
network topology, propensity for relaxation, and glass-forming
ability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, the PI will adopt an integrated
approach, wherein classical molecular dynamics, density functional theory,
enhanced sampling, and machine learning activities mutually inform and advance
each other. First, a machine-learned forcefield will be trained to simulate
archetypical Ge-As-Se chalcogenide glasses. Second, this forcefield will be used
to decode the relationship between topology and propensity for relaxation, and
interrogate the existence of the intermediate phase. Third, a structural
signature of self-organization will be sought using machine learning. Last,
enhanced sampling techniques will be used to characterize the energy landscape
of glasses with varying network topologies. By synergistically combining
physics- and data-driven modeling techniques, this research will reveal how the
relationship between network topology, propensity for relaxation, and glass-
forming ability is encoded in the topography of the energy landscape. This study
will also interrogate the existence, origin, and signatures of the intermediate
phase and structural self-organization in chalcogenide glasses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also supports an extensive education plan.
First, the PI will introduce a cross-disciplinary program connecting condensed
matter, civil engineering, and computer science. Second, the machine learning
techniques developed herein will be used to enable data-informed active learning
in classrooms. Third, active collaborations with industrial partners will be
leveraged to expose students to industrial environments and corporate cultures.
Fourth, the PI will develop an undergraduate research program targeted to
females, so as to enhance their retention in graduate school. Finally, the PI
will collaborate with local high school teachers to develop demonstration
modules, with activities involving virtual reality, structural truss kit set,
and sugar glass crystallization to support material science outreach to K-12
students. Through these activities, the project will contribute to supporting
glass science in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.