* 1944625
* CAREER: Adaptive Photonic Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Liheng Cai, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2025
* USD 588,378.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike electronic devices
that control information by affecting the flow of electrons, photonic devices
control information by affecting the flow of photons or light and have the
potential to overcome the speed and bandwidth of electronic devices. Key to
photonic devices is their basic components -- photonic crystals, which are
periodic nanostructures consisting of regularly repeating regions of high and
low dielectric constants. Transmission of light through such a crystal is
prevented due to multiple reflections at the interfaces between alternating
dielectric domains; this occurs when the wavelength is comparable to
characteristic domain sizes. The band gaps of most existing photonic crystals,
however, cannot be actively controlled because once a nanostructure is formed,
its domain size cannot be changed. It remains a challenge in the development of
adaptive photonic crystals to control light on-demand. This project aims to
establish the foundational knowledge required to design and create Adaptive
Photonic Polymers -- polymeric photonic crystals that enable active control of
visible and infrared light. Educationally, in addition to providing research
opportunities for graduate students, undergraduates, and high school students
from diverse backgrounds, the topics considered in this program will be
integrated into a newly developed course, "Advanced Polymers." The project also
incorporates a number of outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program aims to establish the
molecule-microstructure-property-function relation for Adaptive Photonic
Polymers -- polymeric photonic crystals that enable on-demand control of light.
The central hypothesis is that exploiting the self-assembly of architecturally
designed block copolymers enables responsive periodic dielectric nanostructures
with exceptionally large characteristic lengths necessary for manipulating light
of a wide range of wavelengths. The PI's work will focus on: (i) development of
methods for controlled synthesis of block copolymers with extreme molecular
architecture such as large diameter and high molecular weight; (ii) determining
the molecular architecture for which the polymers form long-range, ordered
nanostructures of large characteristic lengths necessary for visible and
infrared light; (iii) establishing the causal relation between microstructure
and macroscopic optical properties; (iv) quantifying the response of optical
properties to external stimuli using custom-developed in-situ characterization
techniques. The experimental studies will be corroborated by scaling theory and
self-consistent field theoretical simulations. Using the fundamental
understanding gained and the technologies developed through these studies,
active fast control of visible and infrared light will be demonstrated using one
Adaptive Photonic Polymer. This research will be integrated into a variety of
educational experiences in the laboratory and the classroom at the graduate,
undergraduate, and 6-12 levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.