* 1944324
* Collaborative Proposal: The circadian clock's control of seasonal dormancy in mosquitoes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Megan Meuti, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 528,140.00

The overall goal of this research project is to understand the molecular
mechanisms by which the circadian clock regulates overwintering dormancy in the
Northern house mosquito, Culex pipiens, a mosquito species that transmits many
diseases. Mosquitoes become reproductively active during long, summer days, and
enter diapause or overwintering dormancy during short, winter days, when they
are less active and conserve energy to survive unfavorable environmental
conditions. Organisms that live in temperate environments are able to predict
and prepare for winterâ€™s arrival by responding to changes in daylength, or
photoperiod. Precisely how insects are able to measure daylength is unclear, but
the circadian clock, which provides information on the time of day, is
hypothesized to be involved because it controls seasonal responses in plants.
Understanding how insects are able to convert environmental signals, like
daylength, into internal cues, including gene products and metabolites, will
provide insights into the regulation of seasonal responses in other insects.
This work has the potential to generate novel ways to control insect pests by
manipulating seasonal responses to occur at the wrong time of year, thereby
improving public health. This project will allow diverse graduate and
undergraduate students to fully participate in scientific research, and will
provide accessible and engaging educational programming and resources for
middle- and high-school students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators hypothesize that circadian transcription factors pleiotropically
regulate reproductive and overwintering pathways in both a clock- and daylength-
dependent manner in insects. The overall research objective is to determine the
mechanism by which circadian transcription factors regulate pathways associated
with reproduction and overwintering diapause in the Northern house mosquito,
Culex pipiens. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing (ChIP-
seq) and RNA sequencing in clock-null mutant backgrounds will identify the
targets of circadian transcription factors and how they regulate genes
associated with different seasonal responses in both long and short
photoperiods. Additionally, NMR spectroscopy will reveal daily and seasonal
changes in the metabolome of mosquitoes that are associated with reproduction
and survival. Combined, the results will show how insects are able to perceive
changes in daylength and translate this information into key molecular pathways
that regulate different seasonal responses. Photoperiodic diapause has evolved
numerous times among insects, where it converged on a few signaling pathways
that also regulate metabolism and cell cycle arrest in other animals. Therefore,
the results of this study will extend beyond insect diapause research, with
potential applications to the study of hibernation, aging, and obesity. In
addition to training the next generation of scientific researchers, the PIs will
lead entomology field camps and work with K-12 teachers to develop and assess
engaging programming with live arthropods, hypothesis-driven lab experiments,
and effective educational resources that will be freely provided
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.