* 1944120
* CAREER: The Production of High Value, Defect-free Metal Castings through Model-based Design and Additive Manufacturing of Sand Molds
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Guhaprasanna Manogharan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 536,216.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant focuses on the study of
metal casting using model-based design and three-dimensional printed sand molds.
Metal casting involves pouring of molten metal in a mold made of sand. It is one
of the oldest and most widely used manufacturing processes in the production of
parts and components for many industrial applications. However, traditional
metal casting suffers from high scrap rates because it is still regarded as a
process that is empirically designed and with high uncertainty even in
controlled processing environments. Due to the nature of the two-dimensional
geometry of pathways for the molten metal, turbulent flow traps air in the melt
and causes defects in the solidified castings. This results in poor mechanical
properties along with additional costs and energy to repair or scrap the
castings. This project conducts fundamental research to enable new numerical
models and computational capabilities to study the complex relationships between
the three-dimensional geometry of the sand mold and reduction in defects in the
sand castings. This research is complemented by an integrated educational and
outreach program based on new course development to be strategically deployed
across the U.S through a network of foundry educators. In addition, a
manufacturing education center at the home institution is leveraged for
underrepresented minority and K-12 student outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research is to understand the effects of 3D freeform gating and
riser geometry in sand casting on reducing defects and improving the mechanical
properties of metal castings. Turbulent filling of molten metal results in the
formation of oxide bifilms, air entrapment and porosity in castings, which
adversely impact their mechanical performance. The research objectives of the
project are: (1) Understand the effects of 3D free-form gating and riser design
on air entrapment and formation of oxide bifilms during mold filling, and (2)
Characterize the relationship between 3D freeform gating and riser system and
solidification behavior and their impact on mechanical strength. This project
leverages an additive manufacturing process, namely binder-jetting of foundry
sand or 3D sand-printing for the fabrication of sand molds for metal casting.
This research establishes a fundamental understanding of 3D gating and riser
design geometries in sand molds for defect-free metal castings. Melt flow
velocity, fluid dynamics, solidification rate, and microscopic properties such
as dendrite arm spacing, inclusions and porosity are investigated. Design
principles for 3D gating and riser geometries that can be achieved by 3D sand-
printing of molds are developed and validated. This project enables the PI to
advance the knowledge of metal casting science, computational fluid dynamics
modeling and in-process monitoring of the casting process and establishes the
foundation for a long-term career in advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.