* 1944847
* CAREER: Ready for Change: Fostering Adaptability along the Engineering Pathway
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Samantha Brunhaver, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2025
* USD 333,331.00

Engineers increasingly need to adapt to changing job roles, work expectations,
and industry needs. Yet, research shows that they struggle to do this
effectively at every point along the engineering pathway. There is also a lack
of shared language or best practices with which to explicitly teach and assess
adaptability. This project addresses these challenges by developing the means to
characterize, measure, and promote adaptability as a key outcome for engineering
graduates. The broader impacts of these efforts are a better understanding of
the competencies that constitute adaptability in engineering practice and the
educational strategies that best cultivate their formation. Adaptable engineers
will strengthen the economic competitiveness of the U.S. technical workforce. A
greater emphasis on adaptability also has the potential to improve retention in
the engineering profession, particularly among underrepresented groups such as
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five-year project combines leading-edge
theories from vocational and organizational psychology with strongly grounded
research methods and experimental design to critically examine adaptability in
engineering. First, semi-structured critical incident interviews with thirty
early career engineers and fifteen engineering managers are being collected and
thematically analyzed to develop: (1) a unified typology of the adaptive
mindsets and behaviors necessary for professional engineering practice, and (2)
a foundational understanding of the catalysts and barriers that early career
engineers experience to being adaptable. This phase of the work is specifically
grounded in the U.S. semiconductor design and manufacturing industry, in which
increasingly short product lifecycles and rapidly changing consumer demand
patterns have made adaptability a necessity. Women are also being oversampled to
examine the gender-specific challenges that they experience as compared with
men. Findings from the interviews will inform the design self-report and
situational judgment instruments to measure adaptability in engineering, and the
creation of a set of publicly available online modules to enhance the
adaptability of engineering students and early career professionals. The
effectiveness of the online modules will be empirically tested using a delayed-
treatment randomized-control trial with five hundred first and second-year
students during the last phase of the project. An integrated education plan
focuses on implementation of the modules in a wide range of learning
environments, and on the co-construction of educational strategies with
engineering educators, employers, and student-support staff to better support
adaptability development. The project outcomes help advance the alignment
between engineering education and professional engineering practice and
contribute to a broader agenda of adaptability research and educational
innovations that spans engineering sectors and career
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.