* 1944914
* CAREER: Developing Spatially Organized Biomaterials to Engineer Complex Tissue Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Lesley Chow, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2025
* USD 548,928.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tissue interface between
bone and cartilage is known as the osteochondral tissue interface. Damage to the
osteochondral tissue interface eventually leads to osteoarthritis, a disease
characterized by debilitating pain and loss of mobility that affects an
estimated 31 million Americans. Thus, there is an urgent need to repair or
regenerate this interface to delay or prevent osteoarthritis. Unfortunately, the
osteochondral tissue interface has a poor ability to regenerate on its own and
is particularly challenging to repair due to its complex organization. The
research component of this CAREER award focuses on developing a biomaterial that
promotes regeneration of the osteochondral tissue interface. This 3D-printed
material will provide signals to cells to enable the formation of new tissue
that is organized in the same way as natural osteochondral tissue. The education
and outreach activities of this CAREER award will leverage the project’s 3D
printing and health relevance to engage students from backgrounds
underrepresented and at risk for lower success rates in STEM and increase
awareness to the general public about biomaterials. The PI will partner with
existing Lehigh programs that support underrepresented and at-risk students by
providing customized undergraduate research projects. The undergraduate
researchers will also collaborate with the PI and graduate students to develop
YouTube videos and hands-on 3D printing activities for middle and high school
students in the local community. These efforts will recruit, train, and empower
a diverse group of students as next-generation scientists. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structure-property
relationships found in musculoskeletal tissue interfaces illustrate how
extracellular matrix (ECM) organization is tightly linked to tissue properties
and function. The osteochondral interface between bone and cartilage contains
heterogenous gradients in biochemical and physical properties critical for
normal joint function. Biomaterials for osteochondral repair must therefore
present appropriate spatial cues to direct organized ECM formation. This project
focuses on developing new strategies to independently control biochemical,
mechanical, and morphological organization within a continuous scaffold. The
central hypothesis is that scaffolds with optimal spatial properties will drive
the formation of ECM that mimics the native osteochondral tissue interface. The
PI will combine a peptide-polymer strategy with emerging 3D printing techniques
to achieve three specific objectives: 1) demonstrate that bioactive peptides can
be spatially organized without affecting scaffold morphology and stiffness; 2)
show that scaffold stiffness and morphology can be modified independently; and
3) demonstrate that peptide, mechanical, and morphology gradients, separately
and together, affect stem cell differentiation and matrix formation. This
project’s application to health and popularity of 3D printing provides an
excellent opportunity to integrate the research component with the education and
outreach activities. The educational goal centers on engaging and retaining
students from backgrounds underrepresented in STEM. The specific objectives are
to: 1) enhance success of underrepresented and at-risk undergraduate and
graduate students through research, mentoring, and interdisciplinary courses; 2)
promote STEM to underrepresented middle and high school students through hands-
on 3D printing activities; and 3) increase public knowledge about 3D printing
and biomaterials through YouTube videos. Under the supervision of the PI,
undergraduate and graduate students will co-develop outreach activities for
middle and high school students, creating a hierarchical mentorship model to
improve STEM retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.