* 1944683
* CAREER: Sensorimotor representations in visual working memory.
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Edward Ester, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 10/31/2020
* USD 405,845.00

Working memory is a short-duration, limited-capacity system that enables the
storage of information in an “online” state. Several lines of evidence suggest
that working memory is an integral component of complex cognition, and working
memory disruptions are common in many developmental, psychiatric, and
neurological conditions. As a general-purpose workspace, working memory provides
an important bridge between sensory information and anticipated actions, yet
little is known about how memory representations are selected and translated
into overt behaviors. This project will advance knowledge of the interplay
between neural circuits supporting working memory and motor control in two
complementary ways. First, it will test the hypothesis that the neural circuitry
supporting working memory is critically dependent on how a person intends to use
remembered information. Second, it will test the hypothesis that, when
advantageous, the brain merges memory representations and motor plans into
integrated units such that activating a memory representation automatically
activates an associated motor plan (and vice versa). The research includes an
integrated and ambitious education and outreach plan designed to increase the
recruitment and retention of undergraduate students – particularly members of
underrepresented groups and first-generation college students – in basic
research activities. This project will develop a series of workshops where
students will be introduced to basic research techniques in the human
neurosciences, including opportunities for students to collect and analyze their
own data.

Intentional behaviors require organisms to select and maintain sensory,
mnemonic, and motor representations that are relevant to current goals. These
representations are combined in a temporary storage buffer known as working
memory. The goal of this proposal is to understand how the brain translates
temporary mnemonic representations into specific action plans. A hypothesis is
that neural circuits supporting working memory storage flexibly incorporate
posterior sensory cortex and cortical regions for generating task-relevant
outputs (e.g., a verbal vs. oculomotor vs. manual response). When advantageous,
the brain could integrate mnemonic and motor information such that priming one
source of information (e.g., a memory representation) automatically primes the
other (e.g., a specific motor response). This project will test this hypothesis
by leveraging non-invasive neuroimaging methods (electroencephalography and
functional neuroimaging) and image reconstruction techniques to reconstruct,
visualize, and quantify stimulus-specific mnemonic representations in sensory
and motor cortices while participants perform working memory tasks requiring
verbal, manual, or oculomotor responses. The findings of this project will yield
important new insights into the circuitry supporting working memory, as well as
how mental representations are mapped onto overt actions. In addition, this
basic research has the potential to yield new insights into disruptions in
working memory that typically accompany many developmental, psychiatric, and
neurological disorders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.