* 1944192
* CAREER: Low-Dimensional Reactive Hydrides for the Efficient Electro-hydrogenation of Aromatic and Aliphatic Hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Joshua Snyder, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 558,213.00

The chemical and petroleum industries account for 46% of the yearly energy
consumption in the U.S. industrial sector. A reduction in energy consumption by
these industries would have a significant impact on future energy supply. This
research project investigates electrochemical methods for reacting organic
molecules with hydrogen through a process known as electrochemical
hydrogenation. Electrochemical hydrogenation has potential to replace the more
energy intensive thermal/chemical hydrogenation processes that currently
dominate the chemical and petroleum industries. Electrochemical hydrogenation
technologies open the door to improvements in energy efficiencies and to the use
of renewable chemical feedstocks, thereby decreasing carbon emissions. This
research project focuses on the role that catalysts can play in advancing
electrochemical system design as a means to improve process efficiency and lower
the costs of running the system. The project will provide both graduate and
undergraduate students a fundamental foundation in electrochemical science
research. Through a partnership with the Lindy Center at Drexel University,
freshman engineering students will design lab modules to teach the principles of
electrochemical energy storage and conversion to local grade 6-12 students
through a Science Saturdays program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical
hydrogenation has several advantages over thermal/chemical hydrogenation,
namely: (1) water is the source of hydrogen, (2) low operational
temperature/pressure, and (3) control of activity/selectivity with applied
potential. The development of next-generation electrochemical hydrogenation
catalysts requires (1) strategies to manipulate bulk hydride reactivity through
a more fundamental understanding of their reactivity descriptors, and (2) more
detailed insight into the effect of the electrochemical interface on
aromatic/aliphatic reactant adsorption, adsorbed intermediate solvation, and
direct hydrogenation by near surface water. While transition metal hydrides have
been used for high temperature, heterogeneous hydrogenation/dehydrogenation
catalysis, their transition to electro-hydrogenation has been slow. Limiting
this transition has been an absence of analysis of the direct effect of specific
material properties, particularly hydride properties, on both activity and
selectivity. This research project will identify the interrelation between
chemical properties of the organic reactant, intrinsic catalyst properties, and
electric field established at the metal/electrolyte interface, to guide the
design of systems for the selective electrochemical hydrogenation of specific
organic reactants. The project also will build a base for future research
centered on exploitation of electrochemical interfaces as a tool to address
limiting processes including adsorbed reactant solvation, intermediate scaling,
and imbalance between activity, selectivity, and
durability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.