* 1944985
* CAREER: A Holistic Study of Compact-Object Mergers across the Electromagnetic Spectrum
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Raffaella Margutti, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 04/30/2022
* USD 438,895.00

Black holes (BHs) and neutron stars (NSs) are the densest objects in our
Universe. The investigator will advance our understanding of BHs and NSs by
studying their collisions in space. The violent collisions of BHs and NSs
produce bursts of light that can be detected with telescopes, as well as
gravitational waves (GWs) that can now be detected with special instruments like
the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO). Indeed,
astronomers have very recently detected for the first time GWs and light from a
neutron star merger named GW170817. This joint detection marked the beginning a
new era of investigation: the era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics. New research
programs, like the Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST), are further
increasing the distances probed in the Universe and rate of discoveries. The
investigator’s project capitalizes on this guaranteed stream of data, adding the
unique perspective of a truly multi-wavelength (X-ray to radio) characterization
of mergers of NSs and BHs. The investigator will work with high school teachers
to develop curricular material on compact-object mergers, and to guide their
students in research projects. Finally, the investigator’s group will work with
visually impaired scientists and collaborate with professional musicians to
translate astronomical measurements into sound to make multi-messenger
astrophysics accessible to everybody and engage the wider public with an all-
senses experience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The field of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics is in its infancy. After the first joint electromagnetic (EM)-GW
detection, the research priority is to map the post-merger properties as
constrained by the EM transients. This is the overarching goal of this
investigation. By acquiring multi-wavelength observations that sample both the
thermal and non-thermal emission, this effort will map the diversity of the EM
outcomes from NS mergers. In doing so, this investigation will lead to the study
of a population of NS mergers detected via GWs and light. New regimes of high
energy and high-density physics will be explored in their research program. In
addition, the investigator may improve constraints on the NS equation of state
and on the rate of acceleration of the Universe. This project advances the goals
of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.