* 1944750
* CAREER: Electrochemical Nanoimprinting of Inorganic Semiconductors: Towards Manufacturing of Three-dimensional Free-Form Optical Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Bruno Azeredo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant investigates methods of
scaling the production of three-dimensional structures in key electronic-grade
inorganic semiconductors such as Silicon, Germanium and Gallium Arsenide.
Patterning beyond two-dimensional structures is critical to enable the design of
novel metamaterial-based infrared optical devices such as (i) high-speed optical
interconnects in data centers and (ii) advanced imagining concepts for
biosensing and night-vision applications. These design opportunities are
hindered due to the inability of existing semiconductor manufacturing processes
to fabricate three-dimensional hierarchical features with the required
resolution, throughput, accuracy, uniformity and repeatability. In this project,
an emerging format of nanoimprinting lithography, metal-assisted electrochemical
nanoimprinting (Mac-Imprint) is studied through an integrated experimental and
theoretical methodology. By understanding the fundamentals of chemical catalysis
and mass transport in Mac-Imprint, it is sought to mass produce three-
dimensional hierarchical features spanning four orders of magnitude (i.e. 10 nm
– 100 µm) in scale at the physical limits of throughput to enable these
applications. This represents the pursuit of high-risk and high-reward
fundamental nanomanufacturing problems that otherwise are too costly and risky
for industry while training and diversifying the future U.S. manufacturing
workforce. Further, this project seeks to increase awareness of the role
manufacturing engineers have in society for high-schoolers and undergraduates
through integrated research and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite a decade of efforts to extend
nanoimprint lithography (NIL)’s library of patternable media beyond polymeric
materials, nanoimprinting of inorganic single-crystalline semiconductors has
been restricted due to recrystallization effects of heat-based NIL approaches,
curtailing its optoelectronic properties. To resolve these challenges, this
project investigates Mac-Imprint which exploits wet-chemistry and catalysis to
selectively induce anisotropic etching at the interface of a semiconductor and a
metal-coated stamp at room temperature. By exploring advanced stamp materials
composed of mesoporous materials - traditionally used in water filtration and
purification – it is sought to promote diffusion and enhance the process
performance of Mac-Imprint (i.e. resolution, throughput, uniformity). At the
fundamental level, the goal is to understand scaling of the effective diffusion
constant of this new class of metal-coated tortuous mesoporous stamp materials
with sub-50 nm pore sizes and correlated it to the Mac-Imprint’s process
performance. As the reserched length scale of the stamp’s pores enters the range
of the Debye length, it restricts diffusion and imposes a physical limit to
throughput and resolution of Mac-Imprint. Thus, this project examines process-
structure relationships of Mac-Imprint that depart from classical mass transport
models and account for the complexity of the stamp’s geometry and its redox
electrochemistry mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.