* 1944875
* CAREER: Dissipative Non-Equilibrium Supramolecular Hydrogels Using Fuels
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Matthew Webber, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2025
* USD 455,953.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Materials found throughout nature, including
those which compose the cells and tissues of the body, have structures that
often exist transiently and are dependent on the presence of certain stimuli.
Recreating the transient, stimuli-dependent states of natural materials with
synthetic constructs thus offers an approach to more precisely engineer
replicates of natural materials in pursuit of more life-like materials. This
CAREER award seeks to establish new routes to the creation of transient
materials which will inform the future design of functional constructs and
therapeutic devices. Specifically, materials for which formation and stability
is dictated by the presence of a continuously consumed fuel source are
envisioned, wherein the lifetime of the material is tunable through altering the
dosage of applied fuel or changing the environmental conditions to which the
material is exposed. Similarly, toward harnessing light as a fuel, other
materials are envisioned which convert applied light into a directive cue
driving transient material formation with tunable lifetime. Accessing transient
states in soft materials, by way of chemical fuels or by using light, points to
a new direction in the design of soft materials with enhanced functionality
rooted in their nature-mimetic transient states, with uses in advancing a number
of material applications. Integrated within this convergent research program is
an ongoing effort to build and expand laboratory and classroom training in the
area of molecular engineering, and an overarching goal to advance the practice
of scientific communication through research, mentorship, community outreach,
and experiential training for graduate trainees in the chemical and materials
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Nature achieves
remarkable function from materials which exist in dissipative non-equilibrium
states; one must look no further than the cell structure and motility which
arises from ATP-fueled non-equilibrium assembly of its actin cytoskeleton.
Accordingly, this CAREER award integrates research and training in an effort to
create bio-inspired materials with fuel-dependent formation and transient
stability, and which subsequently dissipate when fuel is limited. Recreating the
dissipative non-equilibrium states of natural materials with synthetic analogues
has captivated many in recent years. While efforts have focused almost
exclusively on fuel-dependent assembly of small molecules, a new paradigm is
described here for fuel-dependent non-equilibrium formation of host–guest
supramolecular hydrogels. This outcome will be achieved through recognition
motifs which are dependent on a continuous supply of a consumable chemical fuel
source, or by using light-responsive motifs to actuate a light stimulus into
altered affinity and/or dynamics of the motif. When the specific chemical or
light fuel sources are limited, these materials will exist transiently and
dissipate to their designed equilibrium state of a sol or weak gel. More
broadly, host–guest supramolecular recognition affords a useful class of soft
materials which have properties directly attributed to the dynamic nature of
their crosslinking interactions. These materials have thus exhibited a variety
of useful emergent properties in their application as new biomaterials and
therapeutic delivery devices, and also afford features desirable for a number of
industrial applications. The ability to further integrate transient and fuel-
dependent formation of this class of materials seeks increased biomimetic
function to further expand on their possible uses. This research plan is placed
within a multidisciplinary training environment tailored to train leaders in the
convergent discipline of molecular engineering, which is further augmented by
classroom instruction. In addition, training aimed at improving scientific
communication in the chemical and materials sciences seeks to achieve improved
public engagement conveying the importance of scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.