* 1944689
* CAREER: The Science of Measurement-based Stability Assessment and Model Validation for Microgrids
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Luke Dosiek, Union College
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Measurement-based stability assessment and model validation tools have enjoyed
considerable success in bulk power systems (BPS). Due to the unique challenges
that microgrids pose, such as unbalanced loading, short line lengths, and high
prevalence of inverter-based generation (IBG), such tools cannot be directly
applied. Instead, novel and creative approaches must be considered. Microgrid
tools must employ multirate signal processing that incorporate data from
multiple domains. Additionally, the analysis tools will need to consider
stability metrics beyond the modal damping used in the BPS. Finally,
synchronized point-on-wave (SPOW) data will be required to capture both the fast
inverter dynamics along with all three phases. This work has the potential to
dramatically increase the reliability and resiliency of microgrids by providing
stakeholders with real-time indicators of stability along with regular model
validation and tuning. This will enable more rapid and reliable designs of
microgrids, which has the potential to (1) accelerate the paradigm shift from
central to distributed generation, (2) reduce community dependence on large
corporate- or government-owned energy resources, (3) foster increased use of
renewable energy, and (4) enable a new level of rural electrification. The SPOW-
based model validation researched here can also be applied to the BPS, where
greater confidence in a proposed installation of IBG will lead to increased
penetration of renewables, battery storage, and EV charging stations. Outreach
activities include visits to local K-12 classrooms where students will be
invited to creatively present the history of electric power. At the collegiate
level, this project will redesign and modernize the power curriculum at Union
College, including a cross-disciplinary course that merges power engineering and
music theory that will culminate in a public concert of sonified power grid
data. Finally, this project will support the training of a postdoctoral
researcher that will be well-prepared to continue these endeavors upon the
conclusion of their term. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is
to research and define the modeling and simulation techniques, the system ID
algorithms, and system measurements or functions of measurements that are
necessary to enable measurement-based power grid stability assessment and model
validation in microgrids. The first task towards achieving this objective is to
build a repository of microgrid models. This will involve existing benchmark
systems that may be modified as well as new models created specifically for this
project. A library of simulation cases will be built that will cover several
types of microgrid stability. A real-time digital simulator with hardware-in-
loop (HIL) capabilities will be used to simulate the models with the option of
including hardware inverter controllers and point-on-wave measurement devices.
The second task is to identify which system outputs are necessary for
measurement-based stability assessment and model validation in a microgrid. This
will need to move beyond synchrophasors, and may include mechanical measurements
and SPOW data. This will involve the prototyping of an SPOW measurement device.
The third task will research system identification and detection and estimation
algorithms for use in measurement-based stability assessment. It is expected
that a suite of algorithms will be selected, each specializing in the analysis
of a particular stability type. The final task will investigate the use of
inverter-based probing signals to facilitate model validation using SPOW data
without having to wait for a system event. Successful completion of all tasks
will result in a comprehensive system for achieving measurement-based stability
assessment and model validation in microgrids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.