* 1944445
* CAREER: Modeling Responsive Relationship Behavior: Channels of Communication, Social Benefits, and Mechanisms of Action
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2026
* Cheryl Carmichael, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/28/2026
* USD 814,847.00

People with good relationships live longer and healthier lives. This project
focuses on what makes good relationships good, and how those relationships
transmit benefits to the people who have them. One important part of a good
relationship is feeling like a partner understands, validates, and cares for
you. People communicate understanding, validation, and care (responsiveness) in
the words they say and the way they say them, and sometimes without words at
all. In addition, some people are more easily able to give and receive
responsive behavior based on how secure they feel in their relationships. This
research looks at the separate ways that words and nonverbal cues are used to
show responsiveness, and how each type of communication is uniquely beneficial
to the self, the relationship, and physiological function. It also tests whether
feeling secure in a relationship plays a role in being able to benefit from
responsiveness. Learning how verbal and nonverbal responsive behavior are
separately beneficial, and who benefits most, can help identify specific
behaviors to help people be more responsive to each other and to improve the
quality of their relationships. Sharing the results of this work with the
scientific community and society at large will help support healthier social
connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws from a convergence of theory
and research in social psychology, health psychology, neuroscience and
communication studies. The research compares the effects of verbal (words) and
nonverbal (tone of voice and touch) responsive behavior on personal well-being,
relationship quality, and physiological pathways to health (e.g., stress hormone
production, cardiovascular activity, sleep). It also tests whether feeling
secure in relationships affects whether people are able to be responsive or
benefit from a partnerâ€™s responsive behavior. The project focuses on romantic
couples, friends, and strangers using longitudinal, behavioral, and daily diary
methods. The related educational goals of this work include increasing
participation in science among people from underrepresented groups. This project
supports the development of new courses in relationship science, mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students in research, and sharing basic information
about the results with the diverse community within and around Brooklyn
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.