* 1944304
* CAREER: Radio Frequency Spectrum Sensing with a Fine-Tooth Nanomechanical Comb
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Azadeh Ansari, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The tremendous growth of wireless devices and Internet of Things (IoT)
applications has placed a great strain on the radio frequency (RF) network
infrastructures, congesting the channels and over-crowding the radio frequency
spectrum. Battery-operated portable smart devices such as smartphones, wearable
technologies (e.g., smart watches and glasses), personal radars, and other smart
gadgets all compete for bandwidth and require efficient spectrum utilization. To
combat the looming RF spectrum scarcity, multi-band, multi-standard wireless
systems that ?sense? the RF spectrum in response to the in-situ spectrum
utilization, in the most efficient manner are required. Software solutions such
as machine learning techniques are applied after the RF signal is digitized and
often require large computational power. The machine learning techniques also
face challenges of real-time learning and decision making to identify available
channels in dynamical wireless environments. Signal processing and spectrum
sensing at RF is a potential solution that can assist the software techniques
and relax the receiver specifications. This CAREER project offers a
transformative solution of RF spectrum sensing: a chip-scale multi-GHz nano-
electro-mechanical frequency comb generator, integrated with other RF front-end
electronics. This project aims to broaden the participation of K-12 and
undergraduate students, particularly minority and female students, in STEM
fields. The outreach plan will use educational kits and hands-on modules through
collaboration with outreach programs at Georgia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
the heart of the spectrum sensor, the proposed compact RF comb generator,
utilizes the parallel processing resulting from the multiple comb teeth to
perform fast RF spectrum sensing, using lower power and fewer circuit components
than the current state-of-the-art hardware solutions. The proposed nano-electro-
mechanical frequency comb generator targets the super high frequency range (3-30
GHz) and harnesses new capabilities stemming from drastic reduction of
piezoelectric film thickness in bulk acoustic wave resonators to generate
wideband frequency combs. Leveraging their small size and high quality factor
(Q), nanoscale acoustic resonators can be driven into the nonlinear regime, a
prerequisite for comb generation, with very low input power. This CAREER project
investigates the fundamental science behind the formation and tuning of multi-
modal nano-electro-mechanical frequency combs, which remains under-explored to
date. The study of nonlinear phonon interactions can elucidate fundamental
physical phenomena, such as solitonic behavior, intrinsic localized modes, and
chaotic behavior in such phononic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.