* 1944903
* CAREER: Framework Topology Dependent Photophysical Properties of Chromophore Assemblies within Metal-Organic Frameworks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Pravas Deria, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2025
* USD 672,212.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, &amp;
Mechanisms-B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Pravas Deria of the
Department of Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry at Southern Illinois University
Carbondale is developing assemblies of highly colored organic molecules
carefully arranged in specific structures (known as metal-organic frameworks).
These Metal-organic frameworks have unique properties when they react with
light. The goal of this research is to make framework compositions with the
ability to capture and specifically channel light for efficient light harvesting
and conversion into stored chemical energy. The knowledge gained through this
CAREER research will have a broad impact in southern Illinois by augmenting
young student's (high school and below) perception towards basic science.
Professor Deria will recruit regional high school (HS) students into a two-week
chemistry research camp, where they will be introduced to fundamental scientific
research --including hands-on experience with exciting modern instrumentation.
Middle school students will be involved in demonstration of the 'Science of
Colors' with molecular pigments in biology at a local Science Center. These
educational programs will provide firsthand experience to inspire students to
choose science careers. The project lies at the interface of inorganic, organic,
and physical chemistry, and is well suited for the education of scientists at
all levels as the project has applications to solar to fuels, clean energy
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving photosystem II-like photophysical
behavior for efficient photonic energy harvesting in artificial chemical
assemblies is a challenge due to demanding supramolecular synthetic designs.
Precise and controllable organization of pigments is a prerequisite to achieving
new compositions that function differently than simple chromophore aggregates.
Porous crystalline metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) offer unique platforms to
develop well-defined, solution-stable molecular chromophore assemblies with
efficient photon energy transducing functionality. However, the design and
control of desirable photosystem II-like photophysical behavior in well-defined
MOFs is at an early stage of discovery. Basic rules governing exciton formation,
long-range exciton propagation, and directing exciton splitting into work-
producing charges within these synthetic framework-assemblies need to be fully
established. This CAREER project explores novel MOF compositions that control
excitonic structure and dynamics as a function of framework topology and
elucidates how chromophore electronic structure and excited-state symmetry
impacts exciton delocalization and migration. The research may unveil the
critical factors that modulate singlet-triplet intersystem crossing quantum
yields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.