* 1944958
* CAREER: Characterizing African Dust Aging and Seasonal Contributions of Dust and Biomass Burning to Aerosol Biogeochemical Cycles
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Cassandra Gaston, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2025
* USD 703,045.00

This project is focused on the study of the sources and aging of African dust in
the North Atlantic Basin. The central hypothesis of the research is that
chemically-aged African dust particles are the primary source of soluble
phosphorus (P) and iron (Fe) to the North Atlantic Basin in the summertime,
whereas combustion and biomass burning aerosol are the primary sources in the
winter and spring, contributing even larger quantities of soluble P and Fe than
summertime aged dust. Soluble forms of nutrients, such as P and Fe, can have a
large influence on biogeochemical cycles in the world’s oceans and can impact
the sequestration of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2), affecting
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of the effort are to: 1)
characterize the chemical mechanisms that age African dust during transport and
determine their impact on the solubility of P and Fe, and 2) determine the
contributions of biomass burning and combustion to soluble forms of P and Fe in
the North Atlantic Basin through seasonal measurements. Data from two sites that
have been used for decades to document the long-range transport of African dust
will be used in this study: 1) the Rosenstiel School of Marine &amp; Atmospheric
Science (RSMAS) on Virginia Key in Miami, Florida, and 2) the University of
Miami’s Barbados Atmospheric Chemistry Observatory (BACO). Several parameters
will be evaluated in the dust samples to better understand the mechanisms that
increase the solubility of P and Fe. These are: (1) whether aging has taken
place, (2) the acidity of the dust particles, (3) which specific acids are
internally mixed with dust; and 4) whether soluble P and Fe from combustion
aerosols are also present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of great interest
to communities in the Caribbean that are concerned about the health impacts of
transported African dust. The educational activities will both facilitate hands-
on early career training in analytical techniques as well as develop science
writing and communication skills for Ph.D. students, undergraduates, and high
school students from under-resourced communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.