* 1944879
* CAREER: Connecting Grain Boundary's Metastability Evolution to Mechanical Behavior of Nanocrystalline Alloys During Non-Equilibrium Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Yue Fan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2025
* USD 443,381.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Engineering metals are used broadly for
advanced energy, transportation, and defense applications. Intriguingly, nano-
crystalline metals, which are made of tiny nanometer-sized crystallites packed
tightly together, exhibits superior strength and improved durability. Within
each crystallite, the metal atoms are arranged in a highly orderly manner.
However, as the crystallites can have various spatial orientations with respect
to each other, the atoms near the boundaries between neighboring crystallites
are no longer well aligned and are viewed as defects. These defects play a
decisive role in the enhanced mechanical strength. Thus, to understand how these
defects improve the mechanical strength, the PI and his team will use
synchrotron X-ray sources available at the Argonne National Laboratory
complemented with advanced atomistic modeling techniques developed by the PI in
order to determine the motion of these atoms near these defects during
deformation under various stresses, temperatures, and rates of mechanical
deformation. Such insights will be used to advance predictive theory of the
nano-crystallite metals’ time-dependent and environment-sensitive mechanical
performances. The outcome of this research will also be leveraged into classroom
instruction using a virtual reality (VR)-assisted teaching innovation. In
addition, this project aims for broader impacts by outreaching to a variety of
platforms to mentor the next generation workforce in STEM, inspire under-
resourced K-12 students and potential future engineers with diverse backgrounds,
and engage the public and increase their awareness of material
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
behavior of metastable grain boundaries at complex environments is crucial to
develop cost-effective and high-performance nanocrystalline alloys demanded in
advanced energy, transportation, and defense applications. The primary objective
of this project is to establish a fundamental basis to describe the structural
and metastability evolution of grain boundaries at extreme conditions, and to
use this basis to explain and predict the grain boundary-mediated deformation
and the resultant mechanical properties of nanocrystalline alloys taking place
under non-equilibrium processing. The project will combine advanced atomistic
sampling techniques, potential energy landscape theory, and machine learning
tool to: (i) obtain the ensemble of elementary structural rearrangements and
associated activation energy spectra in disordered atomic packing environments
by inducing location-specific perturbations; (ii) enable an automated detection
of kernel atoms prone to plastic deformation through the non-affine displacement
field analysis using a random sample consensus machine learning algorithm; (iii)
establish a self-consistent kinetic theory to construct the connectivity between
grain boundaries’ various metastable states in the potential energy landscape
and to predict the evolution of time-dependent metastability; and, (iv) discover
the interaction mechanisms between metastable grain boundaries and pinning
dislocations across multiple timescales using potential energy landscape-
assisted novel atomistic modeling protocol. This project will also carry out
designed hypothesis-driven experiments, including X-ray diffraction, sub-
ablation femtosecond laser pulses, and nano-indentation, to validate the
modeling and theoretical predictions. The proposed research will directly link
the atomic level processes (e.g., short-range atomic rearrangements and non-
affine atomic displacement) inside the grain boundaries with the macroscopic
behavior of nanocrystalline alloys, which may facilitate exploiting new
design/processing space of nanocrystalline alloys, identifying optimized routes
to access novel states with enhanced performance and durability under complex
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will be integrated with
educational innovations and outreach activities, including: (i) utilizing
virtual reality and other advanced techniques in the developed new course on the
subject of grain boundaries and other defects in structural materials; (ii)
mentoring the next generation workforce in STEM fields by participating in
Summer Schools both at the University of Michigan and at National Laboratories;
(iii) outreaching to under-resourced K-12 students and potential future
engineers with diverse background through various platforms, and sharing the
PI’s research and career path to inform and inspire them and to promote higher
education; and, (iv) exploring the attractive venues such as museums to engage
the public and increase their awareness of materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded through the Metals and
Metallic Nanostructures and Condensed Matter and Materials Theory programs in
the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.