* 1944177
* CAREER: Precipitation Variability Across Multiple Timescales
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Elinor Martin, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 940,377.00

Precipitation can vary on time scales from minutes to centuries and can
significantly impact a variety of sectors including water resources, managed and
natural ecosystems, and public health. Precipitation is becoming more variable
across much of the globe, and this variability is projected to increase in the
future having potentially dramatic societal impacts. This project will advance
physical understanding and the ability to predict precipitation variability
while building the ability of students to see themselves as scientists in the
workforce (a.k.a. science identity) and contribute to a diverse, equitable, and
inclusive STEM community. The investigation goes beyond traditional individual
timescales to understand how and why precipitation at different timescales
interact. Of particular focus will be understanding how the seasonal cycle of
precipitation varies (i.e., the timing and magnitude of precipitation received
throughout the year) and how and why rapid transitions between wet and dry
conditions occur. Without a thorough understanding of the processes and
mechanisms that control variability, prediction of precipitation variations
cannot be improved. The project will be accomplished through analyses of
observations and historical forecasts and by conducting climate model
experiments to disentangle and unravel precipitation interactions across
different timescales. The research will be integrated with an education program
that utilizes precipitation variability research to build student’s atmospheric
science identity through videos, scientist spotlights, and a Precip-a-Thon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address fundamental science questions at
the interface of grand challenges in weather and climate extremes, water
sustainability, and informed decision making. Science will be advanced by
quantifying variability and diagnosing mechanisms and predictability of the
annual cycle of precipitation, rapid wet-dry transitions, and associated extreme
events across North America. Through these scientific advances, our ability to
predict impactful precipitation fluctuations will be increased. Understanding,
and ultimately predicting, precipitation variability across timescales is a
global challenge and the results and methodology generated in this project for
North America and sub-regions can be applied to other locations. A comprehensive
educational plan is integrated with the project to build an educated, informed,
and diverse workforce, including decision-makers, capable of using,
interpreting, and understanding climate science. Building student’s atmospheric
science identity will lead to a multitude of broader impacts through workforce
development and the educational materials developed. This project will create
video materials concerning precipitation variability to build climate literacy
as well as creating and implementing scientist spotlights to build science
identity. The hands-on Precip-a-Thon, utilizing video materials and
precipitation data, for prospective meteorology students visiting the University
of Oklahoma will begin building science identity and introduce them to research
early. The synergy among components, including engaging students in research and
using research in education and recruiting materials, will amplify their effects
and quicken the pace of scientific discovery while enhancing STEM education and
climate literacy in Oklahoma and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.