* 1944428
* CAREER: Enhancing E-Commerce and Service Systems by Embracing Consumer Flexibility
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Adam Elmachtoub, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2025
* USD 594,919.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the advancement of national prosperity and economic welfare by designing more
efficient e-commerce and service systems that embrace and leverage consumer
flexibility. Consumer flexibility refers to a consumer's explicit willingness to
receive one of an assortment of offered options in exchange for a reward or
discount. Two examples in the retail and service sectors include (i) opaque
products in online retail and travel, where consumers are willing to purchase an
article of clothing of unknown color or travel to an unspecified destination,
and (ii) large time windows in scheduled services such as grocery delivery and
medical appointments, where consumers are willing to receive service in one of
multiple time slots. The research fundamentally benefits consumers and firms by
providing discounted flexible options to consumers while reducing operational
costs of selling products and services. This award supports research on
foundational tools for understanding, embedding, and embracing consumer
flexibility in e-commerce and service systems, focusing on both the demand and
supply perspectives. The plan to integrate research and education includes
further developing the NYC Operations Day conference to embrace doctoral
students via presentation opportunities, mentorship, and funding from this
project, as well as course enrichment and the mentoring and education of
undergraduate and doctoral students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fully
embrace consumer flexibility, researchers and practitioners require a new set of
tools for managing demand with flexible options and for converting consumer
flexibility into operational efficiency. From the demand perspective, this
project provides a computationally tractable framework for incorporating
consumer flexibility. Since the valuations for flexible options are correlated
with the traditional options with special structure, previous models and
algorithms in this domain do not apply. This research will develop new
analytical methods and tractable approximation approaches for modeling consumer
behavior in choice models, leading to new pricing analysis and tools that
address the inherent mathematical difficulties introduced by flexible options.
From the supply perspective, classical operational models will be extended to
incorporate consumer flexibility. In inventory management, this project will
develop algorithms that quantify and leverage consumer flexibility to better
balance inventory and reduce supply chain costs. For scheduled services, such as
grocery delivery, new models will be developed to guide the design of time
windows that effectively manage capacity and ensure efficient vehicle
routes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.