* 1944248
* CAREER:Doped Aluminum Nitride Ferroelectric Microelectromechanical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Roy Olsson, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Title:&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Doped Aluminum Nitride Ferroelectric
Microelectromechanical Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In cellular phones, piezoelectric materials convert radio
frequency signals into mechanical vibrations that form the miniature, highly
selective, front-end filters critical to efficient utilization of the radio-
frequency (RF) spectrum. While acoustic filter technologies are well developed
in the existing cellular bands, miniature filtering technologies for mitigating
interference are lacking in the Millimeter Wave bands that have been allocated
for broadband fifth-generation (5G) cellular network technology. The proposed
research will study new methods for scaling the frequency of acoustic front-end
filtering technologies to the Millimeter Wave bands without the degradation in
performance that plaques existing frequency scaling approaches. Success of the
proposed research will enable reliable fifth-generation wireless networks that
are more robust to interference. The applications will have major societal
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;There are two grand
challenges to overcome in acoustic filter technologies as they are scaled to
meet the needs of wireless communication systems, such as fifth-generation (5G)
mobile networks. First, as the frequency of acoustic resonators and filters are
scaled beyond 6 giga Hertz (GHz), the dimensions rapidly shrink, significantly
degrading the performance due to a litany of parasitic effects. These including
degradation of the resonator quality factor arising from scattering at the
resonator surfaces and from resistive losses in the thinned metal electrodes,
and degradation of the resonator electromechanical coupling as the ratio of the
device capacitance falls in comparison to the capacitance associated with on-
chip routing to the tiny acoustic devices. Second, the fixed frequency operation
of existing acoustic resonators limits the number of bands that can be added
before the losses, area, and cost introduced by the routing and switches becomes
unworkable. This research seeks to study and exploit the recently discovered
ferroelectricity in aluminum scandium nitride (AlScN) thin films to address
these fundamental challenges. The proposed research will develop material
deposition techniques allowing for the systematic tailoring of the ferroelectric
properties through the thickness of an aluminum scandium nitride film stack via
variations in scandium doping. These techniques will be utilized to form film
stacks where the coercive fields have been engineered to vary through the device
thickness, allowing for the selective inversion of the ferroelectric
polarization of specific regions in the aluminum scandium nitride films at
controllable depths. Periodically poled layers through the film thickness will
be realized to selectively excite high order overtone acoustic resonances that
enable dramatic frequency scaling without the steep reductions in resonator
dimensions that degraded both the quality factor and electromechanical coupling
of prior frequency scaling attempts. The selective poling techniques will be
extended to demonstrate acoustic resonators that can be dynamically reconfigured
over many octaves in frequency. Finally, fundamental questions pertaining to the
aluminum scandium nitride film properties that ultimately define the performance
limits of the proposed radio-frequency (RF) devices will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.