* 1944639
* CAREER: Transport of perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in partially and fully saturated porous media - evaluating the interactions of solution chemistry and organic matter quality
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Erica Mckenzie, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Poly and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are man-made chemicals. PFAS have been
used in a variety of products due to their stability and other valuable chemical
properties. However, PFAS this stability also makes PFAS difficult to biodegrade
in the environment. In addition, their properties also pose a threat to human
health and the environment. It is estimated that over six million Americans have
been exposed to PFAS in the water supply, and PFAS is considered one of the most
important issues in environmental contamination facing the Nation. This concern
results from studies that have shown that some PFAS can enter and remain in the
human body, potentially causing cancer and other health problems. This knowledge
has led to many efforts to treat water sources to remove PFAS when discovered.
Pumping and treatment of groundwater is one of these commonly used treatment
approaches. While this approach has worked for some pollutants, the PFAS
movement in groundwater is difficult to predict because we do not fully
understand the interactions between PFAS and natural organic matter (NOM)
present in soil. The goal of this CAREER project is to address this knowledge
gap by investigating the interactions of NOM and PFAS. This will be achieved
through a series of experiments with well characterized model systems.
Understanding this process will allow us to improve groundwater treatment
systems to protect human health. This work will be used to educate the public
through outreach to increase awareness of PFAS challenges and efforts to address
these concerns. These efforts will increase the scientific literacy of the
Nation while educating the public on important health
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER proposal is to identify the
mechanisms of PFAS interactions with organic matter in soils. This will be
achieved using a range of conventional and novel analytical approaches to assess
how organic matter, cations, and PFAS interact through a framework including
solution phase complexation and accumulation at air-water and solid-water
interfaces. Mechanistic insights gained from this research could explain
previously observed variability in sorption distributions and rate constant
values. The proposed work will combine batch, static column, and flow-through
column experiments to assess PFAS transport from a near surface sources through
the vadose zone and saturated groundwater. An idealized porous media system will
be created using polymer-coated beads, where the polymers will be employed as
homogeneous well-defined soil organic matter proxies. Mechanistic insights will
be enabled through the use of organic matter proxies to elucidate how chemical
moieties affect PFAS-organic matter interactions. PFAS complexation by dissolved
organic matter and cation binding constants will be determined based on co-
elution in size exclusion chromatography. Air-water interfacial accumulation
will be evaluated using droplet contact angle coupled with stacked multi-ring
static columns operated in drainage and secondary imbibition modes. Finally,
PFAS transport in flow-through columns will be completed using continuous
effluent analysis by high resolution mass spectrometry to quantify PFAS
concentrations in the column effluent. The project includes a multi-component
outreach effort: 1) educational activities will focus on outreach to middle and
high school students, 2) research opportunities for undergraduate students from
a range of disciplines, and 3) development of multi-disciplinary thinking in
graduate students. These efforts will benefit the Nation through increased
scientific literacy and enhancement of the Nationâ€™s STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.