* 1944688
* CAREER: Scalable and reconfigurable time-based circuits and systems for high-resolution large antenna arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Subhanshu Gupta, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 554,998.00

Extremely large antenna arrays (LAA) comprising hundreds of antenna elements
promise to provide unprecedented spatial resolutions that can not only enable
many critical infrastructure technologies using millimeter-wave wireless
communications but also usher in exciting concepts such as holographic surfaces
for multi-user wireless communications, six-dimensional positioning for
autonomous vehicles, high-speed communication links for deep-space planetary
explorations, and automobile radars for detecting multiple objects. However, the
signal processing at these large-scale arrays bring challenges of higher energy
consumption and less accurate localization. Conventional phased array
transceivers, which interface with the real-world signals, face several
impediments in low-latency tracking and scaling due to highly complex signal
processing and imperfect spatial filtering. Such imperfections result in drastic
performance degradation endangering evolution of emerging wireless technologies.
To overcome these fundamental challenges, this research seeks to use discrete-
time delay-compensating techniques incorporating scalable time-based circuits
and systems so that future LAAs can estimate direction-of-arrival precisely,
cancel multiple interferences efficiently, and optimize the physical front-end
transceivers autonomously. This research effort is integrated with the principal
investigator's educational career goal of enhancing high-school and
undergraduate learning experience by increasing education, awareness and
preparation of the students through active collaborations with national labs and
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to transform
multi-antenna phased arrays using discrete-time delay-compensating time-based
circuits and systems with wide delay ranges and high precision for both energy-
efficient spatial signal processing and low-latency beam acquisition. Several
design techniques with non-uniform-sampling-based scalable discrete-time data
converters will form the basis of delay-compensating spatial signal processor
capable of handling gigahertz signal bandwidth. First, a discrete-time delay-
compensating spatial signal processor will be demonstrated with variable gain
and delay ranges for near-field and far-field LAAs. Second, the delay-
compensating technique will be instituted in linear time-based matrix-
multiplying data converters optimized using artificial-intelligence based self-
initializing bias optimization techniques to demonstrate faster and energy-
efficient convergence. Third, scalable system-level models for spatial arrays
incorporating wide scan angles, high-speed signal bandwidth, large number of
antenna elements, low-latency direction-of-arrival, and segmentation in true-
time-delay arrays will be developed to study their effects on both spectral
efficiency and energy efficiency for future LAAs. Through these comprehensive
studies, the project will establish the advantages of discrete-time delay-
compensating in wideband LAAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.