* 1944292
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Using the M6.4-7.1 Ridgecrest, CA Earthquake sequence to test a postseismic stress evolution monitoring system
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Kaj Johnson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2020
* USD 23,814.00

The RAPID project responds to the July Ridgecrest earthquakes in Southern
California and develops and tests a tool to monitor stress in the Earth and how
it changes after large earthquakes. The project takes GPS and satellite radar
data and in near real time computes how the Earth's crust and upper mantle are
deforming from the mainshocks and aftershock sequences. This project supports
two graduate students to work on developing these new tools and testing them in
the immediate aftermath of an earthquake. This project could lead to a future
real-time aftershock forecasting method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first major
earthquake in southern California in the last 20 years provides an opportunity
to test a postseismic stress evolution monitoring system that would operate in
near-real time. Coulomb stress changes from the mainshock of an earthquake are
routinely computed to examine the potential for triggering earthquakes on nearby
faults. It is known that aftershocks within about one fault-length of the
rupture can largely be attributed to coseismic stress changes, but at larger
distances, stress changes due to deeper postseismic deformation process such as
mantle flow are larger than the coseismic stress change. The Ridgecrest
earthquake triggered aftershocks greater than 100 km from the mainshock that are
not consistent with Coulomb stress changes from the mainshock.The near real time
technique developed through this research has potential to be implemented in
future real-time aftershock forecasting. An advantage of this approach is that
much of the heavy computation required to compute postseismic deformation is
pre-computed and stored. The postseismic deformation calculations are relatively
inexpensive and suites of models can be easily computed near real time. The
Ridgecrest earthquake sequence provides the first opportunity with modern
geodetic data to test a stress evolution monitoring
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.