* 1944453
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Cooperative Control of Humanoid Robots for Remote Operations in Nuclear Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Taskin Padir, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 09/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

As the enabling technologies mature, humanoid robots will find numerous
practical applications, as personal assistants in the home, first-responders in
disaster relief, and as pre-deployed space exploration assets. This project will
advance the capabilities of NASA's humanoid robot, Valkyrie, to replace human
hands for safe and risk-averse operations in existing science gloveboxes
commonly found in nuclear facilities. The project is motivated by the fact that
the dirty, dull and dangerous tasks ideal for human-supervised robots are
extensively found in thousands of gloveboxes being used today. The risk-averse
control framework for humanoid robots will provide significant contributions to
robotics and robot manipulation fields; the resulting technologies will also
significantly improve the safety of humans, accuracy of operations, and cost-
effectiveness associated with operations in high-consequence material handling
applications. Successful completion of this project will not only progress the
technological readiness of humanoids for practical applications but also will
contribute new knowledge to the field including how to translate human commands
to safe robot control methods. The project will create programs and tools to
train a workforce with new skills including teleoperation and interface design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of the project will make novel
contributions to the fields of constrained robot manipulation and human-robot
interaction. Specifically, this project will (1) validate a human-supervised
control framework for the risk-averse and intuitive operation of NASA's humanoid
robot, Valkyrie, performing common tasks found in science gloveboxes such as
pushing and sliding objects to the discharge ports; (2) develop theory and
practice for perception based robot manipulation and design novel solutions to
handle uncertainty, blend motion/force planning with high-level human input and
ambient intelligence to robustly execute practical tasks; (3) introduce and
refine the operational principles and evaluate safety significance of deploying
humanoids in nuclear operations; (4) develop new paradigms for applicability of
humanoid robots in nuclear clean-up by optimizing performance on a task-by-task
basis. The project outcomes will create new approaches in addressing
multidisciplinary challenges at the intersection of hardware/software co-design,
control theory, robotics, and human-robot interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.