* 1944846
* CAREER: Multi-Parametric Electrophysiology for High-Resolution Deep Brain Circuit Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Barbara Smith, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The research goal of this CAREER program is to develop and apply a new
technology that integrates photoacoustics (i.e., sound generated by light) and
fluorescence to precisely target neurocircuits known to be activated in response
to addiction. Identifying the neuronal subtype in reward circuitry is important
to understanding addiction. This group will further develop effective
pharmacotherapies for targeted treatments. The scientific outcomes of this
CAREER project will be specifically incorporated into education and outreach.
Through these efforts, new opportunities will be developed for education,
community engagement, and motivation of the next generation of medically-
inspired engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limitations in optical imaging depth
and cellular identification confines targeted high resolution recording of
neuronal circuits to the top layer of the living brain. A novel tool, pioneered
by the principal investigator, will serve as the foundation of a new scalable
and automated approach to measure and control neuronal signals deep in the
living brain with high spatial resolution and genetic specificity. This will
enable investigators to better characterize and understand complex neural
interactions, improving our fundamental understanding of widespread brain
circuit activity that will be broadly useful for a variety of neurological
disorders and neurodegenerative diseases, beyond current capabilities.
Establishing a valid and reliable system to target select cells in the deep
brain, precisely modulate neuronal activity, and record electrical signals from
multiple neurons within a single circuit will enable transformational
discoveries in neuroscience scientific&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.