* 1944032
* CAREER: Towards a Self-Powered Autonomous Robot for Intelligent Power Lines Vibration Control and Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Oumar Barry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This proposal will support fundamental research to engender a self-powered
autonomous robot to prevent electric power line defects. The US power grid is
more than half-a-century old and runs more than 150,000 miles, often in remote
locations. The overhead power lines (PLs) are exposed to harsh environments such
as wind-induced vibrations (WIV), which limit their lifespan. Conventional
techniques for suppressing the unwanted WIV rely on fixed passive vibration
absorbers (FPVAs). These FPVAs are often ineffective because of their narrow
frequency bandwidth, and inability to adapt to the changing wind
characteristics. This poor WIV control contributes to fatigue damage in the
strands of the cable, eventually resulting in PL failure. Relatedly, PL
inspection and maintenance are often required because of fatigue damage and acid
rain corrosion of the cables. These inspections are mostly conducted through
foot patrol or helicopter-assisted inspection; both techniques are laborious,
expensive, and dangerous to the maintenance personnel. Recently, PL inspection
robots have emerged, but their implementations have been hindered by their bulky
size, heavy weight, short operation time, energy inefficiency, and hefty price
tag. In view of these shortcomings, this CAREER project proposes a shift from
FPVAS and bulky robots to a multi-functional self-powered autonomous robot
(SPAR) for intelligent vibration control and monitoring of PLs. However, the
realization of such a robot requires a fundamental understanding of the
nonlinear dynamic interactions between wind forces, a vibrating-cable, and a
mobile robot. Such a problem has not been explored yet. The research goal of
this project is to create the fundamental tools that will enable the
construction of SPAR, which will help make US power grids smarter, more
sustainable, and more robust. The educational and outreach impacts of this
proposal are to broaden the representation and retention of underrepresented
minority in the STEM field, enable dissemination and commercialization of the
research findings to the power industry, and establish an interdisciplinary
course focusing on nonlinear dynamics of electromechanical systems for graduate
students and professional engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPAR will provide
fundamental breakthroughs at the interface of energy harvesting, fluid-structure
interactions, and vibration control. The proposed research tasks are: (1) the
construction of a multiphysics model to study wind-cable-robot interactions, (2)
the creation of an effective and adaptive electromagnetic energy harvester to
power the robot, (3) the development of a WIV control framework to optimize
vibration suppression, and (4) the establishment of a testbed to experimentally
investigate the performance of SPAR. This CAREER grant will advance scientific
knowledge in the following ways. First, the multiphysics model will create a
fundamental understanding of how a fluid interacts with an elastic continuum
coupled with a traveling robot. Second, the simultaneous adaptive energy
harvesting and vibration control technique will provide understanding of
broadband energy harvesting and vibration suppression of infinite dimensional
systems via passive self-tuning and active tracking of equilibrium positions.
Overall, this CAREER will augment our understanding of simultaneously harvesting
energy and controlling WIV of continuum systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.