* 1944495
* CAREER: Coupling Adsorption and Mechanics: Towards the Development of Smart Porous Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Gennady Gor, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2025
* USD 398,632.00

Adsorption of gases and liquids in porous materials plays a significant role in
separation processes. This project focuses on understanding the relationship
between fluid adsorption and the mechanical properties of adsorbent materials.
Specifically, novel theoretical approaches will be developed to predict how
adsorbent materials deform during fluid adsorption and how this mechanical
response affects the adsorption behavior of porous materials. Addressing these
open questions will guide the development of smart porous materials, advance
membrane separations processes and the design of soft robotics, and aid in
engineering the next-generation of sensing devices. The ability to design
advanced adsorbent and membrane materials may dramatically improve the
efficiency of separation technologies, ultimately improving access to clean
water and providing new strategies for carbon sequestration. The educational
component of the project will include development and dissemination of an online
programming course, as well as outreach activities with high-school students
from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
result in an atomistic modeling framework with quantitative predictive
capabilities to guide the engineering of smart porous materials with controlled
mechanical responses to fluids adsorption. Classical molecular simulation
techniques (Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations) and finite element
modeling will be used in a complementary fashion to predict materials responses
from atomistic to macroscopic scales. The resulting computational framework will
be applied to predict and develop fundamental understanding of adsorption-
induced deformation in three classes of technologically relevant materials:
zeolites, thin porous silica films, and porous polymers. The knowledge to emerge
from the proposed research will transform the paths to development of these
porous materials for applications such as membranes with controlled permeation,
chemomechanical sensors, and actuators. The educational component of this
project will tackle the development of an online course “Python for Chemical
Engineering Calculations,” which will help teach this powerful programming
language to undergraduate chemical engineering students across the nation. The
lecture videos and course materials will be made freely available to the public
and disseminated through the web-based LearnChemE resource. A complementary set
of educational modules targeting high-school and community college students will
also be developed. The investigator will present these modules at neighboring
New Jersey schools. These school visits will serve to engage traditionally
underrepresented groups from Northern Jersey’s diverse population in STEM
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.