* 1944827
* CAREER: Bridging Minor Planet and Meteor Science in the Era of Big Data
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Nicholas Moskovitz, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 04/30/2025
* USD 808,708.00

Minor planets (also called asteroids) are pristine relics of the ancient Solar
System. All meteorites that have fallen to Earth to date are believed to have
come from minor planets. These meteorites are our only direct link to the
earliest epoch of Solar System formation approximately 4.5 billion years ago.
Understanding the connections between meteors and minor planets will help
astronomers develop better theories for conditions on the young Earth. The
proposed work will deploy a network of video cameras to increase the rate of
meteor detection over Arizona, create a database of these meteors to enable new
research into their orbits before hitting Earth, automate the search for parent
asteroids for these bodies, and develop a tool to retroactively search existing
data sets for pre-impact detections of large meteors. The PI will work with
staff and students at Northern Arizona University’s Visual Communications
department to develop an interactive exhibit that will enable users from the
general public to visualize meteor paths and minor planet orbits. The exhibit
will be displayed at Lowell Observatory’s Visitor Center and at the Meteor
Crater Visitor Center. Undergraduates at NAU and NSF REU students will take part
in the work. The research will also have practical implications for discovering
and characterizing meteors that might be a threat to
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origin of meteoroids is not well understood, but
it must involve several processes: collisions, mass loss due to volatile
sublimation, and mass shedding due to rotational spin-up. These processes
produce meteor streams, meteoroids traveling on similar paths that produce
meteor showers when they impact the Earth. Over 100 meteor showers have been
well established, with hundreds more unconfirmed, and the majority have no known
parent asteroid or comet. The work will seek to connect meteor showers to their
parent bodies. Lowell Observatory presently operates four stations to monitor
meteors. Eight new stations will be added under this grant. Additionally, a more
powerful database will be developed that will enable investigators to search for
relational studies and to investigate lightcurves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.