* 1944069
* CAREER: Enhancing Robot Physical Intelligence via Crowdsourced Surrogate Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Cong Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2025
* USD 563,657.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant develops a novel way to
enhance skilled manipulation of objects as performed by human and robotic hands.
Challenges associated with dexterous object manipulation have been a bottleneck
limiting the application of robots in many production and service applications.
This project introduces a novel chopsticks-like robot and associated methods
that will allow robots to gradually develop "physical intelligence" (skills that
can be transferred to novel situations) by learning from a large group of
people, who are distributed across physical location and time. The project uses
"crowdsourcing" to obtain a large set of data from people using the chopsticks
robot to guide a similar, remote robot through industrial and social activities.
Sensorimotor control signals observed during teleoperation are parsed by a novel
artificial intelligence controller to improve autonomous robot skills. An
interesting feature of this controller is its ability to compose new object
manipulation skills from parts of previously observed skills. The project
develops a user training method that leverages the robot's acquired physical
intelligence to actively guide and improve robot teleoperation skills of humans.
The innovations promise to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare
by improving dexterity of robotic and human manipulation skills in a variety of
applications, including manufacturing, medical surgery, and home assistance. The
project includes an educational component that engages pre-college and college-
age students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop and test a novel focus on improving dexterous object manipulation skills
performed by human and robotic hands. The project advances three novel ideas.
First, the PI will use Amazon Mechanical Turk to implement a teleoperation
system (user interface, user management system, and robot learning database)
linking a group of human operators with remote robots. This approach, called
"Crowdsourced Surrogate Learning" (CSL), builds a database of sensor, motor, and
machine vision data collected while a large number of people separately use a
novel chopsticks-like robot to teleoperate a similar robot to conduct industrial
and social tasks. These human subjects experiments will provide the data needed
for subsequent robot skill learning and generalization using an approach called
"Robot Composite Learning" (RCL). RCL implements a discretized joint state space
of the robot and the object being grasped/manipulated, along with a statistical
inference technique, to compose new command signals - in real-time - enabling
the two-fingered robot hand to learn never-demonstrated skills such as new, in-
hand manipulations of small items. Finally, the PI will develop a "Reciprocal
Skill Induction" method that enables the CSL/RCL system to actively guide and
improve the robot teleoperation skills of humans by providing haptic guidance
using "virtual fixtures" that fade as a novel skill is
learned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.