* 1944209
* CAREER: Improving Operational Decision Making with Predictive Information and Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Jing Dong, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,001.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant promotes the national
health and welfare by studying methods to improve the efficiency of resource
planning and operations in healthcare and other critical services. This award
extends our understanding of data-driven methods that can provide better models
of patient flow and staffing. With the growing availability of data and
computational powers, there is an increasing awareness and appreciation of data-
backed decision making. However, challenges remain in identifying what types of
predictive information are most valuable, and subsequently in quantifying system
performance. The findings will provide structural insights and effective
policies to improve system efficiency, consumer experience, and quality of care.
The educational mission aims to expose students to the challenges of improving
operational efficiency and reducing risk in service and healthcare industries.
The accompanying educational plan facilitates training of engineers and
researchers who will be equipped with both solid theoretical backgrounds as well
as practical insights in data-informed operations research. Through the
educational activities, the Principal Investigator is committed to promoting the
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contains two main threads. The first studies
the use predictive information to achieve better system performance. The
objective is to develop a theoretical framework to evaluate the effectiveness of
different kinds of information and to quantify the impact of the informationâ€™s
accuracy. Techniques from asymptotic analysis of stochastic processes will be
extended to incorporate and analyze the impact of predictive information.
Moreover, advanced data-informed policies that lead to substantial performance
improvement and are robust to prediction errors will be constructed. The focus
is on limited-resource environments where externalities need to be carefully
modeled and studied. Motivated by healthcare applications, new paradigms for
transient performance analysis and optimization in face of multiple scales of
uncertainty will be developed. The second thread studies how to utilize data to
build better stochastic models. The objective is to develop a data-driven
modeling framework that provides accurate quantifications of salient tradeoffs
in system operations. Key challenges in model calibration, causal inference, and
performance evaluation will be addressed by combining tools from econometrics
with stochastic modeling. Prescriptive solutions that can be readily implemented
will be provided based on the high-fidelity nature of the
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.