* 1944425
* Statistical inference of the demographic consequences of agriculture worldwide
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Amy Goldberg, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 249,998.00

Human population growth during the Holocene has affected modern human genetic
variation and redefined global ecosystems. Was the shift to agricultural
societies the cause of this population growth? This project proposes a large-
scale quantitative examination of the demographic consequences of this worldwide
agricultural revolution. The investigators will develop a new statistical
framework that jointly infers prehistoric population growth from genetic and
archeological data in order to test a long-standing hypothesis suggesting that
the transition to agriculture spurred rapid human population growth because of
stable food sources and sedentism. The project will develop interdisciplinary
methods and open-access software that can be used by geneticists, archeologists,
paleontologists, and others interested in prehistory. The project also will
support hands-on boot-camps in statistical methods and data analysis for upper
level undergraduates and early graduate students, and train two
interdisciplinary graduate students in quantitative methods, focusing on
integration of large-scale genomic and archeological data, as well as software
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal develops a novel method to
infer population history, combining next generation sequence data with large
archeological datasets, including important developments in computational
archaeology. Incorporation of data from multiple fields allows for higher
resolution inferences, and tests for concordance between disciplines. The method
will then be applied to study one of the most impactful events in human history:
the agricultural transition, testing classic hypotheses about the massive social
and demographic rearrangements thought to accompany the shift to agriculture
using new large-scale databases. Comparisons between multiple continents will
provide independent tests of the consequences of the agricultural transition,
while also providing novel insight into the population histories of understudied
regions of the world. The method will be of use to researchers in a range of
fields as these types of big datasets become increasingly
common.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.