* 1944051
* CAREER: Boundary Control Towards Smart Water Management Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Mamadou Diagne, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 11/30/2022
* USD 528,649.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will provide viable
solutions to control combined river-dam-reservoir systems in an era of unceasing
growing demand for water and energy. Global warming is drastically altering
rainfall patterns, increasing the risk of water scarcity. The rapid conversion
of natural landscapes to urbanized areas that are continually growing in
population further accentuates this issue. Sustainable management strategies are
becoming critical to ensure the optimum use of essential but limited water
resources on the planet. Often, river infrastructures such as dams, gates, and
reservoirs are built to satisfy human societies' water and energy demands.
However, the maintenance of costly engineered river infrastructures is still
posing crucial problems related to reservoir sedimentation and ecosystem
preservation. First, estimation methodologies that allow real-time
quantification and monitoring of distributed profiles of sediments transported
in a water channel from the measurement of appropriate quantities at gate
locations will be developed. Second, flow control strategies for hydraulic
systems governed by continuum models of density gradient induced by moving
sediment will be exploited to ensure stable operation when gates release high
discharges in the channel or reservoir, generating turbulence during sediment
flushing or venting operations. An experimental setup that supports the
feasibility and efficiency of the control/estimation methodologies will be
designed. While advancing the science through the development of innovative
real-time control and estimation approaches, the research program will be
consolidated with an integrated educational plan with the introduction of a
graduate course related to the research topic. This project will create
opportunities for the participation of students in research and development in
water management systems at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key idea of the research is to exploit PDE
(Partial Differential Equation) boundary control techniques towards efficient
water and sediment dynamics management. Fundamental balance equations reflecting
the dynamics of coupled water and sediment waves, namely, the bilayer Saint-
Venant model, which describes a multiphase flow with a density gradient, will be
exploited to achieve the objective. The main difficulties to overcome involve
the real-time monitoring of distributed sediment bed profiles and disturbances
arising from flushing processes such as shock-waves and hydraulic jumps
generated by significant gate discharges over channels. Strongly coupled
nonlinear hyperbolic PDEs and mixed systems consisting of cascading hyperbolic
PDEs and ODE (Ordinary Differential Equations) are relevant to the flow physics
problems. The backstepping control technique combined with Lyapunov analysis
will be employed to derive high-performance observers and controllers that
solely use gate actuation dynamics and output measurements to enable fast and
exponential stabilization at a prescribed setpoint. Various extensions of the
theoretical outcomes of the research can essentially solve decisive challenges
related to the control of traffic dynamics, networks of sewer systems, and
pollutant transport in water flow, to name a few.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.