* 1944498
* CAREER:  Mesoscopic Quantum Opto-Electronics in Gate-Defined Transition Metal Dichacogenide Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Ke Wang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2025
* USD 475,064.00

The electronic properties of a solid can undergo dramatic change when its
thickness is reduced to the atomic limit. A family of semiconductors with
single-atom thickness, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD), host unique
electronic and optical properties that can potentially provide solutions to many
remaining challenges in future electronics and computing platforms. This CAREER
project investigates these novel material properties with versatile experimental
control, towards understanding and harnessing them in realizing novel device
concepts with improved performance and operation schemes. The research underpins
electronic device applications that can be particularly relevant in low energy
electronics and sensing. If successful, the project also lays a foundation
towards future semiconductor-based computing platforms that promises (1) smaller
device dimensions and higher-level integration, (2) new computation paradigms
with higher computational power and efficiency, and (3) new communication
protocols with enhanced information security. Multiple graduate students, and
undergraduates are being educated through this project in an interdisciplinary
research environment. A series of educational and outreach efforts are being
implemented, aimed towards enhanced training of the next generation scientific
and engineering work-force, including (1) development of a new course on device
physics directed towards an interdisciplinary student audience, (2) enhancing
the well-established "Method for Experimental Physics" course by providing a new
module of low-temperature physics experiments for physics undergraduate
students, (3) and recruitment of underrepresented groups into interdisciplinary
research and partnership with the Science Museum of Minnesota on K-12 education
and outreach, promoting public awareness toward the advanced nanotechnologies
and solid-state physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Electron spins â€“ a form of
quantized angular momentum, are widely used to define the 0 and 1 states of a
single quantum bit. In transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), the electron
spin is effectively locked to another quantum degree of freedom, valley. This
provides new ways of defining and manipulating a spin-valley quantum bit with
potentially enhanced life time and robustness, as it is much more difficult to
accidentally flip the valley quantum degree of freedom with electrical and
magnetic fluctuations. In addition, the in-plane electrostatic interactions in
TMDs are much stronger compared to conventional semiconductors, allowing
controllable light-matter interaction. This can be utilized to convert the
electronic quantum information to photonic states, a process essential for long
distance quantum communication between future electronic quantum computers. This
CAREER research focuses on studying exotic quantum phenomena in gate-defined TMD
nanostructures via electrical and optical quantum measurements and providing
proof-of-principle demonstration of new quantum device functionalities, such as
manipulation of the combined spin-valley quantum degree of freedom, tunable
strong in-plane and vertical electron coupling, and coherence transduction of
quantum information between electronic and optical states. By studying
electrostatically-controlled quantum tunneling processes, this CAREER project
also provides sensitive characterization of material metrics associated with
small energy scales that are difficult to access with conventional transport and
optical studies. The more complicated gate-defined nanostructures provide
platforms to study novel spin-valley-locked Coulomb drag and spin-valley
polarized mesoscopic quantum physics, which provides a basis for novel quantum
device concepts such as valleytronics and spin-valley qubits. Gate-defined
quantum confinement and manipulation of optical excitations allow the study of
novel exciton and condensate physics with tunable confinement-enhanced large
exciton binding energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.