* 1944785
* CAREER: Engineering Microbial Communities with Prebiotic/Probiotic Pairs
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Thomas Mansell, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2025
* USD 568,607.00

Some bacteria are beneficial to their host. These are referred to as probiotics.
Taking a supplement containing these organisms may be a way to treat diseases
like obesity, diabetes, or heart disease. The gut already contains a wide
variety of microbes, but introducing new ones that remain in place is difficult.
This research project aims to implement and evaluate a two-step strategy to
create an environment suitable for successfully introducing probiotics. The
first step is to modify the probiotics so that they can use nutrients not
normally found in the gut. The second step is to introduce the probiotic and the
unusual nutrient (referred to as a prebiotic) to the gut. The working hypothesis
is that this combination will provide a unique environment in which the target
probiotic can thrive. This work will advance knowledge of the role of nutrients
in regulating the gut ecosystem, drug delivery by engineered probiotics, and the
usage of prebiotics in the human diet. This research project also supports the
development of an interactive laboratory in which students will be able to
observe competition between engineered gut bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research project is to create a niche for engineered probiotic
bacteria through the use of unique prebiotics. The first objective is to
understand the effect that introducing prebiotics has on microbial communities
in vitro and in vivo. The second objective is to create unique prebiotic-
probiotic pairs by in vitro protection and in vivo deprotection of engineered
prebiotics. Microbial populations in simulated cultures and in mice supplemented
with an array of prebiotics will be characterized. Those results will guide the
design of prebiotics that can provide maximal advantage to the probiotics. Novel
nutrients will be generated by enzymatic and/or chemical modification of
existing prebiotics. Probiotic strains will be engineered to express enzymes
that undo these protective modifications to enable utilization. The results of
this research project could have significant positive impacts on the engineering
of beneficial microbiomes in outdoor environments as well as inside humans and
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.