* 1944121
* CAREER: Form, Function, and Mechanics of Cell-Cell Junctions in the Heterogeneous Vascular Endothelium
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Kimberly Stroka, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2025
* USD 588,778.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will investigate
endothelial cell-cell junctions - the lining of blood vessels and lymphatics.
This work will first study the relationship between the form, function, and
mechanics of these junctions. This work will then study how these features may
be regulated to influence the integrity of the endothelial barrier. Endothelial
cells form a critical semi-permeable barrier that controls the flux of ions,
molecules, and cells into and out of vasculature. When an organism is healthy,
the integrity of the endothelial cell barrier is tightly regulated. It can
become dysregulated in conditions such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, or
neurological diseases. The dysregulation can be in the form of spatial
heterogeneity or a change in temporal dynamics. Regardless, this dysregulation
poses a challenge for drug delivery. Cells exposed to the same environment can
demonstrate phenotypic (form) differences. These cell-cell heterogeneities may
have important functional significance. This work is important because a better
understanding of the links between endothelial cell-cell junction form,
function, and mechanics could lead to image-based functional predictions about
endothelial barrier integrity in both models and in living vessels. These
predictions could ultimately lead to improved drug delivery methods. This
research project will employ a multidisciplinary approach that integrates
aspects of engineering, biology, and physics using novel software. The research
project will also develop outreach initiatives featuring a series of research
training modules for undergraduate and graduate students, partnerships with
rural high schools, new labs and problem sets that synergize research and
education in an undergraduate biomechanics class, a podcast highlighting diverse
experiences in STEM careers, and training and mentoring efforts. As an award to
an early-career researcher, completion of the research and outreach work will
launch the investigator's career in both research and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to discover
how local alterations in endothelial cell-cell junction phenotype, and its
dynamic rearrangements, contribute to local permeability of the endothelium to
molecules and cells, and the degree to which this relationship is conserved
across varying mechanical conditions, genetic alterations, junction types, and
vascular beds from which the endothelial cells are derived. The research
objectives are to (1) determine the role of endothelial cell-cell junction
phenotype in controlling local permeability of the endothelium; (2) assess how
endothelial cell-cell junction mechanics influence junction phenotype in
response to external mechanical cues; and (3) determine how dynamic changes in
endothelial cell-cell junction phenotype and mechanics contribute to local
permeability of the endothelium. This work will establish the potential for a
novel systems mechanobiology approach using microfabricated vascular models,
molecular biology, advanced microscopy techniques, and custom software for
quantitative analysis of the form, function, and mechanics of cell-cell
junctions in the vascular endothelium. The following questions regarding
endothelial cell mechanobiology will be answered: (i) can endothelial cell-cell
junction phenotype and/or dynamics be used to quantitatively predict local
permeability to molecules and/or cells; (ii) does intercellular junction
phenotype quantitatively correlate with cell-cell or cell-matrix tension; and
(iii) how do external mechanical cues alter intracellular signaling pathways to
shift intercellular junction phenotypes and local barrier function? The project
will allow the PI to advance knowledge in the field of mechanobiology, develop
new model systems and quantitative analysis tools for broad use across
bioengineering applications, and form the infrastructure for a transformative
education, mentoring, and outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.