* 1944973
* CAREER: Quantification of Cellular Proteome Stress and Recovery Using Chemical Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Xin Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 10/31/2022
* USD 164,573.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Xin Zhang from Pennsylvania State University to develop
new tools examining the effects of stresses on proteins in live cells, in real
time. The proteins in cells must be maintained in a delicate balance between a
folded state that is dissolved in water (soluble folded) and an solid state that
does not dissolve in water (insoluble aggregated state). Excessive aggregation
is bad for the cells but this phenomenon occurs when cells are exposed to
stresses such as aging, heat and certain chemicals. To understand how protein
stress relates to cellular function, Dr. Zhang focuses develops a new class of
fluorescent sensors that light up when they come into contact with unfolded
proteins in cells. This project provides a variety of new tools for real-time
determinations of cellular protein stresses and recovery. The interdisciplinary
nature of the program allows graduate and undergraduate students to gain
training and expertise in modern chemical biology research. The project also
includes an education plan called "Seeking Protein Aggregates Detectors". The
central theme of this education plan is to integrate K-12 and undergraduate
students in research and public engagement programs that discover new chemical
detectors for protein aggregates from unexplored natural dyes and their
interactions with egg white proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As existing proteome
stress sensors are insufficient to enable quantitative studies on the dynamics
of proteome stress and recovery, Dr. Zhang is developing a novel class of
fluorogenic sensors, represented by the AgHalo sensor. This sensor uses changes
in fluorescence intensity as a direct readout to quantify stress-induced protein
aggregation. Building on this foundation, Dr. Zhang is developing a second
fluorogenic proteome stress sensor, AgSNAP, which is orthogonal to AgHalo, thus
enabling a set of two-color sensors. To detect protein refolding as a post-
stress event, a fluorogenic proteome recovery sensor is being developed using
anti-solvatochromic fluorophores. These sensors are used to quantify
intracellular protein aggregation and refolding in cells that are subjected to
chronic stresses. Mutant proteins that can form either soluble or insoluble
aggregates are also targeted. Results of these experiments test the hypothesis
that the soluble aggregates of mutant proteins cause a more severe proteome
stress than the insoluble aggregates. These research goals enable a set of novel
proteome stress and recovery sensors for the protein biochemistry community and
provide quantitative knowledge of proteome aggregation and refolding in
chronically stressed cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.