* 1944773
* Memory and context effects on representations of variation in phrasal intonation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Cole, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 419,792.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meaning is communicated in spoken
language through words and their arrangement in sentences, and also through the
way the words and sentences are said â€” their intonation. In English, intonation
conveys discourse meaning, marking the distinction between a question and a
statement, expressing the speaker's uncertainty or surprise, or highlighting
informative words. These meanings are conveyed through complex patterns in pitch
and other acoustic features, across the words in the sentence. Understanding how
an intonation system works requires a detailed description of the intonation
patterns that speakers produce, and an account of the elements that are
perceptually salient: Is the pitch pattern of every word in a sentence
potentially meaningful, and if not, which intonational features and which
regions of the sentence are more (or less) critical for conveying discourse
meaning? A further question is whether listeners pay attention to subtle
variation in intonational features as marking corresponding distinctions in
broad categories like 'question' or 'information focus', or alternatively,
whether they attend to coarse-grained distinctions in intonation as cues to the
broad meaning categories, while perceiving fine-grained variation as cues to
speaker identity or psychological state. Understanding the mapping between
intonation and meaning is important for theories of speech communication,
cognition, the brain, and language learning. It has applications in clinical
domains related to speech, hearing, and the brain, and for enhanced computer
speech technologies that can process expressive spoken
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to identify the
elements of phrasal intonation that are perceived in heard speech and encoded in
long-term memory representations. These representations are tapped through tasks
where listeners reproduce the intonation of a heard utterance. Experiments will
test 24 distinct intonational "tunes" proposed for English in the Autosegmental-
Metrical theory of English intonation. In eight experiments, the participant's
task of reproducing intonation is manipulated in three ways: using model
sentences with more complex intonational patterns and variable lexical and
syntactic content; introducing a time delay or an intervening speech task
between hearing the model sentence and reproducing the intonation pattern; with
information about the immediately preceding discourse and social context that
support the interpretation of intonational meaning. Analyses of dynamic acoustic
measures will test the similarity of reproduced intonation patterns to
corresponding stimuli, revealing the phonetic granularity of intonational
representations along dimensions related to pitch, loudness, tempo, and voice
quality, and whether individuals vary in the intonational features they
reproduce. The findings will resolve long-standing questions about intonational
representation, informing linguistic theories of intonation and its meaning, and
advancing intonation research with a novel experimental paradigm that can be
used in studies of other languages, with no requirements on written language or
the explicit definition of intonational meaning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.