* 1944149
* CAREER: Theory-Guided Statistical Framework for Advancing Learning from Post-Windstorm Engineering Assessments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* David Roueche, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2025
* USD 573,297.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will investigate new
methodologies to advance learning from post-windstorm reconnaissance data.
Windstorms, such as hurricanes and tornadoes, continue to cost billions in
economic losses each year in the United States, much of which is due to the
performance of buildings. In response, researchers collect increasingly vast
datasets documenting the post-windstorm state of buildings. These data have the
potential to drive advancements in both fundamental science and engineering
practice that will strengthen the resilience of buildings and communities and
can reduce future losses and other impacts. The robust capabilities for
capturing windstorm performance data vastly outweigh current capabilities for
learning from this data, which are typically incomplete, biased, and ill-suited
for efficient discovery and application of knowledge. This project will develop
a robust, theory-guided, statistical inference framework for learning from post-
windstorm data that will transform the scale to understand and predict windstorm
damage, specifically for low-rise buildings. These advancements will spur the
development and implementation of more effective windstorm risk mitigation and
more robust education strategies, and further inform more efficient and
intelligent post-disaster reconnaissance methodologies. An interactive outreach
platform will be developed to translate the research findings to the general
public and increase public awareness of the critical factors affecting windstorm
performance. A new graduate and undergraduate student organization will be
developed to foster inter-disciplinary collaboration within the disaster
research community that will produce a new generation of engineers, social
scientists, and policy makers that have a more holistic understanding of
disasters and disaster risk mitigation. Data from this project will be archived
and made publicly available in the Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). This grant
supports the National Science Foundation (NSF) role in the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Windstorm performance of
buildings is a function of a complex set of interacting factors that span
meteorology, engineering, public policy, and socioeconomics that are not
holistically understood. The specific goal of this research is to combine
traditional data science with fundamental theory and expert knowledge to create
a theory-guided, statistical inference framework that will enable efficient
knowledge discovery from high-dimensional post-windstorm reconnaissance data.
The project will utilize high quality post-windstorm datasets from recent
windstorms collected by the NSF-supported Structural Extreme Events
Reconnaissance network, enriched using additional data layers and human-machine
techniques, to form robust testbeds for developing and piloting the new
framework. The framework will build upon probabilistic graphical models, which
allow established theory and expert knowledge to define known windstorm
performance factors and their fundamental interrelationships, while focusing on
causal inference as the goal rather than black box predictions. Ultimately, the
research will enable a holistic understanding of the relative contributions of
known windstorm performance factors, identify previously unknown or
underestimated factors, and target new research areas supported by field
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.