* 1944691
* CAREER: 3D/Polyhedral Graphic Statics for Education, Design, and Optimization of  High-Performance Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Masoud Akbarzadeh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 01/31/2025
* USD 599,722.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will bridge the gap between
design and engineering by developing a robust computational framework for the
use, development, and integration of geometry-based structural design methods in
three dimensions. These methods, known as 2-D graphic statics (GS), are powerful
geometric techniques that have been used to find efficient structural forms of
many iconic bridges and long-span structures over the past 150 years. This
program will establish the mathematical foundations of 3-D graphic statics,
which has been very recently developed for finding architectural forms for high-
performance structures. This research will devise computational tools to
effectively build, control, and optimize structural forms in three dimensions.
An open-source software, an interactive educational platform together with
outreach activities will extend the accessibility and use of 3-D graphic statics
by students, designers, and practitioners to learn, share, explore, and design
innovative, high-performance, lightweight spatial structural solutions. The
result of this project will open a new horizon for an unexplored realm of
efficient spatial structural designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective
of this CAREER project is to develop mathematical methods and computational
algorithms that (1) effectively construct convex and non-convex (self-
intersecting) reciprocal polyhedral diagrams with certain user-input geometric
constraints; (2) optimize the magnitude of external loads and the internal
forces geometrically; (3) manipulate reciprocal polyhedral diagrams without
breaking the topological and geometric dependencies of these diagrams; (4) allow
for instant topological editing of both structural form and its force
distribution; and (5) enhance the visualization of the reciprocal diagrams to
increase design efficiency. This program will also provide a robust software
platform and its related application programming interface for design, control
and optimization of structures using 3D graphic statics. The software platform
will be used in the education of a wide range of students, researchers, and
practitioners and broaden the use of 3-d graphic statics in the design and
fabrication of highly efficient, innovative, high-performance structural
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.