* 1944740
* CAREER: Statistical Inference for Bayesian Machine Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Veronika Rockova, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 357,173.00

With visible successes on a broad range of predictive problems, the role of
machine learning (ML) has become increasingly recognized across a wide array of
application domains ranging from economics to electronic commerce. In medicine,
for instance, machine learning is routinely deployed for image segmentation,
registration, computer aided detection and diagnosis, brain function or activity
analysis from fMR images, and text analysis of radiology reports using natural
language processing. In spite of this nascent ML trend, there has been
significant reluctance to delegate decision making entirely to machine
intelligence. This has been largely due to the absence of a formal statistical
framework for uncertainty quantification and interpretability. This yawning gap
between theory and practice presents new exciting research opportunities for
theoretical developments that will justify and unleash the potential machine-
assisted decision making in real life. This project has two broad objectives.
The first one is motivated by the currently unmet demand for theoretical
justification of widely used Bayesian machine learning tools. The second
objective is developing practicable methodology for interpretable machine
learning, which is essential for gleaning insights into the behavior of real-
world processes. The research outlined in this project will bridge current
conceptual divides between statistics and machine learning by solidifying
Bayesian machine-assisted inference as statistically valid so that it can be
safely used to tackle complex scientific problems arising in data-rich
environments including imaging, personalized medicine, business analytics,
marketing and economics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been a
growing realization of the potential of Bayesian machine learning as a platform
that can provide both flexible modeling, accurate predictions as well as
coherent uncertainty statements. In particular, Bayesian Additive Regression
Trees (BART) has emerged as one of today's most effective machine learning
methods under minimal assumptions. BART has already proved itself to be broadly
effective at unveiling structure hidden in high dimensional data across a wide
variety of contemporary applications. Its theoretical properties for statistical
inference, however, have remained unknown. The detailed research agenda of the
first three goals aims at obtaining an in-depth theoretical understanding of
BART (as well as some aspects of Bayesian deep learning) through the
investigation of (1) uncertainty quantification and confidence set
constructions, (2) adaptability to spatially inhomogeneous objects, (3)
asymptotic normality for causal inference. The completion of these objectives
will significantly advance the current frontier of semi-parametric and non-
parametric Bayesian theory. The principal investigator will develop new scalable
tools for interpretable machine learning which will extend the reach of ML to
many new application areas and problem types involving big
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.