* 1944816
* CAREER: Physical Principles and Applications of Plant-Inspired Tip Growth for Robotics
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Elliot Hawkes, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2025
* USD 606,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will study the physical
principles underlying the behavior of a new type of soft robot: the tip-growing
plant-inspired “vine robot.” Currently, the formal understanding for this new
soft robot is limited. This project will investigate the fundamental limits and
full range of capabilities of the vine robots. The benefits of this project are
threefold: (1) Progress of Science - The basic understanding of vine robots
created during this work will enable the design of robots as tools for
scientific discovery. For instance, vine robots will aid archeologists exploring
ruins, and biologists exploring underground creatures; (2) Societal - The robots
enabled by this work will demonstrate new functionality; miniaturized medical
vine robots will enable safe and efficient endovascular surgery to advance
national health, and burrowing vine robots will enable access to the largely
unexplored subterranean world; and (3) Educational - The soft robot-centered
educational content, designed to be engaging and active, while eliciting
creativity, problem solving and critical thinking, will prepare the next
generation of engineers and scientists to make impactful contributions to the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to use
analytical modeling and hypothesis-driven experimentation to elucidate the
physical principles governing the behavior of vine robots. It is critical to
create the body of knowledge that rigorously describes its behavior to realize
the full potential of this concept. This project will be accomplished in three
Aims, in which the researcher will: (1) Investigate dynamic growth in free space
to establish the underlying physical principles; (2) Investigate dynamic growth
in constrained environments: and (3) Apply principles from Aims 1 and 2 to
enable new vine robot applications: medical vine robots in the body’s pathways
and burrowing robots in the subterranean world. The knowledge gained—from new
scaling laws to a formalization of vine robot workspace to a predictive
understanding of obstacle interaction force—will help lay the foundational
understanding for this fledgling sub-field of soft robotics. This will enable
not only parameter optimization, but fundamentally new approaches and designs
for vine robots. More broadly, the new understanding will advance the field of
soft robotics—advancing our understanding of soft systems that deform and
dynamically adapt to their environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.