* 1944284
* CAREER: Risk Modified Life Cycle Assessment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Hua Cai, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2025
* USD 502,917.00

Life-cycle assessment is a widely used tool to evaluate the environmental
impacts of a product or service throughout its life cycle and to guide product
design and policy decisions. However, the current life-cycle assessment
framework and databases do not account for the environmental impacts from
unintentional release of chemicals and other substances due to accidents,
spills, or leaks. Unintentional substance release incidents are not rare events
and instead happen on a daily basis. Ignoring these risks in environmental
assessments may lead to biased results and short-sighted decisions. This
research project aims to develop a critically needed new framework and database
to incorporate potential unintentional substance release risks and impacts into
life cycle based environmental assessments. Undergraduate and graduate students
will receive training on cutting-edge environmental assessment methods. This
research project also aims to implement an education program to provide
materials on risk- and life cycle-based environmental sustainability assessment
to students, decision makers, and the general public. Well-designed and tested
educational games are targeted to help the general public to better understand
environmental sustainability and to culture a system thinking mindset for K-12
students. An open-source tool and online learning materials are aimed at
educating life-cycle assessment practitioners and decision makers on risk-
modified life-cycle assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims
to identify the unintentional substance release risks in the product life cycle,
to characterize unintentional substance release impacts for selected case study
substances, and to apply risk-modified life-cycle assessment for policy
analysis. The developed risk-modified life-cycle assessment framework would
enable the consideration of potential unintentional substance release risks at
the product design or policy planning phase. Such a framework would also better
inform decision making and lead to more sustainable development solutions at
lower economic, environmental, and social costs to society. Freely available,
open-source tool, database, and online learning materials would encourage the
scientific community to apply the risk-modified life-cycle assessment framework
to address additional risks and gradually develop better risk-modified life-
cycle assessment databases collectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.