* 1944345
* CAREER: Dynamic Process-Attribute-Data-Performance Modeling to Enable Smart Ultrasonic Metal Welding
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Chenhui Shao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research on ultrasonic metal welding (UMW). Among the advantages of UMW over
conventional fusion welding techniques are the ability to join dissimilar
metals, energy efficiency, short welding cycles, and environmental friendliness,
making it a promising joining technology for the advanced manufacturing of
electrified and lightweight vehicles. Nevertheless, UMW has a relatively narrow
operating window and is very sensitive to unpredictable, uncontrollable
environmental conditions. This longstanding knowledge gap in the underlying
process mechanisms makes the prediction and control of joint quality difficult,
which limits its use. This project will take advantage of the emergent
information-centric transformation of manufacturing science by leveraging
advances in process physics, microstructural analysis, and data science. By
establishing dynamic, stochastic relationships between process conditions,
microstructural weld attributes, online sensing data, and weld performance, the
research will advance the fundamental understanding of process mechanisms in
UMW. The knowledge gained will be used to establish a suite of machine learning-
based decision-making tools that will ultimately enable smart UMW. This grant
will also support diverse educational and outreach activities that contribute to
the education of the U.S. smart manufacturing workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is a widely accepted hypothesis that UMW process
conditions influence the joining performance via the dynamic evolution of micro-
scale weld attributes and the weld formation process generates a signature, as
reflected in parameters that can be sensed online. Nonetheless, there exist no
studies to date that adequately model or quantify the inherent dynamic,
stochastic process-attribute-data-performance (PADP) relationship. The
overarching goal of this research is to create a PADP modeling framework that
consists of innovative machine learning and statistical models. The framework
will be completed in two steps. First, spatiotemporal models incorporating
uncertainty quantification will be built to characterize the process-attribute-
performance relationship. Second, a tensor-based correlation and regression
analysis will be performed to investigate the attribute-data relationship. This
framework will be further employed to develop a series of physics-aware, machine
learning tools for process control, including process optimization, online
quality monitoring, and real-time control. Finally, the project will investigate
the use of a transfer learning methodology to provide a cost-effective way to
build PADP models and decision-making strategies for related products or product
families. This learning capability will be an essential component in the cloud
intelligence that enables the smart manufacturing
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.