* 1944157
* CAREER: Environmental Fate and Ecosystem Impacts of Drugs of Abuse in Receiving Waters
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Sheree Pagsuyoin, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2024
* USD 525,012.00

The impacts of the opioid crisis extend beyond the human toll to potential
impacts to the environment. A high percentage of these compounds and their
metabolites pass through wastewater collection and treatment systems into
receiving waters, where their impacts are largely unknown. "Drugs of abuse",
which include abused prescription and illicit drugs, are a group of emerging
contaminants whose fate in ecosystems is still largely unknown. Their high
consumption, coupled with their incomplete removal during wastewater treatment,
leads to their widespread occurrence in the environment. Many drugs of abuse are
psychoactive and may pose exposure risks to aquatic organisms. A primary goal
for this project is to evaluate the environmental distribution, natural
attenuation, and ecological impacts of residual drugs in receiving waters.
Results will be used to develop tools for rapid assessment in waters across the
Nation. The project will also implement diverse educational and outreach
initiatives designed to engage student groups in experiential STEM learning and
raise awareness and scientific understanding on the ecological burdens of drugs
of abuse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to leverage state of the
science chemical analytical techniques to understand the distribution, fate, and
ecological impacts of drugs of abuse in aquatic environments. The project has
four integrated research components: (1) characterize the spatio-temporal
occurrence of drugs of abuse in riverine and estuarine systems, (2) quantify
exposure effects on stream productivity and biodiversity, (3) determine kinetic
rates of in-stream attenuation, and (4) identify ecotoxicity "hotspots" for
residual drugs in the Merrimack River model watershed. Characterizing the
spatio-temporal distribution of drugs of abuse will greatly increase our
understanding of their environmental spread, fate, and transport in US waters.
Research findings will inform subsequent exposure and kinetic studies, which in
turn will guide the formulation of environmental exposure indices. Results from
this research will provide a basis for future regional ecotoxicity assessments
for drugs of abuse in the environment and will broaden our understanding of the
assimilative capacity of receiving waters. These results will be leveraged to
benefit society through collaboration with local and State agencies, as well as
through outreach to the public to increase the public's scientific literacy on
the impacts of drugs of abuse on the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.