* 1944810
* CAREER: Establishing a New Retrosynthetic Framework for Identifying Precursors of Priority Disinfection Byproducts in Recycled Wastewater
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Daniel McCurry, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2025
* USD 418,686.00

Water scarcity is a serious and growing problem for the Nation and the world.
One approach to help solve the issue of water scarcity is to recycle treated
wastewater. Re-used wastewater needs to be treated to a sufficient quality to
make it fit for use, including for irrigation, industry, and even drinking
water. The most important step in the water recycling process is disinfection to
kill viruses and bacteria. Disinfection is usually done by adding chemical
oxidants like chlorine (bleach). The problem with using these oxidants is that
they can react with organic molecules naturally present in the water to form
byproduct chemicals. Many of these byproducts are highly toxic and potentially
carcinogenic and must be removed. The goal of this CAREER research project is to
understand the chemical reactions leading to toxic byproduct formation during
water recycling. This knowledge will allow control or the elimination of
byproduct formation without compromising disinfection. Successful completion of
this research will help the Nation develop feasible approaches to address water
scarcity, while protecting the public. Results will be used to inform and
educate the public on engineering and water issues through outreach efforts in
collaboration with Engineers Without Borders and with a local high school in Los
Angeles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to develop a
new framework for identifying the precursors and formation pathways of
carcinogenic disinfection byproduct (DBP) chemicals in recycled wastewater. This
goal will be achieved through specific research focused on three classes of DBPs
that are known to convey the highest degree of risk. DBPs remain a serious
obstacle to wider adoption of water reuse, as they are the chemicals in recycled
wastewater of greatest human health concern; even greater than pharmaceuticals
or industrial contaminants. Minimizing their formation requires identifying
their precursors and formation pathways so that treatment systems can be re-
engineered to prevent formation. In the first step, a hypothesis will be
generated about the functional groups likely to lead to formation of DBPs using
retrosynthesis, a technique developed by synthetic chemists to select chemical
precursors for synthetic targets. Next, a bottom-up approach will be used to
demonstrate that the predicted precursor functional groups are responsible for
observed formation. Precursors will be modified to less reactive derivatives and
DBP formation potential will be compared to controls. Derivatized precursors
will then be analyzed to identity specific precursor molecules. Finally, a top-
down approach will be employed to develop the final precursor candidate list.
These analytes will be measured in recycled wastewater and their share of the
precursor pool will be quantified by both formation potential and simulated
distribution system testing for validation. The education and outreach component
of this CAREER project is composed of three complementary activities. The PI
will work with the USC Engineers Without Borders (EWB) group on water treatment
projects in Latin America, applying tools and knowledge from the research
component to a disinfection system built by undergraduates. The PI will also
host a high school student and teacher in the lab and involve the teacher’s
class in the EWB project by remotely transmitting raw data for analysis.
Finally, the PI will develop a new problem-based “Tradeoffs in Disinfection”
module for the sophomore-level environmental engineering course, using the
system built by the USC EWB team in Guatemala as a case
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.