* 1944322
* CAREER: Modeling human veins and venous pathology with organ-on-chip engineering for basic, translational and educational research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Abhishek Jain, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2025
* USD 509,596.00

Venous diseases (such as venous thrombosis) are ranked amongst the top
cardiovascular causes of death worldwide. These diseases are relatively poorly
understood and the therapeutic approaches to treat these disorders are very
limited. These inadequacies exist because discovery and therapeutic programs
rely heavily on results from animal models, whereas these models (particularly
rodent models) of venous diseases often perform poorly in terms of predicting
human pathophysiology. The goal of this NSF CAREER project is to test the
hypothesis that venous architecture, function and pathology (deep vein
thrombosis) can be recreated bottom-up with a newly designed organ-on-chip
(vein-on-chip) technology, which can serve as a replacement to animal models in
preclinical and clinical cardiovascular research. The project will be leveraged
to create an educational program titled "Biology WITHOUT Animals But WITH
Engineering" that will target high school students, involve undergraduates in
research and as mentors, and provide contemporary communication strategies to
graduate students. The program is designed to stimulate excitement in STEM
education and contribute to creating a critical and diverse workforce of
biomedical engineers who can accelerate and economize healthcare through
innovation in drug discovery pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Investigator’s
long-term goal is to positively impact human healthcare by providing both
mechanistic understanding as well as therapeutic assessment for complex vascular
diseases with FDA-approved bioengineered modeling systems. Toward this goal,
this CAREER project will build on the Investigator’s engineered tunable model of
a fully human vein-on-chip (including valves and endothelium) for the analysis
of venous thrombosis, related pathologies and therapeutics in vitro. The
Research Plan is designed to establish this vein-on-chip platform to perform
dissectible analysis of the known but underexplored factors that govern venous
thrombosis and its treatment. The first step is to leverage the platform to
dissect the factors of Virchow’s triad sequentially (endothelium, blood and
flow) and determine their individual and collaborative contributions in the
onset and propagation of DVT. The vein-on-a-chip will then be applied to dissect
the immune factors systematically. Blood constituents (neutrophils, monocytes or
platelets) will be added or subtracted systematically to determine the
synergistic or inhibitory role, individually or collectively, in onset of DVT
and its consequences. Finally, the vein-on-chip will be used to suggest new
strategies to resolve DVT. The working hypothesis is that the DVT-on-chip system
will reveal how combinations of anticoagulant, anti-inflammatory and statin
drugs may resolve DVT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.