* 1944791
* CAREER: Understanding bacteria encapsulation, proliferation and release in photodegradable hydrogel materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Ryan Hansen, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 04/30/2025
* USD 468,010.00

Abstract (non-technical)&lt;br/&gt;Advancements in microbial biotechnology
continue to expand our knowledge of the bacterial world. To fully understand and
predict behavior of bacteria, it is necessary to connect its molecular makeup
with its observable characteristics. This often requires individual bacteria
first be isolated at high purity, which is currently difficult to do. The goal
of this NSF CAREER award is to investigate use of photodegradable hydrogel
materials for identification and isolation of rare bacteria cells with unique
function for molecular analysis. Hydrogels are three-dimensional, water-soluble
polymers that can be used to encapsulate collections of cells for observation. A
fundamental understanding of both chemical and physical characteristics of
hydrogels that lead to stable and effective encapsulation of bacteria will first
be established. These hydrogels will then be designed to degrade following
exposure to low-energy, near-infrared light unharmful to bacteria, which will
allow for release of live, single cells from the hydrogel at any time. The
outcome will be a new, materials-based approach to microbial isolation that will
be low cost and highly translational to the standard microbiology lab. These
hydrogels will have broader application to other emerging areas in microbiology
including targeted delivery of therapeutic bacteria to disease sites. The
integrated educational goal of the project is to develop global-minded students
who are well prepared for interdisciplinary research careers at the interface of
materials science and microbiology through the Joint Microbe-Material Scholars
(JMMS) program. The JMMS platform will leverage established programs at Kansas
State University for engagement and recruitment of underrepresented minority
students throughout the state of Kansas and will provide its scholars with
international research experiences. This project is jointly funded by the
Biomaterials Program of the NSF Division of Materials Research, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract (technical)&lt;br/&gt;Photodegradable
hydrogels have been intensively studied for application in tissue engineering
and targeted drug delivery. However, these materials are largely unexplored for
use in microbiology, but have great potential for on-demand delivery of bacteria
as well as for use in low-cost cell isolation methods. These capabilities are
critical for advancing our knowledge of the microbial world and for using
bacteria in emerging therapeutic applications. The overall goal of this CAREER
proposal is to provide a fundamental understanding of hydrogel material
properties that provide stable bacteria encapsulation, culture, transport, and
release from photodegradable hydrogels with high viability and precision. Step-
growth polymerizations that use thiol-Michael addition reactions for bacteria
encapsulation into stable, polyethylene glycol-based hydrogels will be
identified, and the impact of hydrogel mesh size and elasticity on bacteria
proliferation and transport will be investigated. Up-conversion nanoparticles
will be integrated into the hydrogel matrix to investigate release of individual
bacteria cells using a patterned NIR light source. Finally, these novel
materials will be tested for isolation of rare bacteria with viable but
nonculturable phenotypes for follow-up molecular analysis. Knowledge gained from
these tasks will inform the rational design of hydrogels for isolation of single
bacteria with unique function for 'omics'-based analysis and delivery of live,
therapeutic bacteria to targeted disease sites. The research will be integrated
into the educational plan through the Joint Microbe-Material Scholars program,
an educational platform designed to produce global-minded, interdisciplinary
students through four components: (1) an international student exchange with
collaborators in food microbiology, (2) an external outreach mechanism designed
to engage and recruit minority students throughout the state of Kansas, (3) a
microbe-material course that uses an interdisciplinary guided-inquiry teaching
method, and (4) public engagement. The PI will leverage successful programs at
Kansas State University for reaching broader audiences including the Kansas-
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation program, Project IMPACT, and
Science on Tap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.