* 1944653
* CAREER: Back-conversion suppressed optical parametric frequency conversion: Nonlinear evolution dynamics for overcoming longstanding device limitations
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Jeffrey Moses, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2025
* USD 510,800.00

Lasers that can emit brief pulses of light have transformed industry and
science. They are used for precise automotive machining, to identify cancer
cells and to perform eye surgery, and to carry voices and data across the ocean.
They are used to understand how plants harvest solar energy, how DNA withstands
irradiation from ultraviolet light, and to study how the composition and
structure of materials changes over time. They are used to study light induced
nuclear fusion as an alternative energy source and to study the behavior of
particles that have been accelerated to near the speed of light. However, only a
few colors of light pulses can be obtained directly from lasers with sufficient
intensity and brevity for these applications, and these colors are often not
appropriate for the task at hand. In order to change the color of laser light,
scientists use so-called “nonlinear optical” methods. By these methods, laser
light can be shifted up or down in frequency and light can be amplified at
colors not available from lasers by combining laser beams in a specialized
optical device, typically a crystal or optical fiber. These methods are limited
by an inherent behavior known as “back-conversion”: before light conversion is
completed across the entire laser beam, the process begins to reverse. This
makes nonlinear optical light conversion methods inefficient and limits the
range of frequencies that can be generated. As a result, selectivity in the
color of light comes at the cost of having less light available for the
application, which in turn limits both the fundamental science and industrial
applications that can be performed. The Principal Investigator aims to solve
these problems by investigating new nonlinear optical methods with suppressed
back-conversion. Devices consisting of crystals or optical fibers will be
explored in order to prove that these light conversion methods can be carried
out with unprecedented efficiency and covering a very broad range of
frequencies, thus enabling new scientific and industrial applications of laser
light. The Principal Investigator plans to use these methods in planned
scientific studies during his career to enable investigation of the human vision
process, new platforms for quantum information processing, and new methods for
controlling the electrical, optical, and magnetic properties of materials
through irradiation with laser light. The Principal Investigator will also
develop related educational resources aimed at middle school through college
level students in order to increase awareness of laser science and technology
and to improve understanding of the engineering research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to avoid the fundamental limiting problem
of back-conversion in the evolution dynamics of nonlinear optical frequency
converters and amplifiers, and thus to demonstrate light conversion and
amplification devices with ultrahigh conversion efficiency and ultrawide
bandwidth, the Principal Investigator will investigate two novel and potentially
widely applicable concepts for nonlinear optical frequency conversion involving
unusual propagation dynamics. First, a newly proposed method for suppressing
back-conversion in optical parametric amplification will be attempted through
the simultaneous phase matching of two wave-mixing processes, optical parametric
amplification and second harmonic generation, in order to achieve signal
amplification efficiency at or even beyond the quantum defect level.
Implementations to be investigated will include both birefringent- and novel
quasi-phase-matching approaches. Second, octave-spanning near- to mid-infrared
photon down-conversion with a near unitary transformation matrix will be
attempted via adiabatic four-wave mixing in an anti-resonant hollow optical
fiber. This will be carried out by applying a pressure gradient to a
microstructured hollow-core fiber that carries four laser beams simultaneously.
The two forms of nonlinear evolution dynamics will be investigated by numerical
and experimental methods, and devices will be investigated to prove
feasibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.