* 1944674
* CAREER: Electro-Chemo-Mechanics of Li and Na Metal: Toward Dendrite- and Damage-Free Metallic Anodes of Rechargeable Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* George Pharr V, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2025
* USD 439,792.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Rechargeable batteries are everywhere in daily
life. Indeed, lithium-based batteries have become the power source of choice in
portable electronics and electric vehicles. Still, commercial batteries utilize
materials with relatively low energy densities; they add substantial weight to
vehicles and occupy huge volumes in portable electronics but must be re-charged
every few hours. Owing to their enormous energy densities, batteries 'beyond
lithium-ion' based on metallic lithium and sodium have emerged, primed to meet
growing demands. However, these systems suffer from severe issues of degradation
and safety that have precluded their practical use. Materials and mechanics-
based studies are thus necessary to enable safe and durable operation.
Accordingly, the goal of this project is to provide understanding of the
interplay between functional and structural behavior of lithium and sodium metal
anodes, combined with materials discovery of alloys. These studies will guide
appropriate charging conditions, applied pressures, and material properties that
prevent damage. Overall, advances in batteries will benefit the USA by reducing
harmful emissions, improving safety, enhancing infrastructure, and securing
energy independence. Commercializing lithium anodes would dramatically increase
energy densities (up to ~4x) of portable electronics and electric vehicles,
while commercializing sodium anodes may enable grid-scale storage of renewable
energy. The broader objectives of this proposal include leveraging established
programs to provide research experiences for military veterans and
underrepresented minorities. The project will also develop immersive
augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) learning modules to enhance students’
understanding of the interplay among mechanics, microstructure, chemistry, and
electric fields in materials for energy storage and conversion. Outreach
activities will involve K-12 students and teachers to increase awareness of
clean energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;While the electrochemistry of lithium and sodium has received
extensive study, at the heart of the issues outlined above lies a mechanics of
materials problem: unstable deformation occurs during operation, producing
dendrites and damage. Complicating this matter is that due to their extreme
chemical reactivity in air, relatively little is known regarding even the basic
mechanical properties of lithium and sodium, e.g., sodium’s room temperature
plastic properties and deformation mechanisms remain largely unknown. Even less
is known regarding stresses developed during electrodeposition,
time/temperature-dependent behavior, fracture and fatigue behavior, how alloys
modify properties, and their corresponding influence on microstructural
stability. This project will fill in these gaps in fundamental knowledge through
testing the following hypotheses: (1) time-dependent plastic deformation
dominates the mechanical behavior of lithium and sodium metal; (2) specific
alloys enhance creep resistance, promoting structural stability; (3) stresses
develop during electrodeposition that can damage surrounding layers and the
metals themselves; and (4) pre-loads applied to electrode stacks promote
microstructurally stable deposition. To test these hypotheses, this project will
utilize unique experimental facilities and develop theoretical models to connect
the evolution of mechanical properties, stress, and deformation to chemical and
microstructural changes during electrochemical cycling. From the educational
perspective of this proposal, textbooks seldom cover coupled phenomena in
electro-chemo-mechanics. This project will develop AR/VR modules to fill these
voids, which will be integrated into undergraduate/graduate curricula, shown at
K-12 outreach activities, shared with K-12 teachers, and made available online.
This project will also enable students in materials and mechanics to work in
areas not conventionally open to the discipline (electrochemistry) to encourage
interdisciplinary research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.