* 1944723
* CAREER: Reactivation controls, timescales, and styles at quiescent hotspot volcanoes: Insights from the Canary Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Marc-Antoine Longpre, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2025
* USD 415,926.00

This CAREER award seeks to quantify the nature and timescales of processes by
which quiescent volcanoes reactivate to erupt again. Understanding this
rejuvenation process remains a challenging, but important goal of modern volcano
science. General relationships between the duration of precursory activity (that
is, eruption run-up) and other variables, such as repose period and magma
composition, are promising for improved eruption forecasting and understanding
of the life cycles of volcanoes, but need further testing at “controlled” case
studies. With available data on 13 historic eruptions across four different
islands providing constraints on crustal structure, magmatic system
configuration, magma composition, repose period, and eruption style, the Canary
Islands represent an ideal natural laboratory to test ideas on the behavior of
quiescent hotspot volcanoes fed from deep within Earth. Preliminary data suggest
that (1) reactivation of Canary Island volcanoes is controlled by new influx of
deep-sourced magma into the upper mantle magmatic system and that (2) the time
lapse between this deep recharge and eruption is typically on the order of a few
months. In order to test these hypotheses, this study will document the style of
compositional zoning of a large number of olivine and clinopyroxene crystals
across all 13 eruptions, through analysis of crystal images and integration of
research in the classroom. This will be complemented by quantitative micro-
analysis on a subset of representative crystals and small inclusions of volcanic
glass trapped within them. These data will be utilized to identify magmatic
processes leading to volcano reactivation and to calculate eruption run-up for
all eruptions. The design of this project will further allow testing whether
eruption run-up is dependent upon crustal structure, repose period, and magma
composition and whether it has an incidence on eruption style, which will
improve our understanding of the inner workings of these volcanoes and
associated hazards. The educational component of this CAREER project centers on
the implementation of a course-based undergraduate research experience, which
will involve students in research design, sample preparation, data collection,
and interpretation and dissemination of results and, whereby, will directly
inform the scientific goals of the work. A tiered and near-peer mentoring plan
between the principal investigator, graduate students, and undergraduate
students will foster student success and will be supported by an established
mentor training program. On-site and online outreach activities will be
coordinated with a volcano interpretive center in the Canary Islands. Finally,
video tutorials will be produced and made openly available to facilitate the use
of our approach by other researchers, educators, and students. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The natural experiment of this project exploits available data on
historic Canary Island eruptions and systematic petrologic analyses of their
products to isolate variables that cause reactivation — and control its duration
and style — at quiescent hotspot volcanoes. Grayscale analysis of backscatter
electron images of numerous crystals will be combined with high-precision
electron probe analysis on selected crystals. In addition, Raman, ion microprobe
and LA-ICP-MS measurements of volatile and trace element concentrations of melt
inclusions within these same crystals will be performed. Diffusion chronometry
will be used to quantify eruption run-up for all 13 historic eruptions in the
Canary Islands, which will provide important data for hazard assessment and
future eruption forecasting efforts in the archipelago. This approach will in
turn allow testing postulated global relationships between eruption run-up,
repose period, magma composition, and eruption style at individual volcanoes
across a single hotspot. The work will advance the understanding of how olivine
and clinopyroxene record magmatic processes and their timescales and will reveal
new insights into the crystal cargo of basaltic
magmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.