* 1944007
* CAREER:Engineering Interphases for Li-Mediated Nitrogen Reduction  at Ambient Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Karthish Manthiram, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2021
* USD 625,000.00

Chemical manufacturing is a key contributor to the Nation's economy, producing
everything from fertilizers and pharmaceuticals to plastics and fuels. Despite
the successes of the chemical industry to produce chemicals and materials
critical to everyday living, there are issues associated with the carbon-
footprint and centralization of chemical manufacturing. Many chemical processes
are run in centralized plants at large scale because smaller capacities are not
economically viable. An example is the Haber-Bosch process that produces a large
portion of the ammonia needed for nitrogen-containing fertilizers. The process
is run at high temperatures and pressures and at large scale in a centralized
fashion. Furthermore, the Haber-Bosch process contributes to 1 - 2% of global
carbon dioxide emissions. Electrochemical synthesis of ammonia could enable
competitive manufacture at a lower carbon footprint and with a smaller
production capacity. By applying an electrical potential to drive reactions
instead of using temperature and pressure, chemical processes can be run at
milder conditions, at smaller scales, and closer to the end user, e.g. in a
distributed fashion. This CAREER project will focus on fundamental research to
study ways to improve selectivity and production rates of an electrochemical
process for ammonia production using a lithium based electrochemical system.
Methods developed in the project will advance how to selectively synthesize one
chemical (ammonia) over another at the highly reactive electrode-electrolyte
interface. The research knowledge will be adapted to be used in an outreach
program focused on teaching the importance of mass and energy balances to middle
school students. Understanding where everyday chemicals and materials come from
and how they are produced will allow for critical evaluation of their impact on
society and the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, synthesis methods
using electrochemical nitrogen reduction suffer from poor selectivity and low
reaction rates in aqueous electrolytes due to the competing hydrogen evolution
reaction. In order to improve selectivity for nitrogen reduction, this project
will investigate ammonia synthesis in nonaqueous electrolytes, as the proton
activity can be well-controlled, with a lithium metal-mediated chemistry, which
allows for nitrogen fixation at ambient conditions. The effect of the
electrolyte composition on the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) species
present on the lithium-covered electrode will be studied with both in situ and
ex situ spectroscopic methods. The SEI structure and composition is hypothesized
to control the selectivity for nitrogen reduction versus competing hydrogen
evolution. The project will address the nature of the transport limitations and
its impact on the coupled transport-kinetics. As a result of this work,
fundamental understanding of the necessary interfacial steps for efficient
electrochemical ammonia production in a nonaqueous solvent will be obtained.
This understanding will translate to other electrosynthetic reactions in
nonaqueous electrolytes that take place at SEIs. The project is structured into
three aims. Aim 1 addresses engineering the solid electrolyte interphase to
promote desired interfacial reactions. Aim 2 will study the design of omniphobic
electrodes for non-aqueous solvents to achieve fast nitrogen transport to the
active sites. Finally, Aim 3 will focus on the mass and energy balances for
anode and electrolyte design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.