* 1944873
* Collaborative Research: Examining Impact and Fostering Academic Support for Open Science Products
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Felice Levine, American Educational Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 12/31/2022
* USD 74,526.00

Open Science has the potential to significantly advance STEM knowledge beyond
individual academic research silos. This project will support a conference
entitled, "Examining Impact and Fostering Academic Support for Open Science
Products." The meeting is jointly organized by the American Educational Research
Association (AERA) and the Council of Graduate Schools (CGS). The objective of
the conference is to examine the products of open science practices and explore
what counts as productivity and quality in contributions that are non-
traditional research outcomes. Non-research outcomes have attendant activities
that include data sharing; the development of multi-user data sets, harvesting
and archiving big data, replication studies, registered reports, data management
plans, and use as well as citation to persistent identifiers
(DOIs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference attendees are higher education
leaders, education researchers, and related scientists, together with collective
expertise in scientific productivity, science professions, higher education
institutions. The conference will engage attendees in a policy conversation and
development of performance metrics and assessments on non-traditional research
outcomes beyond publication citations in highly ranked journals. This several-
day conference, scheduled for Summer 2020, will be held at the AERA Conference
Center in Washington DC and will involve about 28 participants. This conference
has the potential to support change and foster experimentation in the very
institutions where the next generation of researchers are being trained, where
science is organized, and where open science products are
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program. The NRT Program is designed to encourage the
development and implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models
for STEM graduate education training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.