* 1944562
* CAREER: Mechanobiology of Vertebrate Morphogenesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Nandan Nerurkar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will investigate how
mechanical and molecular factors interact to shape tissues during embryonic
development. It will also show the interconnectedness of physics and biology to
students from high school to graduate school. The small intestine is chosen for
study because it must be packed into the body. This process is driven by
mechanical forces, which will be studied. This work is important because it will
expand our knowledge about tissue packing, which has relevance to human
development. For example, improper packing of the intestine during embryonic
development is linked to birth defects with limited cures. The research
component of this award will help us understand 1) how molecular cues control
mechanical forces that organize the small intestine, 2) how those forces in turn
feed back on cell behavior, and 3) how variations in the mechanical process of
shaping the small intestine helps distinct species meet their unique nutritional
needs. This work will include a mix of experiments and mathematical models.
There is also an educational component to this award. High-school juniors will
have a week-long lesson about the connections between physiology, engineering,
and developmental biology, with the small intestine as an example. High-
performing high school students from disadvantaged backgrounds will learn about
cloning and molecular biology, embryology, and biomechanics as part of Columbia
Universityâ€™s Hypothekids Hk Makers program. Graduate students will also learn,
in class, about the biophysical aspects of tissue formation. Taken together,
this award will provide a foundation from which the investigator's career will
grow, integrating teaching and research throughout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long term goal of this award is to understand the profound physical
transformation that occurs during vertebrate development, wherein a seemingly
disorganized ball of stem cells is progressively sculpted into a precisely
patterned complex organism. This must occur through the action of physical
forces under genetic and molecular control; however, an integrated view of
morphogenesis that accounts for both mechanics and molecular genetics is
lacking. The work performed in this award will fill a portion of this gap by
focusing on looping of the small intestine, a process driven by mechanical
buckling of the initially straight intestinal tube. The underlying biological
cues that control buckling during development remain elusive. This award
combines mechanical testing, mathematical modeling, and retroviral gene
misexpression in the developing chick embryo to study how bone morphogenic
protein (BMP) signaling controls buckling morphogenesis in the small intestine,
how forces generated during looping morphogenesis feedback on cell behaviors
that drive buckling, and finally, how changes to genes controlling tissue
mechanics underlie the emergence of morphological diversity across
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.