* 1944942
* CAREER: Multiscale Simulations of Nanofluid Assembly for Smart Materials Design
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Ulf Schiller, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2025
* USD 669,894.00

CAREER: Multiscale Simulations of Nanofluid Assembly for Smart Materials
Design&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Condensed-
Matter-and-Materials-Theory program in the Division of Materials Research and by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports research and education using computer simulations to aid
understanding and manipulating the formation of stable structures in fluid
emulsions. Many modern formulations of food, cosmetic, and pharmaceutical
products are based on mixing two or more fluid components to form a stable
emulsion. Typical fluid components, such as oil and water, normally separate
into two separate phases. Solid particles added to the mixture prevent the
separation and lead to formation of stable compartments that give rise to
peculiar structure and properties of the mixture. The compartments can
encapsulate and transport specific chemical ingredients, mimicking the function
of living cells. Such structured fluids offer us the potential to design smart
soft materials that can be controlled and manipulated on demand. However, the
complex processes that determine the formation of interfaces and droplets in
emulsions over time are incompletely understood, thus hindering the formulation
of protocols for control of the evolving fluid
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use magnetic particles in
emulsions to manipulate the formation of interfaces and droplets in external
magnetic fields. The PI's research group seeks to explore ways to control phase
separation and to stimulate separation and fusion of fluid compartments. This
will be done by using magnetic interactions to orient the particles and to
manipulate the interface between fluid components. The research will employ
large computer simulations on Clemson University's Palmetto cluster, a TOP500
high-performance computing system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training of graduate and
undergraduate students plays an important role in these activities. The PI will
develop innovative teaching materials that support the development of
computational competencies and research computing skills. The PI's research
group also seeks to enhance outreach and will design showcases of computer-aided
materials design to engage a broad audience in the increasingly
multidisciplinary field of computational science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational modeling
and education in multiscale simulations to understand and control the formation
of non-equilibrium structures in complex multiphase fluids. The mesoscale
structure and nonlinear rheology of soft interface-dominated materials raises
many challenges for the development of control mechanisms that enable design of
smart fluids that self-organize and respond to external stimuli. Interfacial
assembly of colloidal particles can arrest the phase separation of immiscible
fluids such that they become trapped in metastable states, e.g., fluid-
bicontinuous gels. These arrested phase states emerge in particulate
multicomponent mixtures due to the intricate interplay of physico-chemical
interactions across different length and time-scales. The research aims to gain
a fundamental understanding of the connection between microscale self-assembly
and mesoscale phase formation in particle-stabilized multiphase fluids, with a
focus on non-equilibrium phenomena and the emergence of kinetically arrested
phase states. The PI seeks to employ lattice Boltzmann simulations and
innovative data analytics to explore avenues for tailoring the phase morphology
and rheological properties of complex multiphase
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will investigate the use of magnetic
particles in external magnetic fields to control interfacial assembly and
manipulate the mesoscale structure of droplets and fluid compartments. Large-
scale lattice Boltzmann simulations will be used to systematically study the
conditions and parameters under which such control is possible for emulsions and
fluid-bicontinuous gels. The PI seeks to propel the nascent field of soft
materials informatics by developing a data-driven active learning approach for
nanofluid assembly with tailored structure-property-processing relations. The
integration of multiscale simulation methods and data-centric approaches will
foster discovery and design of new nanofluid materials with the expectation of
new engineering principles for synthetic systems with targeted
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students to develop advanced computational
competencies and research computing skills. The PI will develop curriculum
components and teaching materials that integrate diverse aspects of multiscale
modeling, high-performance computing, and research software engineering. The
simulation methods and software tools developed in this project will enhance the
broader computing ecosystem for simulation-based science and engineering. The
PI's research team will also design outreach activities showcasing the use of
advanced cyberinfastructure and virtual-reality/augmented-reality technology for
materials discovery and exploration. The activities aim to increase computing
literacy and support broader participation in simulation-driven science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.