* 1944972
* CAREER: Magnetogenesis and Plasma Dynamo Across Cosmic Time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Matthew Kunz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 674,255.00

Magnetic fields are now routinely measured both in our Galaxy and in clusters of
galaxies. The investigator seeks to understand the origin of these fields,
focusing on the complex changes of the magnetic fields over long periods of
time. They address these questions: Why is the nearby Universe magnetized at the
observed levels? When were these fields produced? More specifically, what
material properties give the galaxy-forming material the ability to grow and
sustain strong magnetic fields? The investigator plans traditional, paper and
pencil, calculations combined with state-of-the-art supercomputer simulations to
better understand how these magnetic fields came to be. Predictions for the
strength and structure of magnetic fields in protogalaxies and intergalactic
space will be made in preparation for next-generation radio telescopes. The
investigator plans to provide women and underrepresented groups the training and
encouragement to choose a career in astrophysical fluid dynamics or plasma
astrophysics. These goals are in response to the alarming dearth of women and
minorities in plasma science and the relative lack of fluid and plasma education
in U.S. physics and astronomy curricula. A program of biennial summer schools,
targeting members of these groups, will be initiated. All materials from the
schools will be made publicly available, and a study will track the impact of
these schools on recruitment and retention in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will describe, from first principles, the
creation and development of cosmic magnetism and dynamo across time, focusing
specifically on the amplification of pre-existing seed magnetic fields in
protogalaxies and in clusters of galaxies by instabilities, turbulence, and
large-scale shear. The investigator will determine how the material properties
of a plasma influence its ability to grow and sustain dynamically important
magnetic fields. They will model the properties change with time, from the epoch
of re-ionization to the early lives of galaxies. Answering these questions is
complicated by the low densities and high temperatures in these systems, which
precludes a magneto-hydrodynamic description and brings microphysical plasma
processes to the fore. Their pioneering work on the dynamo in this regime is
leveraged to argue for a phase of explosive field growth in the early
development of protogalaxies and the intra-galactic cluster medium. They
formulate a research plan to investigate this possibility by combining
traditional analytical techniques with state-of-the-art numerical
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.