* 1945503
* CAREER: Design and Synthesis of Heterocyclic Aryldiamine Polymers: Towards a New Class of Processable and Electrochemically Stable Conducting Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Colleen Scott, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 03/31/2025
* USD 675,000.00

Through this project, jointly funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry (MSN) program in the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program in the
Office of Integrative Activities at NSF, Professor Colleen Scott at Mississippi
State University seeks to understand the relationship between the chemical
structures and the electron transport process in certain classes of polymeric
materials - redox polymers. Redox polymers are polymers containing groups that
can be reversibly reduced or oxidized. Professor Scott is interested in
understanding how small changes in the structure of these polymers stabilize the
reversible electron transfer process (i.e. the redox process) in the materials.
The stabilization of the redox process is essential to the longevity of these
materials that are used in common everyday devices such as televisions, cell
phones, medical devices, etc. The success of this research is fundamental to the
advancement of technologies that are used in our daily lives. Additionally, by
joining forces with the Ms. Smith Educational Service, a community program
focusing on afterschool and summer academic programs, Professor Scott plans to
engage K-12 students who are at risk of not completing their primary education.
The “Science with Dr. Scott” initiative integrates fun-filled polymer chemistry
activities into the learning environment. Such activities engage student
curiosity, increase student enthusiasm for science, motivate students to
continue with their education, and ultimately create an informed citizenry
excited about discovery and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advancement in
the organic device technology relies greatly on the processability, efficiency
and stability of the organic materials that comprise the devices. An in depth
understanding of the impact of the chemical structures on the electrochemical
processes of redox polymers is of utmost importance to the development of
durable redox materials. Professor Scott aims to develop processable redox
polymers that are electrochemically stable by studying the structure/property
relationships of the polymers with respect to their electrical conductance and
redox properties. She also provides learning opportunities to undergrad students
at Mississippi State University through research experiences and coursework.
Additionally, the “Science with Dr. Scott” initiative integrates polymer
chemistry activities into the learning environment of K-12 students who are at
risk of not completing their primary education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.