* 1945303
* CAREER: Understanding visual reasoning for visual communication
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Karen Schloss, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2025
* USD 477,240.00

This project aims to advance the understanding of visual reasoning for visual
communication. Visual reasoning enables people to translate visual input to
abstract concepts. For example, to interpret which counties will receive more
snowfall using a weather map, it is necessary to figure out which colors on the
weather map indicate which amounts of snowfall. People have expectations about
how visual features should map to concepts in visualizations, and it is harder
for them to interpret visualizations that violate those expectations, even if
mappings are clearly labeled. However, the nature of those expectations and
their role in visual reasoning is not well-understood, so the design of
information visualizations is often unprincipled and ad-hoc. With a better
understanding of how visual reasoning works, it will be possible to design
visualizations that fit its strengths and optimize visual communication. The
investigators will address this problem by studying how people infer meaning
from color in visualizations. This research can be translated to producing
online tools for designing visualizations, which will improve STEM education and
increase public literacy and engagement with science and technology. The
education plan will use visual communication to make science more accessible and
engaging through virtual reality (VR) and accompanying hands-on experiences with
color and visualization, for both college undergraduates and middle-school
students. The investigators will also support broadening participation of
females in STEM through mentoring among the PI, graduate student, undergraduate
intern, and middle school girls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will address fundamental questions about how visual reasoning enables visual
communication. In Objective 1, the investigators will study how people learn to
associate perceptual features with novel concepts through environmental
statistics. They will also examine how learned associations extend beyond
perceptual input due to categorical structure in cognitive representations. In
Objective 2, the team will study how to automatically estimate color–concept
associations from image statistics. They will construct and evaluate new models
that incorporate predictors based on visual input and cognitive representations
of color categories. In the process of constructing these models, the team will
develop new methods for quantifying graded category membership in a continuous
space. By modeling human judgments, there is potential to develop new insights
into how those judgments are made. In Objective 3, the team will investigate how
people use color–concept associations to interpret visualizations, in a process
called assignment inference. Assignment inference enables people to infer
optimal mappings between colors and concepts in visualizations, but little is
known about how this process works. It is proposed that it can be understood
using accumulator models typically used in decision making research, which will
forge new connections between the fields of decision making and information
visualization. The results will increase knowledge of how people integrate
information from multiple, conflicting sources and provide new knowledge about
how to optimally design semantically interpretable
visualizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.