* 1945705
* Operation of the Sunspot Solar Observatory by the SSO Consortium
* MPS,AST
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2021
* Jason Jackiewicz, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 10/31/2021
* USD 509,253.00

As our closest star, the Sun provides an important laboratory to study the
processes that govern stars in our Galaxy. The Sun is also the primary driver
for the space weather that impacts human life on Earth. The Sunspot Solar
Observatory (SSO) in Sunspot, NM has been used to study the Sun since 1947.
Originally a US Air Force facility, it was operated by the National Solar
Observatory for the National Science Foundation from 1976 to 2016. In 2016,
operation of the observatory passed to the SSO Consortium, a university-based
collaboration led by New Mexico State University (NMSU). The Dunn Solar
Telescope (DST), operational since 1969, is one of the best instruments in the
world for synoptic, full-disk observations of the Sun. DST is equipped with a
wide range of modern instrumentation for multi-conjugate adaptive optics, broad-
band imaging, rapid-scan spectroscopy, and spectopolarimetry. This
instrumentation, along with other recent upgrades, will enable cutting edge
science by the solar astronomy community. SSO will provide a testbed for
instruments being developed for the upcoming Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope
and for observations in support of the Parker Solar Probe. SSO's location allows
unique opportunities for concurrent observations with sounding rocket flights
from the White Sands missile range. The five Consortium member institutions will
provide training to graduate students, including underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will allow the SSO Consortium will
operate the Sunspot Solar Observatory for two additional years. NSF funding now
represents a minority of the overall funding, with the rest being provided by
the SSO Consortium, including member institutions and the State of New Mexico.
During FY 2017 - 2019, the Consortium compiled a science plan, hired personnel
and upgraded the DST. The next two years will be spent performing observations
and providing data in support of four science goals: 1) synoptic mapping of
solar filament magnetic fields in support of space weather studies; 2)
monitoring for solar eruptive events; 3) coordinated targets of opportunity in
support of sounding rockets from the White Sands missile range and the Parker
Solar Probe; and 4) PI-led science investigations involving Consortium member
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.