* 1945332
* CAREER: Behavioral Analytics and Field Experiments in Sustainable Innovation Policies
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Omar Asensio, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 05/31/2025
* USD 392,473.00

The analysis of big data in digital platforms accelerates entrepreneurial
activity and supports the development of innovation related skills in the
economy. However, these data often exhibit a paradox in that there is distance
between those who own, curate, and control intelligence gleamed from massive
data (e.g., companies owning mobile application databases) and those who
broadcast it (e.g., users or communities). For open data in the public domain,
this distance can be narrowed by directly involving communities, and training
local cohorts of students and professionals to be able to interpret and
translate data to answer questions of significance to the community. Using
social innovations in energy systems and transportation, this CAREER project
deploys big data analytics and experimental science to advance the design of
incentives for resource conservation policies in both urban and non-urban areas.
Buildings and transportation are important sectors of the economy; therefore,
this research calls on human and machine intelligence to advance research on how
large-scale civic data in combination with behavioral strategies can be used to
increase resource conservation, while providing aggregate intelligence about
infrastructure and localized impacts in near real time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research creates the necessary data infrastructure
for a suite of information-based policy interventions. This includes linkages in
the application of artificial intelligence and machine learning prediction with
methods of causal inference. Unstructured data that would take months of human
processing will be interpreted and classified rapidly, while structured data
that lives in disparate information systems can be linked and activated to
enable policy analysis. Furthermore, this CAREER program integrates behavioral
research, teaching, and the dissemination of computational tools as a means to
broaden participation in analytic policy processes among historically under-
represented communities. The research, will lies at the intersection of data
science and policy, will deploy novel approaches to evaluate, engage, and
disseminate open data to problems of resource efficiency and behavior changes
for critical civic infrastructure and natural resource protection. It engages
not only with civic partners, but also with K-12 students as well as
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.