* 1945868
* CAREER: Rhodium-Catalyzed Oxidative Functionalization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Kami Hull, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2022
* USD 318,560.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the research
of Professor Kami L. Hull of the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign to
develop new approaches for the synthesis of carbonyl containing compounds. Such
species are extremely important in the commodity chemical industry as well as in
pharmaceutical and specialty chemical syntheses. Their preparations, however,
are complicated and often involve the production of undesirable by-products. One
of the primary goals of this project is to maximize the economy of the synthesis
of these species. The development of new methodologies that minimize waste are
targeted for the synthesis of amides, esters, thioesters, and ketones, all of
which are important starting materials or intermediates in large scale chemical
processes. The broader impacts this work include the potential to minimize the
waste associated with the synthesis of carbonyl compounds, thereby making better
use of our natural resources in the synthesis of fine and commodity chemicals.
Additionally, there is an outreach component that aims to increase the
scientific literacy of rural children and encourage these students to pursue
higher education in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New rhodium based
metal-catalysts are developed that allow for the direct coupling of alcohols and
nucleophiles, through dehydrogenation or transfer hydrogenation, for the
synthesis of amides, esters, thioesters and ketones. Further, synthesis of alpha
and beta chiral carbonyl compounds is explored. The catalysts and organic
products are fully characterized by NMR spectroscopy, IR spectroscopy, and X-ray
crystallography, when needed. To increase the scientific understanding of the
greater community, an outreach program entitled Next Generation of Illinois
Scientists (NGIS) is developed. The goals of NGIS is to bring scientific
outreach to rural communities. Working with fourth grade students at rural
elementary schools within a 50 mile radius of the University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign a series of experiments is developed that builds on the Common
Core Curriculum.