* 1945672
* Computer Science for All Researcher Practitioner Partnerships  Technical Assistance Workshop at the University of the District of Columbia
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Laura-Lee Davidson, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 02/28/2021
* USD 99,364.00

As the nation becomes increasingly diverse, it is important that the science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) workforce and body of scholars who will
define and implement the K-12 education research agenda include practitioners
that reflect that diversity. The University of the District of Columbia (UDC)
will convene a Fall 2019 Computer Science for All Researcher Practitioner
Partnerships (CSforAll:RPP) Development Workshop in Washington, DC. The National
Science Foundation (NSF)'s CSforAll:RPP program focuses on the importance of
researcher-practitioner partnerships in supporting computer science (CS) and
computational thinking (CT) education. CSforAll empowers our Nation's students
to develop skills and competencies in problem-solving, critical thinking,
creativity and collaboration that will help them excel in today's increasingly
digital and computational world. As a public, historically black and land-grant
institution, UDC's responsibility is to build a diverse generation of
competitive, civically engaged scholars and leaders. The CSforALL:RPP workshop
builds on UDC's culture of teaching and learning as well as on the core values
of collaboration and innovation. Through targeted outreach, UDC will engage more
minority-serving institutions in the CSforALL:RPP initiative. Workshop teams
will receive information, guidance, and access to resources they will need to
enhance the capacity of their schools to produce successful CS/CT education
outcomes for diverse groups of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In partnership
with NSF-funded Research+Practice Collaboratory, UDC's project staff will
coordinate the event logistics for up to 100 workshop attendees. Participants
will include three- to four-person teams of CS education researchers and preK-12
practitioners (teachers, administrators, and counselors), along with other
community and industry partners. Logistical planning will include participant
team recruitment and registration; arranging meeting room space, catering, and
A/V support; and providing reimbursements for travel costs for eligible
participants. The 1.5-day workshop will engage teams with different models of
RPPs, strategies and tools for forming and maintaining RPPs, and data collection
and analysis approaches well-suited to RPPs. Workshop participants will learn
how to design and lead RPPs to provide high school teachers with the
preparation, professional development and ongoing support that they need to
teach rigorous computer science courses; preK-8 teachers with the instructional
materials and preparation they need to integrate CS and CT into their teaching;
and schools and districts the resources needed to define and evaluate multi-
grade pathways in CS and CT. Minority institutions are important incubators of
STEM teachers of color--RPPs will assist them in developing/sustaining exemplary
teacher education programs, uniquely tailored to equip teachers committed to
preparing and inspiring more students from diverse groups to consider computer
science careers which in turn, will contribute to America's global
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.