* 1945587
* Common Variability in the Stable Atmospheric Boundary Layer on Small Space and Time Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Larry Mahrt, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 550,728.00

A regular nighttime occurrence is the development of a stable boundary layer,
which is a shallow, near-calm layer of air near the Earthâ€™s surface. However,
despite the air seemingly being calm, there are ongoing motions which have
important impacts on near-ground temperatures and the dispersion of pollutants.
This research award provides support for the analysis of existing observational
data on stable boundary layer motions, with a fresh look at how they can be
tracked and how that information can be used to improve numerical weather
models. A specific use case that this award will address, in consultation with
local field managers, is vineyards in the Pacific Northwest where frosts and
freezes have a significant impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research under this
award will expand understanding of small-scale, non-stationary motions, their
interaction with surface heterogeneity, and their stochastic behavior. The focus
is on submeso motions, which are formally defined to include motions on scales
just larger than the largest turbulent eddies and up to scales normally
considered to be the smallest mesoscale motions (2km). A sequence of case
studies of different types of small-scale motions will be constructed using data
from 9 prior field campaigns and a package of different analysis methods that
has been developed by the researcher. The main objectives of the proposal are
to: 1) Quantify the submeso time and space variability of the temperature, the
wind vector, and turbulent fluxes and relate these variations to the forcing
variables, 2) Track propagating modes across networks of data and examine their
interaction with surface-based phenomena due to gentle topography and the impact
of this interaction on turbulent fluxes, 3) Formulate probability distributions
for short-term (non-turbulent) variations of the temperature and wind direction
for low wind speeds and relate the characteristics of the distributions to the
forcing variables, and 4) Reanalyze the behavior of the fluxes and corresponding
transfer coefficients in the bulk formula for low wind speeds based on time
averaging and based on spatial averaging across the networks and improve
formulation of the transfer coefficients for low wind
speeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.