* 1945546
* CAREER: Echo Mapping the Census of Supermassive Black Hole Mass, Accretion, and Spin
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Jonathan Trump, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 430,359.00

This program will compile a census of supermassive black holes in the universe.
Essentially every galaxy hosts a supermassive black hole in its center. The
program will use a new generation of time-domain observations from the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) to map the
fundamental black hole properties of mass, spin, and accretion. This will give
insights into how supermassive black holes and galaxies evolve across cosmic
time. The PI will develop a “bridge program” for underrepresented minority
undergraduate physics majors at the University of Connecticut to increase their
number in STEM fields by completing their education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
census of supermassive black hole will be made using spectroscopic and
photometric Reverberation Mapping (RM) in a series of time domain campaigns with
massively multiplexed spectroscopy to measure their mass and accretion disks by
first using the SDSS-RM survey. Techniques will be developed to construct
contemporaneous UV-optical spectral energy distributions that avoid the effects
of quasar variability which together with the full SDSS-RM sample with black
hole masses will be the first to determine a large number of black hole spin
masses. Future matched UV photometry together with time domain optical LSST data
for spin measurements with the SDSS-V survey will result in a census of the
black hole population and characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.