* 1945947
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I: Workshop: Architectures and Opportunities in Programmable Quantum Simulators
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Lincoln Carr, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 74,743.00

This workshop will be organized in Fall 2019 and will bring together key
stakeholders from academia and industry. The participants will discuss current
challenges in Quantum Simulations, opportunities to overcome those challenges,
and will map out a path forward to enable near-term progress. The specific aim
of the workshop is to identify realistic deliverables in the area of Quantum
Simulations, including: i) Prototypes that could be developed in the next 2-5
years, and ii) Testbeds needed to evaluate them in the following 5
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike digital quantum computers, programmable
quantum simulators (PQS) have already surpassed the ability of classical
computers to solve quantum problems on many fronts. Indeed, at this juncture the
exploration on PQS of non-equilibrium phenomena, many-body decoherence, and the
foundations of quantum statistical mechanics has led to the notion of
"information as fuel" with a nanothermodynamical revolution presently in
progress. Thus, PQS not only allow exploration of fundamental physics questions
and materials design, but also are inspiring new kinds of devices and
applications. Beyond work done so far, PQS offer us a new opportunity to address
deep unanswered questions in open quantum systems far from equilibrium, quantum
complex networks, lattice gauge theory, and many other areas of physics, such as
the quark-gluon plasma and the interior of neutron
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The White Paper produced by this workshop will help
guide research and investment in PQS US industry and government agencies such as
NSF. Students reading this White Paper will have a quick and clear understanding
of the scope of the field. At the present time, digital quantum computers are
often in the press while the understanding of PQS is not widespread beyond
people in the field. This workshop will help expand the understanding of PQS and
quantum information science more generally to physics students and physics
professionals from many subfields, to STEM professionals, and to the wider
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.