* 1945046
* CAREER: Evolutionary and Adaptive Histories of Human Populations: Integration of Ancient DNA Research and Interactive Education
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* John Lindo, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2025
* USD 567,940.00

This CAREER project will examine the evolutionary history of populations in the
Americas. DNA from both ancient and living individuals will be integrated to
characterize evolutionary processes and population dynamics before and after
European contact, including the biological and social consequences of adapting
to changing environments and pathogens, the adoption of agriculture, and the
shift from living in small groups to large interconnected cities. To build a
comprehensive picture of local population histories, the project will utilize
ancient DNA from human civilizations throughout the Americas in combination with
state-of-the-art computational methods and archaeological contexts. The project
will also support several integrated educational goals. The investigator will
establish an intensive summer research program, bringing together participants
from indigenous communities with local undergraduates. Collaborators and
students will not only contribute to the specific research aims but also help
develop an interactive public website about the ancient lineages of the
Americas. This resource will not only reveal ancient social, demographic, and
evolutionary histories but also allow LatinX users to explore their own
ancestry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By utilizing population-level whole genomes from
both ancient and modern individuals, this project will use comparative
statistical and empirical methods to reveal novel genomic features that
putatively underlay adaptive phenotypes as they evolved through time, discover
ancient migrations on both regional and continental levels, and investigate the
evolutionary impact of European contact on indigenous populations. Furthermore,
the deep coverage whole genomes generated from this study will provide a
reference panel for the people of the Americas, which will uncover rare alleles
and genomic features unique to each region. These findings will be placed into a
more complex demographic framework to provide a richer characterization of these
evolutionary adaptations, while elucidating nuanced demographic histories
complicated by disease and colonization. This will serve to establish the
greater use and power of ancient DNA to characterize important aspects of
evolutionary and cultural events, which might otherwise remain intractable, and
thereby deepen the integration of genetics with anthropological
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.