* 1945541
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Partition-Oblivious Real-Time Hierarchical Scheduling
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Zhong Shao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 12/31/2022
* USD 531,905.00

With the advancement in modern computing and communication technologies, there
is an increasing trend toward integrating many real-time applications from
various vendors into a single, larger system, allowing an efficient utilization
of common hardware resources. In safety-critical systems, such as avionics,
automotive, industrial control systems, it is of utmost importance to provide
strong isolation among the applications that require different levels of
criticality in order to confine faulty operations to individual components. In
particular, time partitioning is a key ingredient for a safe composition of
real-time applications whose correctness highly depends on their timings. Real-
time hierarchical scheduling facilitates modular reasoning about the temporal
behavior of individual real-time applications by abstracting away varying
behavior of other applications and, more importantly, by isolating their
potential misbehavior. However, conventional time-partitioning mechanisms fail
to achieve strong temporal isolation from a security viewpoint; variations in
execution timings can be perceived by others, which enables illegitimate
information-flow between applications that are completely isolated from each
other in the utilization of CPU time. This project addresses the problem of
information-flow through real-time hierarchical scheduling in such integrated
software environment. The proposed work will allow such systems to employ
advanced hardware and software technologies to develop high-end, real-time
applications in a secure manner, dramatically improving the utility and
reliability of many key components in the world’s critical infrastructure. The
project includes significant curriculum development activities and outreach
activities to K-12 students as well as women and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a set of algorithmic
solutions that make real-time partitions oblivious of others’ varying temporal
behaviors -- achieving non-interference-based security among all partitions. The
main challenge is that the mechanisms should be independent from particular
scheduling algorithms and non-intrusive to the underlying schedulers. Hence, the
project focuses on highly modular and extensible mechanisms that facilitate
integration into a wide variety of existing systems without requiring complete
reengineering of operating systems. Scheduling analysis techniques that can
enable system designers to assess the impact of the improved information-
security on the CPU utilization, as well as formal method techniques for the
verification of the non-interference property in both algorithmic and
implementation levels is developed. The solutions are validated on prototype
real-time systems with real workload. On the education side, this project pushes
new courses on real-time systems into the existing curriculum and also provides
students opportunities for hands-on experience with modern real-time
applications. It also aims to broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups and give students a unique combination of technical training and
experience in this cutting-edge field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.