* 1945347
* EAGER: Bridging the Last Mile; Towards an Assistive Cyberinfrastructure for Accelerating Computationally Driven Science
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Rajiv Ramnath, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2024
* USD 326,547.00

Even though computational scientists have high-speed computers and powerful
software tools at their disposal, their ability to make scientific discovery is
held back because much of their time is inefficiently spent in data exploration,
manipulation and visualization, preliminary analyses, and hit-and-miss attempts
to find the right settings for their software tools to be used effectively,
rather than in running their computations at scale. For example, researchers
doing gene sequencing (a process in which the individual base nucleotides in an
organism's DNA are identified) have to figure what sequencing method to use,
which software package - out of several - to use for that sequencing method,
what settings to use for the software package, and so on. Researchers would
greatly benefit by learning from prior use of the software tools at their
disposal, that is, from past experiences and mistakes, both their own, and those
of other researchers in the field. However, only a small percentage of them are
able to do so. This exploratory project will investigate whether effective,
intelligent guidance can be extracted from past experience on specific
applications using artificial intelligence techniques and then provided in a
tailored manner to the individual researcher. This will be done within the
software tools being used by the researcher, and provided by the underlying
cyberinfrastructure itself, so that anyone who uses these tools can benefit.
This project will explore the feasibility of AI-based approaches for providing
such assistance, and prototype, pilot and validate a range of capabilities, and
widely disseminate results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research and
development in cyberinfrastructure(CI) for science focuses on scaling the CI:
developing algorithms that scale better, automating pipelines, building scalable
computational and data systems, and optimizing system resource allocation. This
project, on the other hand, focuses on scaling the individual researcher, i.e.
making her more effective, through the application of a portfolio of techniques,
from observational studies of scientist-CI interactions, to end-to-end
instrumentation for recording and tracking these interactions across the CI,
building machine-learned models from these interactions, and embedding and
experimenting with these models within human-machine teaming paradigms. These
techniques will be given the best chance to succeed by applying them in a
methodological and technical framework that focuses on specific applications.
The proposed methods will vary participant expertise, test hypotheses of
performance, and use transparent ?guide me? methodologies to establish
dimensions of individual differences in designing guidance. The exemplar domain
science is genomics, where the goal is to sequence and assemble the complete DNA
of selected species, and where the work in this project could be particularly
transformative. The project team is integrative, interdisciplinary and
convergent; the investigators have expertise in genomics, software engineering,
systems, data science, project management, and human-machine systems, and are
working with a key CI provider in the Ohio Supercomputer Center, and
collectively advising a small team of graduate students. The project is aligned
with the NSF Big Ideas of Harnessing the Data Revolution, Growing Convergence
Research and the Future of Work, and the Office of Advanced Infrastructure
criteria for software cyberinfrastructure, since it is domain and computer
sciences-driven, innovative, collaborative and convergent, strategically
managed, and building on significant prior investments by NSF - a clear path to
sustainability. This work could make computational scientists from many science
domains transformatively more productive, leading to accelerated discovery.
Additional broader impacts are through educational case-studies for
computational science, contributions to instrumentation standards, and
observational and empirical study methods for CI. A side contribution of this
work will be in assessing the usability of CI tools . This will directly enable
tool designers to build more usable tools. Broadening participation has been
emphasized: one of the principal investigators is a woman. All three PIs have a
history of recruiting and working with women students. At least one of the
funded graduate students will be an incoming female student. The project team
will additionally be closely collaborating with two women students and a woman
post-doctoral researcher in the genomics laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.