* 1945057
* CAREER: Liquid Crystallinity as a Tool to Probe Cell and Protein Behavior in Gel Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Kelly Burke, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 04/30/2025
* USD 460,405.00

Mechanical properties of tissues can influence how individual cells behave.
Changes in mechanical properties are often hallmarks of disease and are critical
for healthy repair following injury. However, how the cells sense these
properties at different length scales and how that information affects cell
function are not well-understood. This CAREER research investigates new polymers
that are compatible with human cells and can be used to surround cells for
laboratory culture in three-dimensional (3D) gels. The polymers are liquid
crystalline (LC), which means that they can be designed to order at different
length scales. The research will establish new gel materials and determine how
protein orders within the gels. The work will then determine how the length
scales at which cells sense mechanical properties affect cell function, as well
as investigate materials-based approaches to tune protein
deposition/organization and cellular activation. The knowledge of cell behavior
gained from this CAREER project can help discover and validate therapies for
diseases such as fibrosis, a pathology characterized by excess scarring, and can
contribute to new materials for regenerative medicine. The educational goal of
this project is to provide fifth and sixth grade students, who are vulnerable
along gendered lines to decreased self-efficacy in STEM, with opportunities to
practice resilience or "grit", a measurable and trainable skill. Research-based
activities will allow these students to attempt challenges and confront and
overcome failure in a safe environment with support from undergraduate mentors.
The integrated educational and research program aims to 1) teach resiliency
skills to underserved students to increase attitudes of STEM self-efficacy, 2)
train undergraduate and graduate students in research and to communicate
research to diverse audiences, and 3) broadly distribute results of that
research and generate interest in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of cell cultures in vitro generates
knowledge of cell behavior and can reveal therapeutic targets, validate clinical
therapies, and establish new materials for regenerative medicine. Mammalian
cells alter function in response to culture substrates with different elastic
and viscous (viscoelastic) properties, yet how cells sense viscoelasticity is
not well understood. Given the heterogeneity of natural tissues, clarifying at
what length scales (from microns to millimeters) cells sense and/or respond to
viscoelasticity is hypothesized to be a critical design variable unaccounted for
in current culture substrates. This project will establish a new class of
cytocompatible, three-dimensional (3D) liquid crystalline (LC) gels, to enable
encapsulation of cells in vitro and to pioneer new insight into
cellular/subcellular responses to local 3D environments. The first objective
will synthesize LC hydrogels and establish design parameters that control LC
polymer order and material properties. The hydrogels will be combined with Type
I collagen and fibroblasts to determine how LC polymer ordering affects the
organization of reconstituted and de novo synthesized collagen. The second
objective will quantify fibroblast activation and protein responses to changes
in the viscoelasticity of the local 3D environment at varying length scales. The
educational goal centers on resilience or "grit" as a measurable, trainable
skill key to self-efficacy in STEM. A novel service learning model will
integrate research with education, focusing on underrepresented students at the
late elementary and early middle school level, a time when gender differences in
STEM self-efficacy arise and affect both the rate at which students enter and
continue with STEM studies. Research-integrated activities will allow 5th and
6th grade students to attempt challenges and confront and overcome failure in a
safe environment with support from undergraduate student mentors. The integrated
and sustainable educational and research program is expected to 1) teach
resiliency skills to underserved students, 2) train undergraduate and graduate
students in research and to communicate research to diverse audiences, and 3)
broadly disseminate results and generate interest in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.