* 1945069
* CAREER: Integrating information across levels of processing during real-time spoken language comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Joseph Toscano, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 05/31/2025
* USD 512,158.00

Language comprehension is central to successful communication. However, to
understand spoken language, people must cope with noisy environments,
variability across speakers' voices and language backgrounds, and differences in
the way words are pronounced. As a result, people rely on context, such as the
other words in a sentence, to interpret the meaning of what they hear. This
project will investigate how people understand spoken language in different
contexts by studying brain responses to speech and developing computer models
that recognize spoken words in context. The aim is to understand the ways that
human listeners successfully communicate in a noisy world. The research may also
provide insights into how computer systems designed to recognize speech can be
made smarter by having them process language in ways similar to humans. This
research will be integrated with the educational component of the project, which
will provide students with training in advanced computational and neuroscience
techniques that are vital to the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses these issues by studying language comprehension in experiments
using neuroscience techniques that reveal how speech is perceived by the brain
in the first few hundred milliseconds of hearing a sound. By studying these
early brain responses, the investigators will be able to identify what
information the listener uses to distinguish spoken words and determine how
these brain responses are affected by the listeners' expectation of which words
they will hear. The investigators will also create neural network models that
use techniques from machine learning to recognize speech and are trained in a
way that mimics how children learn language. The behavior of the model will be
compared with the data from human listeners to determine whether the model
accurately captures the way the brain understands spoken language in different
contexts. The techniques developed from this research will also be used in
classroom and laboratory settings to train undergraduate and graduate students
in the use of these approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.