* 1945525
* CAREER: Machine Learning: How Electrons Correlate
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Jason Goodpaster, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Professor Jason Goodpaster of University of Minnesota is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop computational methods which enable the accurate
calculation of energies of molecules and solids utilizing machine learning.
Highly accurate calculations of large molecules use a lot of expensive computer
time and thus, our ability to understand the properties of these compounds is
limited. Machine learning offers the ability to leverage many small calculations
and combine them to accurately calculate the properties of large molecules, such
as proteins or industrial catalysts. Professor Goodpaster and his research group
are developing machine-learning methodologies that utilize regression and neural
network models to accurately predict the properties of larger chemical systems.
This methodology may open the door to improved understanding of these complex
molecules. Professor Goodpaster is applying his computational techniques to the
study of molecular magnets and metal oxides; however, the machine learning
methodology is generalizable and can be made be applicable to a wide variety of
molecular and solid materials. This project bolsters industries of the future as
it develops new ways of designing chemicals and materials with specific
properties. The Goodpaster group is also developing an outreach program
targeting K-12 students from historically underrepresented and underprivileged
groups. His educational program seeks to encourage these students to pursue
higher education, specifically in STEM fields. Part of this program involves
training high school students to perform chemistry
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Goodpaster and his
research team will produce new state-of-the-art electronic structure methods
with improved accuracy and computational efficiency. The project will develop
and assess the accuracy of different machine learning (ML) methods, specifically
different machine-learning features and regression algorithms, in predicting the
Full Configuration Interaction energy. The researchers will also develop deep
learning networks to predict the Full Configuration Interaction energy, and
produce computationally efficient algorithms and code for these approaches. With
the ML methodologies developed, they will be directly applied and combined with
quantum embedding theory to study a variety of complex electronic structure
problems, such as molecular magnets and metal oxides to benchmark the accuracy
of these new methods and gain fundamental insights in these complicated
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.