* 1945753
* Collaborative Research: Discovering genomic and developmental mechanisms that underlie sensory innovations critical to adaptive diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Elizabeth Dumont, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 240,780.00

All animals must sense their environment and other organisms to find food, avoid
threats, and find partners. The ability of some individuals to locate food and
mates more effectively than others can open opportunities for them to leave many
more descendants. And yet, multiple advanced sensory systems seldom evolve in
the same species despite the advantages they may confer, suggesting there are
physical limits to developing several specialized senses. This project focuses
on a diverse group of tropical bats in which various species evolved acute,
specialized hearing, supersensitive eyes, the ability to smell subtle plant
chemicals, or highly developed vomeronasal systems (thought to contribute to
mating and social hierarchy). This project will compare approximately 2000 genes
involved in vision, hearing, olfaction and the vomeronasal system in more than
150 bat species. To find out how some of these genes contribute to developing
distinct sensory systems, their actions will be studied in the lab. This
research will uncover the role of specific genes in the acquisition of
specialized senses, test whether the size of the head limits the number of
specialized sensory structures a species can have, and discover how sensory
adaptations contribute to the diversity of species through
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will uncover the evolution of genes and
structures of the auditory, visual, and olfactory and vomeronasal systems in a
large superfamily of bats characterized by diverse sensory adaptations
associated with specific diets. Analyses of gene evolution will be used to test
the hypothesis that sensory innovations arise through gene duplication and
positive selection. Measurements of gene expression from tissues collected in
the field, and experiments to express key bat genes in developing embryos will
be used to elucidate how genes shape adaptive sensory structures. Comparative
analyses of detailed measurements of the size of sensory structures will
evaluate trade-offs between sensory systems and the way these may limit
diversity of diets or species. State-of-the art methods to quantify
relationships between gene and trait evolution and species diversity will be
used to discover the impact of sensory adaptation on species diversity through
time. This research will illuminate the main biological forces in the genome,
during embryonic development, and in anatomical structures that contribute to
the success of species in adapting to their ever-challenging environment.