* 1945740
* Collaborative Research: Disentangling the effects of extrinsic mortality risk and energy availability on adolescent maturation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Aaron Blackwell, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 209,099.00

Both environmental and social factors are known to affect the timing of
maturation at adolescence. Yet little is known about how these factors interact,
vary with socioeconomic status, and differ for boys and girls. The aim of the
current project is to disentangle the effects of nutrition and disease from
several understudied factors on the timing of puberty in adolescents developing
within contexts that present a wide range of social and environmental
challenges. The project will study puberty as a set of physical, hormonal, and
behavioral changes, allowing for a better assessment of factors affecting
maturation in boys and girls. The research will address theoretical questions
related to the evolution of the unique human pattern of growth and development.
Insights from this work may also inform public health interventions related to
adolescence. The project will train undergraduate and graduate students from
under-represented minorities and will enhance research collaborations and
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory and evidence suggest that
individuals often accelerate development in response to cues of extrinsic
mortality risk and decelerate development in response to disease or low energy
availability. This project will examine the individual and combined effects of
energy availability and cues of extrinsic mortality on the timing of puberty by
longitudinally quantifying differences in the magnitude, tempo, and velocity of
maturation across a diverse sample of youth facing a variety of different social
and environmental stressors. It will employ a comprehensive set of measures in
both boys and girls, including novel measures of male development (e.g., voice
pitch), and conventional measures such as age at menarche, somatic growth,
hormone levels, and self-reported Tanner stages. Research will be carried out in
two locations with a wide range of variation in key measures to facilitate
robust findings. Statistical models will be used to partition variation in
measures of puberty into effects due to different social and environmental
factors, and to assess whether measuring of the timing of puberty are associated
with adolescentsâ€™ reproductive, educational, and life-course
aspirations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.