* 1945664
* CAREER: Impact-Adaptive Conducting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Yue Wang, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2025
* USD 488,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation wearable or on-skin
electronics have the potential to transform personalized biomedical care by
providing non-invasive, constant biometrics monitoring. Stretchable conducting
polymers, a special type of plastic that conducts electricity and deforms with
body movement, have become a main class of materials for such applications.
However, these polymers break more easily when deformed at a faster rate because
of their intrinsic mechanical properties. This is detrimental for electronics to
be applied directly on human bodies since they are constantly undergoing dynamic
movement. This CAREER project aims to develop a new class of adaptive
stretchable conducting polymers with toughness that will scale with the rate of
deformation. Specifically, the PI will explore and elucidate the fundamental
chemical design principles for realizing and manipulating these adaptive
mechanical properties. Successful execution of this project will lead to plastic
electronics with enhanced stability, reliability, and practicality for next-
generation wearable or on-skin electronics. These properties could also result
in longer use cycles, and therefore reducing plastic waste and contributing to
preservation of our environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational objective
of this project is to increase the scientific literacy in Central California, a
historically underserved region, and create a more diversified future STEM
workforce. Specifically, the PI will develop low-cost 3D printing tools for
local K-12 students to experimenting with various classes of polymers and learn
the diversity, pervasiveness, and important role that polymers play in our
lives. Modified versions of these experiments will be integrated into the
undergraduate curriculum at UC Merced, a Hispanic Serving Institution, to expose
undergraduate students to new soft materials and educate them at the forefront
of polymer science. The PI also plans to publish these outreach experiments in
an education journal, with the hope of disseminating this low-cost technology to
increase scientific literacy and knowledge of polymers across the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
key challenge in realizing practical wearable and on-skin electronics using
conducting polymers is to overcome their viscoelasticity. This strain rate-
dependent property is highly detrimental as wearable and on-skin electronics
made using these polymers would be prone to damage when used under conditions
involving sudden movements and impact, such as during sports. This CAREER
project aims to develop a set of chemical design principles for creating a new
class of stretchable conducting polymers that defy this classic, unfavorable
strain rate behavior. This objective will be realized by creating two competing
deformation mechanisms at the molecular chain and nanoscopic domain levels. In
phase I of the project, the PI will design and synthesize a number of conducting
polymers with chemical structures that favor the formation of interpenetrated
micelles. Different secondary interactions will be incorporated at the surface
and interior of the micelles to serve as functional handles for tuning the two
competing deformation mechanisms. Phase II of the project will employ a full
suite of chemical, mechanical, electrical and structural characterization
techniques to study these polymers. In particular, in-situ
resistance/tensile/small- and wide-angle X-ray scattering will be used to
decipher the structure-property relationships and deformation mechanisms at the
surface and interior of the micelles across various length scales. Phase III of
the project is aimed at optimizing the electrical conductivity of these impact-
adaptive conducting polymers by creating effective charge transport pathways on
the surface of the micelles. The polymer design principles and mechanistic
insights gained through this project will lead to a body of fundamental
knowledge for creating polymeric conductors that have toughness adaptive towards
the degree of impact.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.