* 1945224
* CAREER: Shape Analysis in Submanifold Spaces: New Directions for Theory and Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Nicolas Charon, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 01/31/2025
* USD 351,590.00

Shape analysis has now become an integral component of data science as it is key
to modelling and analyzing quantitatively the geometric variability within
datasets for applications as diverse as computer vision, speech/motion
recognition, morphogenesis or computational anatomy. Among the variety of
geometric structures that are studied in this field, curves, surfaces and more
generally manifolds are both very natural objects but also particularly
challenging to process and analyze due to the non-canonical structure of the
corresponding shape spaces. This has in part hindered the development and
effectiveness of shape analysis frameworks for such data, if compared for
instance to the more widely studied case of images. This project attempts to
bridge a few of these important gaps, both on the theoretical and computational
side and develop new scalable algorithms for morphological analysis adapted to
the growing size and complexity of real datasets. The project will also promote
those research topics among students at various levels of the educational
system, with the creation of an upper-level undergraduate course on differential
and computational geometry, training of PhD students and K-12 outreach
activities through the Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building up on several prior works on shape
spaces and metrics, the specific research objectives of this project are (1) to
advance the analysis and comparison of relaxed shape matching problems deriving
from Riemannian metrics on spaces of manifolds; (2) to investigate supervised
and unsupervised deep learning approaches to improve the efficiency of manifold
registration algorithms; and (3) to study novel extensions of those models to
account for partial or incomplete data and model joint shape/topological
variations across shapes. As part of this project's outcome, Python pipelines
will be developed and made openly accessible to the scientific community with
the long term goal of expanding the potential scope of applications of those
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.