* 1945558
* CAREER:  Lead-Free Pseudohalide/Halide Perovskites for Next-Generation White Light-Emitting Diodes
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Peifen Zhu, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 90,247.00

Lighting accounts for one-eighth of total U.S. electricity consumption.
Conventional light sources such as incandescent light bulbs and fluorescence
light tubes consume a lot of energy. Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) as a new
generation lighting technology have extremely long life spans and consume much
less energy. Despite rapid advances, LED technology is still in its early stage,
and continued innovation and breakthroughs are needed to achieve the full
potential of this technology. White LEDs are typically obtained by coating
yellow luminescence materials (called “phosphor”) onto blue LEDs. The lack of
red component results in a cool color, which is not suitable for indoor lighting
applications. The objective of this CAREER project is to develop highly
efficient, environmentally friendly luminescent materials by using earth-
abundant elements and low-cost and large-scale solution-based methods to replace
the yellow phosphors. The project aims to develop highly efficient white LEDs
with superior color quality, to speed up the widespread adoption of white LEDs,
and to save energy. This project offers educational training in
multidisciplinary areas such as Physics, Material Science, Electrical
Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering for both undergraduate and graduate
students. The research is also integrated with photonic education activities at
local K-12 schools. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Materials
Research and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal halide perovskites are promising
semiconductor materials for potential applications in optoelectronic devices.
However, the common inclusion of lead and stability issues of this material are
hampering the practical applications of these materials. The Principal
Investigator is exploring new lead-free pseudohalide/halide perovskite
nanocrystals and investigating the factors affecting their optical properties
and stability by using theoretical and experimental methods. The knowledge
obtained in this project improves our fundamental understanding of the physics
of pseudohalide/halide perovskite materials and assists in discovering new
environmentally friendly materials for next-generation white LEDs. The project
expects to solve the issues challenging the practical applications of these
materials and to accelerate their use in optoelectronic devices. The completion
of this project results in a cost reduction of LED, widespread adoption of white
LED in the general illumination market, and significant energy savings. This
project is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.