* 1945481
* CAREER: Understanding the Evolution of Random Graphs with Complex Dependencies: Phase Transition and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Lutz Warnke, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2022
* USD 176,966.00

Time-evolving random networks/random graph processes play an important role in
several branches of mathematics and science, including extremal combinatorics,
complex networks, and statistical physics. This project seeks to develop new
theory for such random graph processes, in order to better understand their
properties, improve existing methods of analysis, and rigorously justify their
applications. In doing so, the proposed research addresses long-standing open
questions in phase transition of dependent random graph processes. The goal of
this research is to show that a variety of dependent random graph processes
exhibit similar phase transition behavior. Another major thrust of the proposed
research is to transfer these new analytical tools from constrained random graph
processes to resolve open questions in extremal combinatorics, including Ramsey
and Turan type problems. These new mathematical tools can also be used to tackle
related problems arising in network science, number theory, computer science,
and engineering. The educational component includes annual K-12 math teacher
workshops, research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students,and a
multidisciplinary workshop/summer school for junior researchers and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main theme of this project
is the development of new theory and applications for time-evolving random graph
processes with dependencies (that grow step-by-step according to specific rules
or structural constraints). One goal is to establish fundamental phase
transition properties such as location/existence of critical points, bounds on
the second largest component, and analyticity of scaling limits. A second goal
is to justify the universality paradigm, i.e., prove that the phase transition
of a range of dependent random graph processes such as the random d-process
belong to the same universality class. To this end we will develop a general
proof framework which allows us to show, among others, that the largest giant
component grows at a linear rate in the supercritical phase. Another goal is to
improve/sharpen the analysis of constrained random graph processes such as the
H-free process. Here one key ingredient is a more robust analysis framework
based on semi-randomization (that works under much weaker technical
assumptions), which will allow us to significantly broaden the scope of
applications in Ramsey and Turan theory. Each of these goals is related to
analytic, combinatorial, and probabilistic properties, and this project focuses
on development of new mathematical theory at the intersection of these areas,
and will enable us to attack important and challenging questions pertaining to
explosive percolation and other well-known and notoriously difficult open
problems in the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.