* 1945794
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The skeletal biology of porous cranial lesions
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Michael Gurven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 10/31/2021
* USD 31,044.00

Skeletal remains are important sources of information on temporal trends in
human health. Porous cranial lesions (PCLs) are interpreted as indicators of
nutrient deficiencies and chronic infections and are among the most common
pathological findings in human skeletal remains. This doctoral dissertation
project uses methods previously applied primarily in archaeological contexts to
investigating the causes of PCLs and the health of individuals who live with
them. Specifically, the researchers will use an archaeological reference sample
to develop computed tomography (CT) criteria for identifying PCLs in living
individuals. They will then link measures of individual health to PCL findings
from existing CT scans of a living population. Protocols and tools developed for
PCL analysis will be made freely available online. The project will strengthen
institutional capacity for future research collaborations and support STEM
student training at the graduate and undergraduate levels. Because PCLs are
developed during childhood, the methods developed in this proposal will have
implications for public health across the lifespan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PCLs
in archaeological samples have been interpreted as evidence of both stress and
resilience. This project attempts to resolve this ambiguity by leveraging
existing data drawn from a living population to test the association of PCLs in
the orbits (cribra orbitalia) and the cranial vault (porotic hyperostosis) with
known health profiles. First, the researchers will develop a protocol to extend
archaeological methods to determining the prevalence of PCLs in a living
population. Specifically, investigators will employ both visual assessments of
CT scans and machine learning to reliably identify the presence and extent of
PCLs on cranial CT scans using a reference sample of archaeological crania (n =
600). Once developed, investigators will apply the protocol to identify PCLs on
existing cranial CTs of 1,310 living adults with known health profiles. This
will link childhood development of PCLs to measures of later life health,
including biological markers, medical diagnoses, and self-reported wellness.
Finally, this project tests the common interpretation of PCLs as indicators of
childhood anemia. Using biological markers from dried blood spot samples from
children in the same population of living individuals (n = 480), investigators
will identify the underlying causes of individual anemia cases and test their
association with a biological marker of active bone
remodeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.