* 1945974
* Goethite Internal Thermometry - Improvements and Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Kenneth Farley, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2024
* USD 381,424.00

Earth's climate varies over timescales from tens of years to millions of years
in response to factors such as the sun's output, the arrangement of continents,
ocean circulation, and the composition of the atmosphere. Much of what we know
about past climate comes from analysis of minerals that carry a record of
environmental conditions under which they grew. For example, polar ice
constitutes an archive of climate extending back hundreds of thousands of years,
while the carbonate skeletons of marine organisms carry similar information
extending to hundreds of millions of years ago. At present, little is known
about environmental conditions on the continents in deep time, primarily because
few materials are known that carry a record of paleoclimate and for which an
accurate formation age can be determined. Recent work indicates that the mineral
goethite, a common iron oxide produced during weathering of continental rocks,
can be radiometrically dated and also contains a record of its formation
temperature. This award will explore this new method of characterizing
continental paleoclimate by developing an efficient and automated technique to
assess goethite formation temperature, and, once established, will use that
technique to refine the temperature calibration of the method and apply it to
suites of dated goethite specimens spanning the last 66 million years from
localities in Europe, Brazil, and Australia. The end product will be an improved
analytical methodology and amongst the first multimillion year paleotemperature
records from the continents. The work will support a graduate student and will
also engage students from a local community college in both the science of the
undertaking and in the development and programming of the automated analytical
system to be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goethite (FeOOH) is formed when Fe-
bearing minerals interact with oxygen-bearing ground and surface waters. In
weathering environments, this very insoluble phase forms, survives and
accumulates, becoming a major constituent of ferricretes, gossans, paleosols and
laterites. Two recent advances suggest that goethite can provide a unique record
of paleotemperatures in settings, such as continental interiors, where almost no
alternative paleothermometer exists. First, using the (U-Th)/He method goethite
can be dated with an uncertainty &lt;5%. A compilation of more than 1500 dates
reveals that goethite formation spans, almost without interruption, the entire
Cenozoic Era (0-66 Ma). Second, the two crystallographically-distinct oxygen
sites have a readily-measured temperature-dependent contrast in 18O/16O,
allowing single-phase paleothermometry. This project will link these two
advances by undertaking three tasks designed to improve and refine the goethite-
internal thermometry method, and to apply it in a systematic way for the first
time. Task 1 is to design and build a new oxygen extraction line that can
process goethite specimens in a completely automated and efficient way. This is
a critical step to permit the large number of oxygen isotopic analyses required
by this project. Task 2 is to refine the calibration of the goethite internal
thermometer by analyzing synthetic goethites grown under a more diverse range of
temperature and chemical conditions than previous work. This task will improve
the uncertainty on goethite-internal temperatures, and will identify any as-yet
unrecognized secondary controls on derived temperatures. Task 3 consists of the
first systematic investigation of the goethite internal thermometry archive.
Three suites of already-dated goethites will be analyzed for paleotemperature
(total ~100 samples): supergene goethites from a deeply weathered sulfide
deposit in the Amazon basin, goethite pisoliths from Central Europe, and
goethites from the enigmatic Channel Iron Deposits of Western Australia. From
each of these localities we will obtain oxygen isotope data that continuously
spans many millions of years. These records will allow the researchers to assess
internal consistency of the goethite temperature estimates, and to document for
the first time paleotemperatures at high temporal resolution over the entire
Cenozoic from three different continents. A fourth task is designed to engage
members of the community with this project and simultaneously to teach them a
useful skill. The principal investigator will lead a 3-day short-course in
Labview, a programming language that fundamentally enables the proposed work.
Competitively-selected students participating in the course will include
individuals from local high schools and/or community colleges. The short-course
will introduce the science and the approaches of goethite-internal thermometry,
and coding examples and exercises will be drawn from the proposed analytical
work. At the end of the short course one of these students will be selected for
a ten-week internship to develop/document Labview code for the proposed
extraction line. More traditional Broader Impacts of this project include
support for a PhD student, refinement and verification of an entirely new
paleoclimate tool that can be broadly applied, and creation of new paleoclimate
records from previously unstudied areas that will be useful in geoscience and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.