* 1945296
* CAREER: Jets measurements at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Rosi Reed, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2025
* USD 483,181.00

This award supports the investigation of the strong nuclear force by the PI and
her research group, and also supports several initiatives to increase the
participation of under-represented minorities in the field of high energy
nuclear physics. The nuclei of atoms are made up of nucleons, which can be
either protons or neutrons. These, in turn, consist of quarks, and are bound
together by gluons. These quarks and gluons are confined to the protons and
neutrons and cannot be observed individually. In order to study the strong
nuclear force that holds the quarks and gluons together, heavy ions such as gold
or lead nuclei are collided with each other at ultra-relativistic speeds. This
forms an extremely hot and dense liquid drop of matter, where the quarks and
gluons are no longer confined into normal matter as we know it. This new state
of matter is called the Quark Gluon Plasma (QGP). Understanding the QGP allows
for a better understanding of the strong nuclear force, which is necessary to
discern how sub-atomic matter organizes itself. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
two facilities in the world that can create this matter, the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) in Europe and the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) located
in Brookhaven National Lab, in Long Island, New York. In some of the heavy ion
collisions, two nucleons will strike each other hard enough to knock a quark or
gluon out at a high rate of speed. This quark or gluon will travel through the
QGP, losing energy to it via its interactions, and then produce a spray of
particles called a "jet". The jets created in this fashion can then be used as
probes of the QGP, by comparisons with collisions where QGP was not formed. This
award supports studying this phenomenon at the Solenoidal Tracker at RHIC (STAR)
experiment, which has recorded several large data sets ideal for jet
measurements. Additionally, it will support measuring jet results using a new
experiment, called sPHENIX, which will start taking data in the last few years
of the award. This experiment has a central hadronic calorimeter (HCal), which
allows nearly all the energy within a jet to be measured and will increase the
precision of all jet-based measurements. In addition to the jet related
analysis, this award includes testing electronic components of the
Electromagnetc Calorimeter (EMCal) and HCal and helping with the final assembly.
A dedicated test stand will be set up at the PI's institution, which will allow
the electronic boards used by both calorimeters to be characterized by
undergraduate and graduate students at Lehigh. These students will then spend
some time at Brookhaven, assisting with the final assembly so that they can see
how detectors are designed, tested, and assembled. Additionally, the students
will continue to assist with the installation, commissioning and calibration of
the STAR Event Plane Detector. This detector was constructed with the help of a
previous award and forms a vital part of the STAR experiment by determining the
impact parameter of the colliding nuclei within the STAR experiment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diverse undergraduate and graduate students involved
in this project will gain skills in the analysis of big data, develop hardware
skills, and be able to network within the large experimental collaborations at
RHIC. These will be important for both preparing and mentoring the next
generation of STEM workers. Additionally, this award will be used to continue
the K-12 outreach program at Lehigh University, which will allow the younger
students to work with a diverse group of scientists. This will encourage a
diverse population to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.