* 1945395
* CAREER: Controlled nonequilibrium dynamics of quantum matter and machines
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Armin Rahmani, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2025
* USD 505,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
on the controlled dynamics of quantum systems and devices, with applications to
quantum information processing. Quantum technology is still in its infancy, but
rapid developments are underway. On the theoretical side, fundamental questions
need to be addressed regarding how to control the dynamics of quantum systems,
as well as the effects of noise and environment. The PI and his group will
pursue research to uncover critical characteristics of intricately controlled
dynamics of quantum states. An example is determining how best to control the
time dependence of an initial quantum state to prepare a desired quantum
mechanical state. Theoretical insights gained will be applied to simulating on
quantum computers problems that are intractable on traditional modern computers,
including simulating complex quantum materials. The PI will focus on quantum
computers based on superconducting qubits, which harnesses a state of matter
where the electrons in some materials at sufficiently low temperature can
collectively behave quantum mechanically. The PI will also explore the
development of robust methods and algorithms for computing on another platform
that harnesses a different many-electron quantum mechanical state that offers
reduced susceptibility to noise based on topological properties of materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project involves condensed-matter physics and
quantum information science and will contribute to the development of efficient
quantum software for near-term quantum computers. The research will be performed
with undergraduate students and postdocs, helping to develop the workforce in
the emerging area of quantum science and technology, and providing a broad range
of career opportunities. The education and outreach component of the project
will reform and expand the quantum course offering at the PI's institution,
develop innovative educational material on undergraduate-level quantum
information and computation, and involve local high school and community college
students in quantum science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education on the fundamental
characteristics of controlled nonequilibrium quantum dynamics and its
application to the simulation of strongly correlated quantum systems. One
promising near-term approach, known as the variational quantum algorithm which
suffers from a large number of variational parameters, and the absence of
suitable ansatzes for the variational protocols. This project will investigate
the use of quantum optimal control theory to overcome these challenges to the
use of the variational quantum algorithm. The objectives of the research are
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) discover the salient qualitative, quantitative, and
universal features of the optimally controlled quantum dynamics of many-body
systems, such as speed limits, patterns in the optimal dynamical protocols, and
the evolution of entanglement and correlations.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) further develop
the theory of noise-driven quantum systems and use stochastic driving as a
resource for creating desired states.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) devise practical ways of
simulating strongly correlated many-body models of fermions and spins with
superconducting qubits.&lt;br/&gt;(iv) engineer fast and robust schemes, based
on optimal control, for quantum information processing with topological anyons,
which beat the adiabatic performance barrier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
utilize Monte Carlo simulations, Pontryagin's theory of optimal control,
theoretical methods for strongly correlated systems, and the density-matrix
renormalization group to achieve these objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
education and outreach activities are aimed to reform and expand the upper-
division quantum-mechanics sequence at the PI's institution, create an
accessible undergraduate-level course on quantum computing, develop and
disseminate hands-on student-centered teaching material, and give outreach
presentations on quantum research at local high schools and community colleges.
The project involves undergraduate students in authentic quantum research,
contributing to workforce development in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.