* 1945692
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Trabecular and cortical skeletal correlates to locomotor ontogeny in hominoids
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Miranda Nicole Cosman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 31,200.00

The growth and development of the human skeleton is affected by the way it is
used across the life course. In order to understand how human skeletal
development evolved, it is useful to study skeletal development in other closely
related primates. The goal of this doctoral dissertation project is to
investigate how changes in locomotion across the chimpanzee life course are
reflected in the skeleton. Chimpanzees change from moving mostly in the trees
when they are young to moving more on the ground as they age, providing an
opportunity to examine how chimpanzee trabecular (spongy) and cortical (compact)
bone are modified as locomotion changes across the life course. The research
will contribute to our understanding of bone biology, specifically the
sensitivity of the skeleton to changes in movement throughout life, which can be
used to better reconstruct the locomotion of extinct fossil apes and humans,
particularly the evolution of terrestriality. This research will be used in K-12
science outreach and exhibited at natural history museums. CT scans and 3D
prints of Pan troglodytes and fossil hominoids (apes) will also be part of an
international exhibit focused on ape evolution and conservation. All CT scans
generated from this project will be shared with the museums where the data were
collected, furthering scientific access and inquiry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bones
are a crucial source of data from the fossil record because they undergo
modification in response to the mechanical loads placed upon them during
movement (e.g. walking, running, climbing). However, most studies to date focus
on either trabecular or cortical bone and not the two together in one study.
Chimpanzees modify how they move through their life, shifting from more arboreal
to more terrestrial substrates from infancy to adulthood. Thus, if the skeleton
is responding to these changes, the investigators hypothesize that these
transitions will be detectable in trabecular and cortical bone. This study will
also address whether both bone types respond to locomotor changes during
development, and will apply these findings to other species, extant and fossil,
to help in recovering patterns of movement and substrate usage. These questions
will be addressed using microCT scans of trabecular bone in the fore- and
hindlimb as well as pQCT scans of cortical bone in the shaft of the femur,
tibia, humerus, and radius. The prediction is that trabecular and cortical bone
at each life history stage will reflect the locomotor behaviors used at that
time. By further studying the relationship between ontogenetic changes in
behavior and cortical and trabecular bone structure, novel anatomical proxies
sensitive to loading patterns may be identified and used to reconstruct the
locomotor repertoires of fossil apes and humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.