* 1945975
* EAGER: Bubble Plume Emissions from Fault Zones within the Puget Sound Forearc
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Harlan Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 112,757.00

This EAGER proposal will obtain samples from newly identified gas and fluid
plumes in Puget Sound to determine whether the plumes come from the Cascadia
subduction zone megathrust. The idea is that deep regional faults act as
pathways for upward migration of fluid that has been generated by heating along
the plate interface between the North America and the incoming Juan de Fuca
Plate. If the Puget Sound plumes have a subduction zone source, the plumes may
provide a means to monitor the pressure and chemistry of the fluid between the
plates, and provide a new approach for studying slip on the Cascadia subduction
zone megathrust fault. This project is a first step toward developing predictive
models for understanding seismic hazards in the heavily-populated Pacific
Northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upward migration of fluid and gas through the
forearc crust that overlies active subduction zone faults has been observed in
settings very similar to the Puget Sound region, including Japan Trench on the
Kii peninsula, New Zealand at the Hikurangi margin, and on the Baja California
Peninsula, Mexico. Although these fluid seeps emit fluid with helium, oxygen,
hydrogen isotope signatures that unambiguously identify them as coming from the
subduction zone fault, none of them emit fluid and gas with the vigor or wide
spatial distribution observed within Puget Sound. Critically, none of the
previous globally-identified forearc plumes are in subduction zones where
periodic Episodic Tremor and Slip (ETS) events occur - that arise from periodic
local slippage on the subduction zone fault. At Cascadia, these ETS events have
a quasi-period of 14 months and variations in the amplitude and intervals are
newly-recognized as potential precursors to both regional faulting and large
episodic megathrust earthquakes. If the the new Puget plumes are found to be
derived from the subduction zone megathrust zone, it would be the first step in
using correlations between the variations in emissions and ETS behavior to
understand slip on the megathrust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.