* 1945779
* I-Corps: Multi-functional patch for chronic wounds
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Morteza Mahmoudi, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop an
innovative multi-functional patch to efficiently heal chronic (non-healing)
wounds. Chronic wound patients (such as diabetic foot ulcer and bed sore
patients) are often subject to lengthy and costly treatments. As an example of
the societal burden from chronic wounds, chronic diabetic foot ulcers alone lead
to 50,000 amputations each year in the US, often after lengthy and expensive
period of unsuccessful treatment trials. Current product solutions in the market
have demonstrated limited clinical success in effective treatment of chronic
wounds. This multi-functional patch has a capacity to significantly reduce the
cost and social burden associated with the treatment of non-healing wounds. In
chronic wounds, the body's healing process has paused because of a combination
of multiple factors: lack of cell migration, limited vessel formation, bacterial
infection, and unbalanced inflammation. This innovation makes possible a single
dressing product that can efficiently resume the healing process by addressing
all four underlying issues. The patch implements the therapy in a sequence that
is more compatible with the timeline and biology of wound healing stages.

This I-Corps project will further develop a multi-functional patch technology in
order to adapt to the current clinical needs of treating chronic wounds. The
patch has a unique combination of biopolymers, antibacterial nanoparticles, and
therapeutic biomolecules which can potentially overcome the main issues of
chronic wounds. The technology platform mimics the physical, chemical, and
mechanical characteristics of skin. The homogeneous distribution of the
therapeutic biomolecules in the patch is designed to offset the impaired
molecular and cellular healing process in chronic wounds through substantial
acceleration of the angiogenesis process, cell proliferation, and balancing the
inflammation through the course of healing process. The patch contains
nanoparticles with capacity to locally activate the impaired immune system which
in turn can remove pathogenic bacterial colonies. The sequential release of
nanoparticles and biomolecules during the patch degradation process uniquely
enables the patch to overcome the complications associated with chronic wounds,
thereby accelerating the healing process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.