* 1945647
* CAREER: Causal Explanation in Biology and the Diversity of Causal Concepts
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Lauren Ross, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 362,504.00

This award supports a CAREER proposal. Such proposals have a research component,
and a closely integrated pedagogical component. The research project is to
develop a novel account of scientific explanation that captures the diversity of
causal concepts, structures, and reasoning in biology. It will expand on
mechanistic views that have dominated the field for the past two decades; it
does so in a way that is guided by actual explanatory reasoning in biology. The
project will demonstrate how distinct patterns of explanation can be understood
within an interventionist account of causation. The theoretical foundation for
understanding biological explanation to be developed in this project promises to
clarify how biologists understand their work and how this work is communicated
to public audiences. The pedagogical component of the project includes plans to
create educational opportunities for underrepresented students, to increase
diversity in the field of philosophy, and to improve undergraduate student
training in the use of historical and philosophical methods to address questions
about scientific methodology. There are also plans to develop resources for
science communication and guidelines for communication of biological explanation
to different audiences. These impacts will be achieved through a summer
diversity program for underrepresented groups in philosophy, the development of
a biology interest group at UC Irvine, and the implementation of a set of
classroom diversity initiatives that reflect consideration of UC Irvine’s
minority-serving institution status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the context of
modern biology, the way that scientists describe their research often makes use
of a mechanistic framework; biological phenomena are understood as machine-like,
having lower-level causal parts that all interact to produce some outcome of
interest. As a result, philosophers of science and the general public have come
to regard explanations in biology as predominantly mechanistic. However, this
view fails to accommodate the diversity of causal concepts in biology that
differ from the mechanistic paradigm. For example, biologists appeal to causal
concepts that are not well understood with the notion of mechanism including
concepts such as pathways, cascades, triggers, and processes. This suggests that
causal explanation is more diverse and variegated than the single mechanistic
paradigm that is communicated by scientists and supported by philosophers. A
view that reduces all biological explanation to mechanisms, obscures the rich
and diverse set of causal concepts, reasoning strategies, and experimental
techniques that are found in this scientific field. Maintaining our best
biological science requires that scientists have an awareness of this diversity,
that it is properly characterized in science communication, and that is it
appreciated in the philosophy of science literature. This research proposal will
use philosophical and historical methods to develop a novel account of
biological explanation that accommodates the diversity of causal concepts and
causal reasoning in biology. This account will be used to further our
understanding of biological explanation and enhance science
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.