* 1945471
* CAREER: Hadron's Transverse Structure and Associated QCD Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Zhongbo Kang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2025
* USD 407,325.00

Nucleons (protons and neutrons) are the building blocks of matter, and also
known to be the bound states of quarks and gluons - the elementary particles
that give rise to most of the mass in the visible universe. Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD) is the microscopic theory of strong interactions - one of
the four fundamental forces - which describes how quarks and gluons interact
with each other. The fundamental laws of QCD are elegantly concise; however,
understanding the structural complexity of protons and neutrons in terms of
quarks and gluons governed by those laws is one of the most important challenges
facing physics today, a challenge that motivates the newest generation of
experimental facilities, supercomputers, and nuclear
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to perform new
theoretical analysis and computations for important QCD scattering processes,
develop phenomenological tools that can be used for reliable extraction of quark
and gluon structure of the nucleon from existing and future experimental
measurements, and thus address outstanding questions related to hadron structure
and associated QCD dynamics. For example, the fundamental questions that the
project will be able to address include: what role does the confined motion of
quarks and gluons inside the nucleons play? Are there quantum correlations
between the motion of quarks and gluons, their spin and the spin of the nucleon?
How do quarks and gluons that come out of a high energy scattering make a
transition into hadrons? What new insights can be gained from the production of
collimated spray of hadrons (so-called jets)? This project will also provide
much-needed guidance and predictions for the future Electron Ion Collider, the
flagship nuclear experimental facility planned in the nuclear physics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.