* 1945681
* Workshop to Explore Science Opportunities and Concepts for a US Aerosol-Cloud-Microphysics Research Facility; Boulder, Colorado - Fall 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Raymond Shaw, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 25,840.00

This award is for a workshop that will explore scientific questions and set
priorities for a potential US-based aerosol-cloud research facility. Clouds are
an integral part of weather and climate but the physics behind many cloud
processes are not fully understood. The US research community must currently
work with colleagues in Europe to gain access to a large cloud chamber facility.
The workshop will investigate whether a US-based large chamber facility would be
a significant benefit to the scientific community and, if so, what that chamber
should look like. The main societal impact of this workshop will be future-
looking, as an eventual cloud-aerosol chamber would provide a national resource
to help improve weather and climate modeling.

The meeting will take place in Boulder, Colorado in late 2019. The main
objective of the workshop will be to gauge community interest and to obtain a
sense of priorities for the various scientific challenges that are likely to be
amenable to laboratory investigation. The organizers note that the need for a
cloud chamber with path lengths over 10m and a total volume over 100m3 has been
previously described in agency documents and in community discussions. This
workshop will address questions about what can be learned in such a chamber that
can't otherwise be studied, and what kind of measurement capabilities it should
have. The investigators have estimated attendance at 40-50 personnel with
expertise in aerosol and atmospheric chemistry, cloud microphysics, cloud
modeling and parameterization, radiation propagation and transfer, and turbulent
convection and multiphase flows.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.