* 1945170
* CAREER: The development of, and reasoning about, inequality and its rectification
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Nadia Chernyak, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 422,991.00

This project investigates the origins of our understanding of fairness and
inequality. The first part of the project investigates how our cognitive skills
shape our understanding of equity; the second aim then focuses on the specific
features of inequality that young children attend to. Finally, the last aim
investigates how social factors, such as experiences with systemic disadvantage,
shape the development of our reasoning about inequality. This research will help
pinpoint the specific stumbling blocks that children – and by extension, adults
– face when reasoning about and actively rectifying inequality. Broader impacts
include dissemination of the work to the local community and to scholars focused
on poverty and education; cross-training a group of researchers from
traditionally under-represented groups in research, technical skills, and
community outreach; and collaborations with local communities to conduct this
work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most pervasive problems of our society is
the perpetuation of unequal distribution of resources. While people recognize
the pernicious effects of inequality, they face a series of biases that dictate
its perpetuation, rather than its rectification. Through a series of
experimental developmental studies, the research in this proposal focuses on why
people have trouble rectifying inequality by investigating a) how our
understanding of inequality develops in early childhood, b) the cognitive
mechanisms that shape our understanding of early inequality, and c) how our
social experiences and social contexts contribute to our abilities to recognize
(un)fairness. The results of this work will shed light on the origins,
developmental trajectories, and cognitive underpinnings of our abilities to
think about inequitable resource distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.