* 1945098
* CAREER: Stochastic Methods for Electronic Excitations in Complex Nanoscale System
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Vojtech Vlcek, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 01/31/2025
* USD 421,729.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A quantitative theoretical
understanding of electronic excitations is necessary for searching and designing
new electronic devices. Properties of these systems are dominated by quantum
mechanical interactions that extend over nanometer scales. In these cases,
simulations of electronic excitations pose a considerable challenge for
conventional theoretical approaches, and such calculations are often deemed
untractable. This CAREER award supports three focus areas: (i) development of
new methods that break the current computational limitations; (ii) application
advanced quantum many-body theory to complex nanoscale systems to elucidate new
strategies for design of electronic devices; and (iii) educational activities in
physics, chemistry, and materials science focusing on electronic and optical
properties in condensed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team combines
new numerical techniques to describe the dynamics of excitations and electron-
electron interactions. The methodology is based on a non-deterministic quantum-
statistical approach. It is computationally inexpensive, and it allows treating
exceedingly large systems with high accuracy. The project also provides a new
methodology to account for finite temperature effects. Hence, it is possible to
establish a direct correspondence between computational results and experimental
observations. The theoretical tools developed and used in this project will be
made available to the community. The new developments will be applied to
photovoltaic systems to elucidate how structural and chemical modifications
affect the electronic excitations in photovoltaic devices and their
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goals of the project aim to
provide tools and training for graduate, undergraduate, as well as K-12
students. The PI will provide graduate students with research experience in
theory and computation. Multiple research and training opportunities for
undergraduate students will be established through this proposal in
collaboration with the Califonia Alliance for Minority Participation. This award
also supports a new educational K-12 outreach activity on relations between
molecular and electronic structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
in the theory of electronic excitations. The research team will develop a
stochastic form of the many-body perturbation theory based on an efficient
numerical sampling of wavefunctions and expectations values of operators. The
representation of the electron-electron interactions is derived in the Green’s
function formalism, which includes high order correlation (vertex) terms. This
step is combined with a new stochastic formalism for computing electron-phonon
couplings, which need to be considered for quantitative comparison with
experiments. The research team will determine the most accurate and efficient
stochastic implementations of the many-body perturbation theory for predicting
electronic excitations. The new developments will be applied to organic
photovoltaic systems with strong charge transfer and excitonic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be carried out in three steps:
(i) development of an accurate stochastic many-body framework beyond the
commonly used approximations, including the treatment of strong electron-hole
interactions (vertex terms); (ii) development of new stochastic methodology to
study vibrational effects on excitation energies in large systems; and (iii)
applications of the new stochastic framework to large molecular systems and
their assemblies in the condensed phase. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
computational framework will enable simulations of quantum many-body
interactions in systems with hundreds and thousands of atoms. The results will
provide a detailed understanding of how composition, environment, and the degree
of intermolecular interactions affect the properties of organic (opto)electronic
systems. Effectively, this research bridges theoretical chemistry and the
condensed-matter physics research areas. This multifaceted approach is
integrated into graduate and undergraduate training, as well as newly developed
K-12 outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.