* 1945675
* 3rd International Conference on Plant Synthetic Biology, Bioengineering, and Biotechnology; October 4-6, 2019; Cambridge U.K.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Patrick Shih, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Elebeoba May
* 08/31/2020
* USD 45,000.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Plant synthetic biology is an emerging field
that intersects many disciplines, including plant biology, synthetic biology,
computational modeling and mathematical analysis, and engineering sciences to
enable crop improvement and enhanced bio-production of high value chemicals. The
award will provide travel and registration support to facilitate participation
of US-based researchers, including graduate students, postdoctoral researchers,
and early stage investigators in the 3rd International Conference on Plant
Synthetic Biology, Bioengineering, and Biotechnology Conference to be held
October 4-6, 2019 in Cambridge, United Kingdom. This meeting will bring together
researchers from academia, industry, and government to participate in a highly
interactive and engaging meeting, enabling professionals and young researchers
to hear from one another through organized talks, panel discussions, and poster
sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Presented by the Society of Biological Engineering (SBE),
the conference includes scientists and engineers from universities, industry and
government, and consists of multiple sessions in areas such as: photosynthetic
factories, novel bioproducts, new tools and technologies in synthetic biology,
engineering biotic interactions, engineering plant development and morphology,
and engineering primary productivity, and food and nutritional security. Through
the interactive program, the conference will provide a venue for: scientific
presentations from a diverse group of international researchers working in
various areas, active student and trainee engagement in the field, investigators
from diverse disciplines to discuss cutting edge methodologies and approaches in
plant synthetic biology. The conference will help promote the participation of
women and underrepresented scientists in the field of plant sciences, synthetic
biology, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.