* 1945373
* IIBR Instrumentation: Integrated optical imaging and machine-learning platforms for mapping 3D topology of nanoscale cellular structures
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Inhee Chung, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 02/29/2024
* USD 792,666.00

An award is made to the George Washington University to create a novel light
microscopy platform to visualize and detect features of cell membranes in three
dimensions (3D) at ultra-fine (nanometer-scale) localization accuracy and on
living cells. The project also includes the development of a machine-learning
algorithm as a low-cost alternative to predict real-time 3D changes from
conventional 2D light microscopy data. This innovative research will enable cell
biologists and biochemists to gain new training in disciplines including optics,
lipid biophysics, and biomechanics. The research program will also educate
students ranging from high school to graduate school with diverse backgrounds,
including women and underrepresented minorities. Research outcomes will be
disseminated via creation of a public database, peer-reviewed publications, and
conference presentations. Outreach activities will include hosting high school
summer interns and underrepresented minority students through the national SPARC
program. Other societal benefits of this project are the potential extension of
the use of the proposed instruments to additional biological research areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new tools to view and assess
changes occurring in cell membranes, which may play key roles in important
cellular processes. Current light microscopic technology cannot detect changes
at a nanometer scale in 3D in living cells. However, the 3D nanometer-scale
membrane morphologies and their changes are important features that control cell
biology. To resolve these issues, this project will build an innovative light
microscopy system that combines two existing technologies to enable ultra-fine,
3D detection of cell membrane morphology on living cells. The platform will be
tested and validated on various cell types to ensure reliability and wide
applicability. The new instrument will be complemented by a machine-learning
based software tool that predicts 3D cellular features based on 2D data obtained
by using conventional light microscopes. The software will both allow for
broader use in research with conventional light microscopy, making it affordable
for many settings, as well as further extend the capabilities of the newly
developed hardware. These tools together have broad implications for advancing
basic biology research, by facilitating a wide variety of studies addressing the
effects of cell surface morphology on cell biological
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.