* 1945207
* CAREER: Protein-integrated materials: From molecules to machines
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Leila Deravi, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2025
* USD 420,918.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; Humans live in a visual world, where
analog or digital signals that lead to color and color change impact everyday
decisions such as mobility, communication, and defense. In the ocean, soft-
bodied marine animals like cephalopods (octopus, squid, and cuttlefish) are
naturally endowed with advanced optical organs that enable them to change their
skin color almost instantaneously. This award by the Biomaterials Program in the
Division of Materials Research is to identify and understand the role of
pigments and proteins in squid skin, specifically how they combine and
contribute to dynamic color sensing and subsequent change. This bottom-up
approach will provide a unified biochemical, optical, electrical, and
physiological framework describing the adaptive coloration inherent to these
marine animals. Results from this work are anticipated to inspire the design of
next generation of adaptive and interactive materials that can benefit from new
types of pigments and photonic materials derived from and inspired by
cephalopods. This award includes an integrative education plan designed to
leverage the knowledge, tools, and connections from the proposed research into
educational experiences through experiential learning environments beyond the
classroom. Specifically, this research will generate exciting visual content
from underwater footage of incredible camouflage capability of marine life to
bench top material demonstrations that respond dynamically to electrical signals
(e.g. music) that will be used to create STEM learning modules focused on
materials design for middle and high school classrooms. Beyond the classroom,
the PI will develop and launch a seminar series with local female entrepreneurs
to engage aspiring female undergraduate and graduate students interested in
pursuing translational science. Finally, this research will support increasing
participation of females and underrepresented minority groups at the national
conferences focused on wearable technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; While cephalopods have been a subject of research
for many years, the fundamental physics and chemistry underlying their color
modulation is still not well understood, and the reality of creating a material
that mimics such outstanding capabilities remains elusive. For instance, a
recent study of the cephalopod chromatophore revealed an abundance of lens-
crystallin proteins confined within nanostructured pigment granules, indicating
a functional convergence between the eyes and skin of the animals that has yet
to be explored. This CAREER Award will build off this exciting finding and now
investigate the role of these proteins in facilitating signal transduction
during camouflage. Specifically, it will explore the influence of the protein
structure on tuning the range of visible color presented by chromatophore and
test their role as sensors that regulate a visual feedback loop during
camouflage. Through a mechanistic study that tracks the supramolecular assembly
of these pigment-protein complexes in vitro, materials design rules will be
developed that link the chemical composition to changes in color and pattern.
Additionally, the potential of these complexes to behave as opto-electronic
nodes evolved to facilitate distributed signaling will also be studied.
Together, this multidisciplinary approach will provide a unified biochemical,
optical, electrical, and physiological framework for adaptive coloration,
providing insights into the development of next generation of adaptive and
interactive materials. This work includes an integrative education and outreach
component designed to maximally impact women and underrepresented minority
groups from the local, University level to the broader Boston community and
national scales to inspire, promote, and train the next generation of scientists
and engineers through experiential learning environments beyond the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.