* 1945604
* SBP: CAREER: Organizational diversity management through supportive, skills-focused allyship training
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2025
* Larry Martinez, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 11/30/2025
* USD 497,769.00

As social and political tensions become increasingly acerbic, the need for
support-based interventions against interpersonal prejudice, stigmatization, and
discrimination is becoming abundantly clear. Despite a relatively long history
of research identifying strategies for reducing interpersonal negativity (e.g.,
“diversity training”), reports of continued negativity dominate the current
headlines. This project will design and validate a theoretically-developed and
empirically supported diversity intervention focused on training employees
specific skills to be allies for one another and for marginalized others.
Specifically, this project will extend current knowledge and implementation by
(a) assessing the effectiveness of this type of training longitudinally to
assess long-term impact and (b) developing an online version of the training for
broad dissemination. This project will also include the development of a
diversity research group, a summer diversity research institute for
undergraduate scholars, and a workshop designed to educate organizational
scientists about allyship and diversity research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
training content is informed by theories related to social identity, bystander
intervention processes, social learning, and planned behavior. The training
design is informed by theories of learning and contemporary best practices
related to learning, retention, information processing, and knowledge transfer.
Training modules include lecture-based presentations, video-based role modeling,
perspective-taking empathy exercises, and interpersonal skills practice. The
training will address knowledge and skill acquisition, deep levels of cognitive
and emotional mental processing, and concrete skill-building to maximize
transfer and implementation of the skills learned. This project can transform
our understanding of diversity training initiatives by focusing on skill-
building rather than on discrimination reduction and by employing systematic
longitudinal and multilevel empirical validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.