* 1945615
* CAREER: Dynamics of Nonlinear Dispersive Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Sung-Jin Oh, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2025
* USD 214,080.00

From the dynamics of subatomic particles to electromagnetism, fluids, plasmas
and gravity among astronomical bodies, nature is governed by nonlinear
dispersive partial differential equations at all scales. The objective of this
NSF CAREER project is to enhance the rigorous understanding of the long-term
behavior and singularities of solutions to nonlinear dispersive partial
differential equations of physical origin by attacking strategically chosen open
problems for a wide array of such equations. The theoretical advances from this
project will lead to a clearer and more effective understanding of highly
nonlinear phenomena in physics, such as solitons, gravitational singularities in
general relativity and magnetic reconnection in plasma physics. The project will
train undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral researchers by developing
accessible expositions of modern research topics, organizing summer workshops
and mentoring research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, for three
classes of nonlinear dispersive equations at different levels of complexity, the
following goals will be pursued: (i) for the energy-critical wave maps and
(hyperbolic) Yang–Mills equations, which are examples of relativistic field
theories, to prove a new forward-in-time scattering criterion for “initially
outgoing” solutions, with a view towards resolving the soliton resolution
conjecture in the one-soliton regime, and along a sequence of times in general;
(ii) for linear and nonlinear wave equations on a black hole background, to
develop a Fourier-based approach that rigorously justifies the sharp late-time
asymptotics along the event horizon, which will be a starting point for
investigation of the linear and nonlinear instability of the Kerr Cauchy
horizon, and ultimately the strong cosmic censorship conjecture in the vicinity
of the Kerr spacetimes; (iii) for the Hall-magnetohydrodynamics equations in
plasma physics, to establish a general local wellposedness theory, which is
interesting in view of the recent work of the PI that proved illposedness of the
Cauchy problem in the vicinity of the trivial solution. Insights from various
disciplines of mathematics, such as differential geometry, calculus of
variations, harmonic analysis, spectral theory and microlocal analysis, will
naturally enter in attaining the above goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.