* 1945468
* CAREER: Chemoenzymatic Total Synthesis of Terpenoids via P450 Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Hans Renata, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2022
* USD 670,000.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Hans Renata in the Department of
Chemistry at The Scripps Research Institute. This research develops new
strategies for the synthesis of terpenoids, naturally occurring small molecules
that have a variety of biological functions. Many of these terpenoid molecules
can only be obtained in small quantities from natural sources. Laboratory
methods to prepare them in an efficient manner still remain an unsolved
challenge. The research uses nature’s catalysts, i.e. enzymes, to modify
starting materials and produce useful building blocks. The building blocks are
then used to prepare a wide range of terpenoids. Streamlined access to
terpenoids enabled by this research strategies helps support further studies on
their physiological functions. Students working on these studies receive
important training in chemical and biological sciences to support their future
careers in science and engineering. Concomitant with the research activities,
the Professor Renata is organizing outreach efforts including classroom
education and public engagement to cultivate interest in science among young
students and members of the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Renata lab
aims to develop novel strategies to access important natural products by
incorporating biocatalytic transformations. The goal of this project is to
establish chemoenzymatic means to access oxidized terpenoids with unique
structural motifs, specifically terpenoids bearing “trans-trans-trans”, “trans-
trans-syn” and “trans-syn-trans” ring junctions. This is achieved by combining
site-selective biocatalytic oxidation of readily available feedstock terpenes
and state-of-the-art chemical methodologies for carbon-carbon bond
constructions. Studies in this area help formulate a new type of synthetic logic
(“chemoenzymatic logic”) for accessing complex molecules with interesting
architectures. To complement the research activities, outreach efforts, new
coursework material in biocatalysis, and an external lecture series are designed
to encourage participation in science among young students, underrepresented
groups and members of the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.