* 1945310
* CAREER: Dwarf Galaxies in Clusters: their structure, globular clusters and dark matter content
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Laura Sales, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 03/31/2025
* USD 619,563.00

Although “dark matter” plays an important role in the formation and the complex
dynamics of galaxies, there remains a discrepancy between the amount of dark
matter predicted versus the amount observed. The PI will conduct a detailed
study of the dark matter content of dwarf galaxies found in galaxy clusters. She
will use sophisticated computer simulations to improve on current methods, which
use observations of globular clusters. These results should lead to insights
that could help resolve the controversy concerning the amount of dark matter in
the universe. The PI will organize and conduct an annual program on STEM
instruction for middle and high school students and their teachers in the
Riverside, CA. The instruction will be based upon “hands-on” analysis of
astronomical images. Over 4000 middle and high school students are expected
participate in this program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research study will
perform detailed hydrodynamical simulations using the Illustris/TNG suite to
determine the several paths through which dwarf galaxies start/stop star
formation in high density environments, the associated time scales for quenching
star formation and its relation to the orbits, mass and in-fall properties of
their Galactic Clusters. It will identify the physical processes that drive the
differences of dwarf galaxies stellar sizes by comparison with groups and
clusters with a control sample of dwarf galaxies simulated in isolation. It will
also perform a study on the dark matter content of dwarfs in clusters versus
isolated field galaxies and determine if the differences may be traceable to the
dynamics of Globular clusters. Finally follow-up zoom-in runs of selected
clusters with different resolution and star formation feedback will allow the
evaluation of the robustness of the results to numerical choices. The results of
these simulations will be used to inform the observations of Globular clusters
to correct for the cluster environmental effects when using them to to determine
dwarf galaxies dark matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.