* 1945316
* CAREER: Robust Isotopic Constraints on Primary Productivity from First Principles
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Laurence Yeung, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 05/31/2025
* USD 352,228.00

The response of the global biosphere to climate change is uncertain. In
particular, biosphere productivity in the present and in the past is difficult
to estimate because the available tools are technically challenging to apply in
the varied and often poorly understood natural environments in which life can
thrive. This study will improve estimates of biosphere productivity in the
present and the past through an approach that unifies theory and experiments on
the biochemical reactions that drive photosynthesis and respiration. The results
will be applied to determine patterns of surface-ocean productivity over the
past several decades using a new compilation of existing data that will be made
available to the research community. Finally, the project will support a program
of annual teacher-training activities aimed at global-change science at the
middle- and early-high school level, where curricula and training are currently
lacking. Working with the Rice Office of STEM Engagement and the Harris County
Department of Education, the investigator will host teachers for summer
laboratory experiences and an annual 1-day workshop to train Houston school
teachers, develop lessons on global-change science, and cultivate early
connections between the geosciences and core science/math
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the key tools for assessing past
changes in biosphere productivity is stable-isotope analysis. Of this family of
approaches, the isotopic composition of molecular oxygen (O2) has been applied
widely to constrain the biogeochemical carbon cycle because oxygen is linked to
carbon cycling at the metabolic level. Covariations between 18O/16O and 17O/16O
ratios, in particular―the “triple-isotope” composition of O2―have been of great
utility for determining both modern and past biosphere productivity. Even
remnant signals, transferred more than a billion years ago from O2 into rocks,
have been used for this purpose. However, the interpretations of such isotopic
data are only justified if the biological fractionation processes are well
understood. The signals on O2 are quite subtle, and the technical difficulty of
triple-isotope measurements has meant that few of the foundational experiments
have been repeated and validated. This project will re-evaluate the fundamental
O2 fractionation factors for respiration and photosynthesis using new
experiments and the tools of computational chemistry. A central hypothesis is
that biological oxygen-isotope fractionation can be predicted accurately from
first principles to benchmark, improve, and unify oxygen triple-isotope tracers
across geoscience fields. The project will also test the sensitivity of
biological O2 isotopic fractionation to environmental boundary conditions to
evaluate the impacts of environmentally forced isotopic variability on the
interpretation of local and global O2 budgets. As a capstone, the oceanographic
triple-oxygen field data collected over the past 20 years will be compiled and
re-interpreted in light of this new information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.