* 1945442
* CAREER: Reactivity-Driven Metabolic Signaling: A Feature not a Flaw in Metabolic Regulation
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Raymond Moellering, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 11/30/2024
* USD 730,000.00

Key to healthy cell function is proper control over metabolism - chemical
reaction pathways that provide energy and produce molecules for making complex
biological structures and send messages to various parts of the cell. While
research efforts have defined many of the most basic chemical reaction pathways
in cells, the changing connections between these pathways under normal and
abnormal metabolic conditions remain largely unknown. Dr. Raymond Moellering
develops new chemical tools and techniques to understand how glucose (sugar)
metabolism - the dominant energy pathway in life - communicates with other
pathways that sense and control the response of cells that are experiencing
stress. In parallel, Dr. Moellering integrates this research with new
coursework, on-campus research opportunities for local high school students, and
the creation of an educational outreach program in local high schools.
Collectively, these programs aim to provide students with hands-on research
experiences and encourage them to pursue career paths in science, technology,
engineering, and math fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Dr. Raymond Moellering at the
University of Chicago to develop an integrated suite of chemical probes,
proteomic methods, and cellular model systems to discover and quantify the role
of a prototypical intrinsic reactive metabolite, methylglyoxal. Methylglyoxal
regulates cellular homeostasis and complex phenotypes in cells and whole
organisms. Dr. Moellering uses these methods and cross-species proteomic and
metabolomic datasets in identifying novel protein targets involved in the
response to reactive glycolytic metabolites. He studies the two candidate
proteins already identified. Research objectives are integrated with three
educational goals that develop new coursework that brings together physical
science pedagogy and student exposure to diverse career options for science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM). The team provides educational research
opportunities for local high school students on-campus at the University of
Chicago and in local high schools. The coursework, summer research areas, and
basic science lectures consider the role of chemical probes and techniques in
understanding basic biology and wellness in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.