* 1945417
* CAREER: Numerical Modeling of Volcanic Flank Instability Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Christelle Wauthier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2025
* USD 455,420.00

Massive collapse of volcanic flanks is among the largest mass-wasting events on
the planet and can evolve into energetic lateral blasts and spawn dangerous and
destructive tsunami waves. Despite this hazard, the processes leading or
aggravating the risk of flank collapse remain poorly understood. All volcanoes
behave differently and the reasons behind initiation and persistence or arrest
of flank collapse need to be explored and modeled accurately for a wide range of
volcanoes affected by distinct flank processes. An initial suite of type-
volcanoes comprises Kilauea (Hawaii), Piton de la Fournaise (France) and Anak
Krakatau (Indonesia) for which extensive observations are available and where
contrasting modes of recent failures are evident. This project will support an
early-career, female assistant professor and her diverse research group to
develop a suite of CAREER research and educational tools for investigating
natural hazards and volcano processes. The project will fund two graduate
students at Penn State, including a female international student, who will be
educated in data processing, analysis, interpretation and process-based
modeling. The research will be integrated in educational modules to develop FE
models representing compelling examples of volcanic collapse and seismic unrest
through engaging case studies. Undergraduate students will participate through
senior theses with UNAVCO RESESS underrepresented interns additionally hosted at
Penn State. The ensemble goal is to generate educational resources and teaching
materials for courses in natural hazards, volcanology, and fault mechanics,
including a large-enrollment General Education class for non-science majors. The
work will exhance existing collaborations at Penn State, USGS, South Dakota
School of Mines, Université de Savoie, and Piton de la Fournaise
Observatory/IPGP France. Expected project outcomes have the potential to
illuminate key mechanisms triggering and sustaining the massive collapse of
volcano flanks and their associated and potentially catastrophic air- and sea-
borne hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal addresses why the
style, behavior, and timing of the cyclic growth then destruction of volcanic
edifices varies across such a wide spectrum? It focuses on flank collapse on
ocean island volcanoes and in using modeling to unravel the observed complexity
in data sets representing a spectrum of type volcanoes. Specifically, this work
will explore how styles of collapse are primarily controlled by the evolved
size, steepness, structure, and strength of the edifice, in turn conditioned by
rates of magma supply and composition and modulated by the aspect and slip
interface properties of the substrate. Of key interest is how combinations of
these characteristics define the unique signature of the anticipated collapse.
Finite Element (FE) models will reproduce the spectrum of observed behaviors at
ocean island volcanoes, defining key controls. An integrated study of
geophysical observations will constrain process-based models of volcanoes
affected by flank instability. To develop an understanding of how growth and
collapse of ocean island volcanoes vary in style and timing, the researcher will
benchmark and apply novel numerical modeling strategies using FE models for
flank motion, with a focus on a complementary spectrum of volcano genetic types,
sizes, and flank instability behaviors. An initial suite of type-volcanoes
comprises Kilauea (Hawaii), Piton de la Fournaise (France) and Anak Krakatau
(Indonesia) spanning large-to-small, shallow-to-steep and shield- to strato-
volcano. A new numerical modeling strategy will be developed and benchmarked
through synthetic tests, then applied to recent episodes of flank failure for a
spectrum of volcanoes. The approach is interdisciplinary, relying on cutting-
edge FE numerical modeling approaches to model deformation and failure and
constrained by seismic and geodetic (ground-based and InSAR) data spanning
multiple spatial and temporal scales. Mechanical properties of flank materials
and the role of heterogeneities will be addressed using geophysical and
geological observations, enabling key transient events promoting progress to
collapse to be projected and defined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.