* 1945560
* CAREER: Exploring chiral edge plasmons in novel two-dimensional materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Zhe Fei, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2025
* USD 465,517.00

Nontechnical Description: The capability of controlling the flow of light in the
nanoscale is extremely important for realizing functioning optical circuitry for
fast data processing and broadband signal communications. Nevertheless, unlike
electronic signals, it is challenging to control optical signals in the
nanoscale. This project explores a class of novel materials with atomic
thicknesses, where a special type of light with nanoscale footprints can travel
at the edges of these materials. Moreover, both the direction and the intensity
of the “nanoscale light” are actively controlled, and only one-way transport is
allowed under certain conditions. The main goal of this research is to uncover
the general characteristics and key functionalities of these “nanoscale light”,
which could pave the way for its applications in next-generation computers. This
project provides opportunities for mentoring and training high-school,
undergraduate and graduate students, especially those from unrepresentative
minorities in science and engineering. In addition, the project team offers
special outreaching activities in the themes of two-dimensional materials or
optics for the public and designs new teaching materials for advanced lab
courses at Iowa State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
The project team aims to realize the ultimate control of nanophotonic signals by
exploring chiral edge plasmons in novel two-dimensional materials. These edge
modes are formed by the coupling between photons and electrons in the
atomically-thin samples and can propagate strictly along the sample edges. The
chirality is introduced either by applying a magnetic field or inducing net
Bloch band Berry curvature with optical excitations. State-of-the-art
scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy will provide ultrafast,
ultrasmall and broadband imaging and spectroscopy of chiral edge plasmons at
cryogenic temperatures and high magnetic field. With this technique, the project
team plans to perform systematic studies of chiral plasmons in the benchmark
two-dimensional materials – graphene and group six transition-metal
dichalcogenides. The main objectives include characterizing the general
properties of chiral plasmons and demonstrating the basic functionalities of
these modes related to nanoscale signal control. The research is expected to
deepen our understanding of the intriguing nano-optical physics in association
with electron-electron interactions and Berry curvature in two-dimensional
materials, revolutionize our approach towards tunable chiral plasmonics in the
technologically important terahertz to infrared regions, and establish chiral
edge plasmons as novel media for nonreciprocal signal communications with broad
bandwidth and active tunability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.