* 1945611
* CAREER: New Frontiers for Frobenius, Singularity Theory, Differential Operators, and Local Cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Emily Witt, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 03/31/2025
* USD 330,023.00

The field of commutative algebra provides a framework in which to study
polynomial equations and their set of solutions. Given the prominent role of
such equations in our society (e.g., in pure and applied math, computer science
and technology, engineering, physics, biology, and chemistry), the applications
of commutative algebra are broad and impactful. For example, commutative algebra
is fundamental to cryptography, which many of us rely on daily, but also to
genomics. This project advances the field of commutative algebra, and also
trains junior scientists to develop skills relevant to a variety of scientific
careers. This project also includes three initiatives focused on education,
outreach and scientific leadership. These initiatives support research
collaboration among women algebraists, implement an REU training program serving
students from groups that are underrepresented in the STEM fields, and create
new computer algebra software for research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to further our understanding
of commutative rings and algebraic varieties using prime characteristic methods,
differential operators, and local cohomology. In prime characteristic, one goal
is to use the Frobenius map to study hypersurfaces by providing a better
understanding of test ideals and Frobenius jumping exponents. The project also
seeks effective algorithms for computing the Bernstein- Sato polynomial over the
complex numbers. Another goal of the project is to investigate differential
operators, and modules over them, in non-regular settings, and then apply this
new theory (for example, to study multiplier ideals). Finally, the project
proposes to investigate new geometric and topological properties determined by
local cohomology, with an emphasis on connectedness properties of the
irreducible components of a ring's spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.