* 1945999
* Workshop on Deep Learning and Software Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Baishakhi Ray, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,907.00

This award supports a workshop to explore synergies between Deep Learning and
Software Engineering. The goal is to accelerate research that uses Deep Learning
in research and practice to improve techniques and tools for Software
Engineering through the power of Deep Learning. Conversely, deep-learning based
systems, which are emerging in many application domains, need new Software
Engineering approaches render them correct, reliable and comprehensible. The
workshop will bring together researchers and practitioners in both fields to
discuss research priorities community resources needed to accelerate research in
the intersection of Deep Learning and Software Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep Learning represents a fundamental shift in the manner
by which machines learn patterns from data by automatically extracting salient
features for a given computational task, as opposed to relying upon human
intuition. Deep Learning approaches are characterized by architectures comprised
of several layers that perform mathematical transformations, according to sets
of learnable parameters, on data passing through them. These computational
layers and parameters form models that can be trained for specific tasks, such
as image classification, by updating the parameters according to a model?s
performance on a labeled set of training data. Given the immense amount of data
in software repositories that can serve as training data, deep learning
techniques have ushered in advancements across a range of tasks in software
engineering research including automatic software repair, code suggestion,
defect prediction, malware detection, feature location, and many others. The
workshop will review the state of the research and practice and give guidance to
the community about opportunities and challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.