* 1945941
* Macroinvertebrate Ecosystem Engineers Mediate Whole-Stream Metabolism and Nutrient Uptake
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Lindsey Albertson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,166,841.00

Many stream insects are highly sensitive to changes in water quality -- so much
so that scientists use the presence or absence of certain stream insect species
as indicators of water quality in rivers and streams. Yet evidence suggests that
the reverse may also be true: the activity of stream insects in stream beds may
help regulate water quality in streams in surprising ways. This award will
document how stream insects alter the exchange of water between stream channels
and underlying gravels of the streambed. This exchange can transport pollutants
from the stream channel into the streambed. In the streambed, microbes break
down the pollutants, providing a natural mechanism to remove pollutants from
streams. Thus, these stream insects may alter these important water exchange
rates while also providing new habitat for microbes. Researchers will
investigate the ways in which stream insects may play in controlling processes
that naturally cleanse rivers of pollutants and thereby facilitate the
maintenance of high water quality in streams. Students from elementary through
postgraduate will be trained and a video produced to highlight the importance of
stream insects in the water quality of
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, researchers will investigate how
caddisfly activity in the streambed alters river and stream biogeochemical
cycling by: (i) regulating streambed hydraulic conductivity, hydrologic
exchange, and resultant nutrient processing, and (ii) influencing microbial
metabolism and associated nutrient processing by altering habitat conditions and
niche opportunities for streambed microbial biofilms. The project will use a
suite of laboratory flume experiments and field enclosure experiments to
quantify the impacts of caddisfly silk nets and retreats on hydraulic
conductivity and streambed residence time distribution for water, as well as
documenting how silk nets and retreats alter streambed microbial habitats and
associated expression of metabolic pathways. Researchers will then integrate
experimental results into a stream ecosystem model to understand the relative
contribution of caddisfly-driven changes to hydrology versus changes to
microbial communities in regulating whole-stream respiration and nutrient
processing at the river reach scale. This study will be the first to: (i)
quantify how macroinvertebrates (in this case, caddisflies) alter streambed
hydrology in gravel-bedded rivers and streams, (ii) quantify how
macroinvertebrate ecosystem engineers can influence microbial communities and
their metabolic pathways, and (iii) develop a novel modeling approach to predict
nutrient uptake under scenarios for animal-altered hydrology and microbial
activity. The results from these studies will identify new biological
considerations to be incorporated into theoretical and empirical models of river
water flow dynamics and ecosystem functioning by bridging the disciplines of
ecosystem ecology, aquatic entomology, and hydrology. Public outreach via a
video and education will spanning elementary to postgraduate will highlight the
importance of macroinvertebrates in altering hydrology, biogeochemistry, and
metabolism of streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.