* 1945187
* CAREER: Evolution During Spatial Growth
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Kirill Korolev, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 10/31/2020
* USD 0.00

Population dynamics are central to many pressing problems in medicine, science,
and technology. Whether we look at epidemics, microbiome, or cancer, we need to
understand how populations grow, spread, and evolve. The outcome of these
processes is largely controlled by the ecological and genetic diversity of the
population. Moreover, the patterns of diversity are often the only available
cues about the factors that drive population dynamics. Recent work by the PI
showed that seemingly innocuous changes in the growth dynamics can fundamentally
alter how populations evolve during spatial expansions. This project will take
our understanding of evolution in growing populations to a new level.
Specifically, the PI will determine how environmental fluctuations, ongoing
adaptation, and growth morphology change the pace of neutral evolution and the
structure of genealogies. The project will support new and enhance ongoing
outreach and educational activities of the PI. Five to ten high school students
and undergraduates will be involved in summer research projects directly related
to this project. In addition, the PI will develop an innovative project-based
course to help students from life sciences enter The Program in Bioinformatics
and Quantitative Biology at Boston University. The mini-projects designed for
this course will be made available online for others to use. Some of them will
be adapted to serve as an introduction to research at the intersection of
physics and biology for high school students. This will be done via a series of
4-hour workshops that will reach about 400 students and 10-20 high school
teachers. The PI will also develop three lectures about his research and the
exciting synergies between physics and biology for a local group of 30-50 high
school science teachers.

Genetic diversity contains clues about both the past and the future population
dynamics. To infer the past and predict or even control the future, we need to
characterize genetic diversity and link it to specific biophysical processes
such as growth and dispersal for invasive species or nutrient diffusion and
mechanical forces for cancer tumors. Recent work by the PI has produced powerful
theoretical tools to address this problem and identified hidden universality
classes in the standard reaction-diffusion models of population genetics.
Preliminary data strongly supports the hypothesis that each universality class
has a unique structure of genealogies. Moreover, neutral evolution in some
spatially expanding populations seems to produce genealogies identical to those
in rapidly-adapting well-mixed populations. This suggests that some common
signatures of selection need to be revisited. The first objective of this
project is to test this theory in simulations and extend it to sexually
reproducing populations. The second objective is to examine how the universal
behavior of genealogies is affected by specific biophysical process such as
mechanical pressure, nutrient diffusion, or environmental fluctuations. The
final objective is focused on establishing a connection between genetic
diversity and growth instabilities that produce typical population morphologies.
Taken together, these lines of research will lay the groundwork to interpret
spatially-resolved genetic data and use it to predict and control the course of
evolution. Such capabilities are essential for our fight against cancer,
antibiotic resistance, epidemics, and invasive species. The mathematical
innovations developed in the course of this work should also be useful in other
disciplines because reaction-diffusion models find numerous applications in
physics, chemistry, and biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.