* 1945759
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Inflammation and mother-infant dynamics in an industrialized environment
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Carmen Hove, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 30,934.00

Fundamental research in human biology has provided insight into the complexity
of breastfeeding as a unique form of maternal investment that is responsive to
offspring cues, sensitive to environmental inputs, and capable of influencing
short- and long-term offspring outcomes. While much of this research has focused
on implications for infant physiology, comparatively little is known about the
biological determinants and impacts of breastfeeding practices among mothers.
This doctoral dissertation project will investigate the maternal physiological
dynamics of breastfeeding, advancing knowledge about the ways in which immune
function, physiological status, and behavior are interrelated in humans. The
research may also inform public health research and practice about breastfeeding
behaviors. The project will facilitate graduate and undergraduate training and
mentoring, and research outcomes will be shared with the participant community
as well as a broader research and public audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few
studies have directly examined the link between maternal immune function,
maternal physiological status, and breastfeeding behavior in humans during the
perinatal period. This study will longitudinally measure breastfeeding behavior,
immunological biomarkers, and perceived physical and mental well-being among a
heterogenous sample of pregnant and postpartum women in the United States, a
population exhibiting unprecedented variation in breastfeeding behavior. The
resulting data will be used to test two overarching hypotheses: (1) heightened
inflammatory activation in late pregnancy will predict increased breastfeeding
difficulties and impaired maternal physiological status, and (2) continuation of
skin-to-skin breastfeeding across the early postpartum period will correspond to
better regulated immune “bounce-back” and enhanced maternal physiological
status. Findings generated by this study have the potential to inform current
public health strategies to (1) identify mothers who may experience heightened
barriers to breastfeeding success, (2) provide support for women to continue
breastfeeding, and (3) support mental and physical maternal well-being during
the transition from pregnancy to the postpartum
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.