* 1945513
* CAREER: High-resolution Simulations of Subduction Along the Pacific Rim of Fire
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Margarete Jadamec, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2025
* USD 431,738.00

The theory of plate tectonics predicts the outer layer of the Earth, the
lithosphere, is composed of rigid tectonic plates (approximately 100 km thick).
These plates are in motion with respect to one another, moving at speeds on the
order of 1-20 cm/yr. The interaction of the tectonic plates is characterized by
convergent, divergent, and shearing motion, with the majority of deformation
(earthquakes, volcanism, and mountain building) concentrated at the plate
boundaries. Subduction zones are convergent plate boundaries where the denser
oceanic plates bend downward, leaving the Earth’s surface, and descend into the
underlying mantle. The majority of the Earth’s subduction zones occur along the
Pacific Rim of Fire and are characterized by large-scale earthquake activity
where plates slide past one another and by arc volcanoes in the upper plate due
to fluids released by the subducting slab as it descends into the mantle. This
proposal leverages data-driven model design, high performance computing, and
three-dimensional (3D) virtual reality to construct high-resolution 3D models of
the Pacific Rim of Fire. The geodynamic models of the Pacific Rim of Fire will
investigate a new class of volcanoes that occur at the edges of subduction
zones, rather than typical arc volcanoes located above the subducted plate. In
addition, the geodynamic models will examine slab-driven mantle flow, addressing
outstanding questions of coupling between the tectonic plates and the mantle. In
terms of broader impacts, the PI will collaborate with the Space Visualization
Lab at the Adler Planetarium in Chicago, IL to develop 3D visualizations of
subduction along the Pacific Rim of Fire. These visualizations will enable data
exploration as people can tour the plate tectonic boundaries through a series of
virtual voyages through the Earth. Furthermore, the subduction zones that flank
the Pacific Ocean form major tectonic hazards affecting over 20 countries,
including major populations centers, making the high-resolution simulations of
this region likely to have a large societal impact. A graduate student and
undergraduate students will be trained and actively involved in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction at convergent plate margins,
characterized by descending oceanic lithosphere and subparallel tracts of
oceanic trenches and arc volcanoes, has commonly been distilled into a two-
dimensional (2D) paradigm. However, modern subduction systems contain
discontinuous slabs that are not infinitely long and over half of the slabs
intersect or interact directly with another slab, invalidating the 2D subduction
approximation. Furthermore, although arc volcanoes do track subducted slabs at
depth in most subduction zones, anomalous volcanoes also systematically occur,
not above a slab, but distal to the slab edge forming a pattern not explained by
the 2D subduction paradigm. In addition, rock deformation experiments indicate
that much of the upper mantle is governed by nonlinear rheology, indicating
slab-driven flow at intersecting slabs is not a linear combination of variations
on the 2D Newtonian framework. The proposed research will build comprehensive 3D
geodynamic models of the entire Pacific Rim of Fire that will allow for
systematic comparative analysis of natural subduction zones and move the field
into a 3D framework of subduction, rather than the 2D paradigm that has governed
the broader research community and undergraduate textbooks. Specifically, the
numerical simulations will test two hypotheses. The first hypothesis is that
slab edge driven mantle upwelling is a common phenomenon, constrained
geometrically by the three-dimensional subduction geometry and physically by the
constraints on the motion of density anomalies due to conservation of mass and
momentum of viscous flow in the asthenosphere. The second hypothesis is that the
shear thinning effects of the dislocation creep deformation mechanism of olivine
constrains the lateral extent of non-plate motion aligned shear wave splitting
in observed subduction zones, by allowing the localized upper mantle near the
subduction zone to decouple from the larger-scale mantle circulation patterns. A
data-driven 3D model of the Pacific Rim of Fire will provide the ideal system to
constrain these phenomena, because a geographically referenced model can
spatially link upwellings in the asthenosphere to specific observed locations of
anomalous volcanics along the Pacific Rim of Fire, as well as predict the extent
of nonlinear mantle flow which can be directly compared to shear wave splitting
observations from the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.