* 1945504
* CAREER: From the forest to the stream: Exploring forest land cover controls on dissolved organic matter character and aquatic ecosystem respiration in headwater streams
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Tim Covino, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 622,442.00

Although inland waters comprise only ~1% of Earth’s surface, they play a central
role in the global carbon cycle. Large amounts of carbon are delivered to inland
waters as terrestrial dissolved organic matter (DOM) in headwater streams. The
type and amount of DOM in these streams controls whether that carbon is released
to the atmosphere (i.e. stream respiration) or removed from the carbon cycle
(i.e. transported downstream and buried). This project will determine the role
of forest harvesting, and specifically clear cutting, in controlling carbon
cycling and stream respiration in headwater streams. The results from this
project will be used to develop predictive models that guide future research and
inform management of forested headwater systems. This project will provide
training for at least 2 PhD and 9 undergraduate student researchers who will
gain interdisciplinary expertise in the hydrologic and biogeochemical sciences,
solving problems of societal concern. Data and understanding gained in this
project will be used as university class examples to discuss the linkages
between land management, carbon cycling, and hydrologic response of forested
ecosystems. This project will develop educational materials on watershed science
that will reach nearly 6,000 K-12 students, 48 science teachers, and 40 pre-
service students to enhance understanding of land cover-ecosystem interactions
and knowledge of their local watersheds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inland waters have
recently been highlighted for their importance in global carbon pools and fluxes
relative to terrestrial and marine systems. Dissolved organic matter (DOM)
represents the largest fraction of organic carbon transported through stream
networks, and much of this DOM enters streams in headwater forest locations.
This project answers the call to ‘focus on better identifying human impacts on
the transport and biogeochemical cycling of carbon by inland waters’ as outlined
in the Second State of the Carbon Cycle Report, by: 1) Determining the role of
forest harvesting in regulating DOM character in headwater streams; 2)
Quantifying the influence of DOM character on stream ecosystem respiration; and
3) Identifying how components 1 and 2 interact to regulate spatial and temporal
patterns of ecosystem respiration across forested headwater stream networks.
This information will be used to create predictions that will then be confronted
with data to improve models, and expose gaps in understanding to guide future
field and lab experimentation. This project will develop a vertically integrated
program of mentorship, education, and provide training for undergraduate and PhD
students who will gain exposure to research, outreach, and professional
development activities. Through collaboration with the College of Natural
Science Education and Outreach Center, this project will develop a STEM kit on
watershed science specifically targeted at K-12 schools with a high percentage
of underrepresented students, and encourage these groups to pursue STEM
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.