* 1945324
* CAREER: Quantum mechanics far from equilibrium: Matter-wave turbulence
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Nir Navon, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 554,523.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of equilibrium phases of
quantum matter has enormously progressed in the past decades. The tools of
statistical mechanics and linear response theory are well suited to understand
the equilibrium and near-equilibrium properties of such phases. This general
approach has yielded the most important paradigms and technological
breakthroughs in condensed-matter physics of the past century. On the other
hand, far-from-equilibrium quantum many-body physics is a frontier in modern
physics, and the search for novel paradigms and novel dynamic phases of matter
is open and very active. Turbulent states - far-from-equilibrium dynamic states
of fields characterized by spatio-temporal chaos - are arguably the least
understood of the family of non-equilibrium many-body states. The central
scientific goal of this project is to develop the nascent field of matter-wave
turbulence as a framework to understand such states and generic far-from-
equilibrium quantum dynamics problems. Matter waves of ultracold atoms trapped
and controlled in programmable optical potentials offer a near ideal platform
for this work. Because quantum technologies are playing an increasingly
important role in today’s society, the educational component of this project
aims at exposing a broader audience to quantum physics, through lectures series,
hands-on workshop and more advanced experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;Far-from-equilibrium dynamics of both classical and quantum
fields almost inevitably leads to turbulent phenomena. However, to date
turbulence and quantum dynamics are mostly investigated by separate scientific
communities. Given the ubiquity of hydrodynamics as an effective theory to
describe the long-distance long-time behavior of quantum many-body systems,
these topics are bound to intersect more often in the future. This project aims
at providing a bridge between these two important themes by developing the field
of matter-wave turbulence. The project consists of a web of scientific issues
that include the observation of a novel form of condensation formed from the
far-from-equilibrium particle flow of an inverse turbulent cascade, the study of
quantum effects as source of dissipation in wave-turbulent cascades, and the
investigation of the existence of threshold effects in wave turbulence. The
experimental platforms for this project are bosonic and fermionic atomic
superfluids; new forms of forcing, dissipation and probing of these fluids will
be performed by leveraging recent technical advances in the shaping of arbitrary
potentials on atoms using programmable electro-optic devices. This work likely
provides blueprints to tackle other quantum dynamics problems because the
generic picture of wave turbulence as a cascade of excitations could be relevant
to the elementary excitations of various quantum many-body
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.