* 1945351
* CAREER: Realization, Manipulation, and Interaction of Majorana Kramers Pairs
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Fan Zhang, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2025
* USD 370,307.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
theoretical research and education in the rapidly developing area of topological
states of electronic matter. Over the past decade, the discovery of topological
insulators has revolutionized our understanding of the quantum world. The bulk
of a topological insulator is insulating, but the surfaces and edges are
metallic. A topological insulator is robust; it persists even under deformations
of the material. In mathematics, topology is concerned with the properties of an
object that are preserved under continuous deformations. Superconductors embody
one of the most well studied macroscopic quantum phenomenon. Below a
characteristic critical temperature, the electrical resistance of a
superconductor drops to zero and magnetic fields are expelled from their
interior. Like their topological insulator cousins, topological superconductors
exhibit surface states; however, these are predicted to have curious Majorana
Fermions, electrons that are correlated in such a way that they behave like a
particle that has unusual properties; as a consequence, they may be useful as
building blocks for computing and memory in a quantum computer. First proposed
as an elementary particle, Majorana Fermions are also fundamentally interesting;
a Majorana Fermion is its own antiparticle. The discovery of superconductors
that exhibit topological properties has proved difficult. To this end, the PI
will leverage well-understood topological and superconducting materials to
design new materials systems for realizing topological superconductivity. The PI
plans to investigate new phenomena that can arise involving Majorana Fermions
and their interplay with crystal symmetry, topology, and interactions in
topological superconductors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is aimed to
stimulate the realization of new phases of electronic matter that can appear in
materials. The PI aims to investigate new avenues for realizing topological
quantum computing and Majorana Fermion based electronics. The research will
stimulate and connect with experiments. The education component involves the
implementation of a multi-layered outreach plan that includes: 1) mentoring and
training graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students participating in this
research, 2) developing an unconventional dual-level course on topological
quantum matter, and 3) creating animated online video lessons for global physics
education of the general public. In these activities, the PI is committed to
promote broadening participation from members of groups underrepresented in
science. This CAREER award will contribute to the preparation of future
scientists and engineers to discover, invent, and innovate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports fundamental research into the realization of symmetry
protected topological superconductivity and manipulation of Majorana Kramers
pairs in order to develop a deeper understanding of the interplay between
symmetry, topology, and interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past decade was
an exciting era for condensed matter physics. The discovery of topological
insulators has led to an ongoing revolution deepening understanding of quantum
matter. The critical temperature of iron-based superconductors has been made
unexpectedly high in atomically thin layers. The delicate two-channel Kondo
effect as a non-Fermi-liquid paradigm has been achieved in sophisticatedly
designed devices. These seemingly unrelated advances in distinct areas can be
deeply correlated in a time-reversal-invariant topological superconductor
hosting Majorana Kramers pairs. The central goals of this project are: 1) to
realize such topological superconductors by designing new material systems
involving iron-based superconductors, and 2) to investigate the consequences of
Majorana Kramers pairs by studying Josephson effects and many-body interactions
mediated by them. The research will be carried out using a diverse set of
techniques: phenomenological modeling, topological band theory, first-principles
calculations, many-body simulations, and symmetry analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to establish materials platforms for realizing
time-reversal-invariant topological superconductors and manipulating Majorana
Kramers pairs. In particular, he aims to identify iron-based topological
superconductors with high critical temperatures and advance ideas for the
braiding and interaction of Majorana Kramers pairs. Directly applicable to
ongoing experiments, these results could advance current knowledge of
topological phases of matter and their interplay with symmetry and interaction.
Alongside the research, the PI will implement a multi-layered outreach plan that
involves: 1) mentoring and training graduate, undergraduate, and high-school
students participating in the research, 2) developing an unconventional dual-
level course on topological quantum matter, and 3) creating animated online
video lessons for global physics education of the general public. In these
activities, the PI is committed to promote broadening participation from members
of groups underrepresented in science. This CAREER award will contribute to the
preparation of future scientists and engineers to discover, invent, and
innovate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.