* 1945543
* CAREER: Impacts of Earthquake Shaking on Seafloor Sediment Stability and Landslide Hazards
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Derek Sawyer, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 469,678.00

The massive amount of sediment moved by seafloor landslides is a hazard to
coastal areas and to seafloor infrastructure including undersea cables. This
project will use a combination of field observations from seismically active
regions offshore Japan and offshore the Pacific Northwest along with geophysical
data and sediment cores, and laboratory experiments that simulate the shaking
induced by natural earthquakes to obtain a better understanding of why submarine
landslides occur. The project uses newly acquired and legacy data from the
International Ocean Discovery Program and the United States Geological Survey.
Laboratory experiments will be performed on samples from each field site to
understand the relationships between earthquake shaking, sediment physical
properties, strength of the sediment, and the potential for a landslide. A key
element of the education and outreach plan is to address under-representation of
first-generation college students in STEM fields. This project will provide
research experiences to first-generation college students majoring in the STEM
field of earth sciences. A second major element of the education and outreach is
a collaborative project with five other universities (Michigan, Penn State,
Nebraska, Wisconsin, and Washington) to measure ‘fanquakes’, to provide outreach
to hundreds of thousands of students and the public on the science of
earthquakes by analogy to stadium shaking during sporting events. The project
supports the training of graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the relationship between
earthquake shaking and stability of the uppermost 100 meters of ocean seafloor
sediments, which is the critical zone where submarine landslides are most likely
to occur. Earthquakes can trigger submarine landslides, and the massive sediment
mobilized is a socio-economic hazard to populated coastal areas worldwide and
seafloor infrastructure including undersea cables that route 99% of global
internet data. The project goal is to understand the relative influence of
earthquake shaking, sedimentation rate, and sediment lithology on overall slope
stability. The hypotheses are 1) in hydrostatic pore pressure conditions,
seafloor sediments exposed to earthquake shaking develop an enhanced shear
strength greater than would be achieved without earthquake shaking, and 2)
sedimentation rates high enough to develop overpressure will offset seismic
strength gains because of the arrested consolidation. These hypotheses will be
tested using a combination of field observations from three active margins sites
with geophysical data and cores, controlled dynamic shaking laboratory
experiments, and numerical simulations. The field sites span two primary types
of active margins (convergent megathrust subduction zones (Cascadia and Japan
Trench) and strike-slip (Queen Charlotte Fault Margin), and rely on both newly
acquired and legacy data from the International Ocean Discovery Program and the
United States Geological Survey. Controlled laboratory experiments will be
performed using state-of-the-art dynamic shear experiments on samples from each
field site to clarify relationships between seismic shaking, sediment physical
properties, and shear strength response over a range of materials and shaking
intensities. To understand more complex behavior in multiple dimensions within
heterogeneous margin stratigraphy, numerical models will quantify depth limits
(vertical effective stress) where sediments are no longer subjected to seismic
strengthening, and how seismic strengthening varies between different active
margins with differing lithologies, sedimentation rates, and earthquake
histories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.