* 1945918
* NSF: CCSS: Precision Positioning for Structural Monitoring by Embedded RFID Tags
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Edwin Kan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2023
* USD 368,729.00

Accurate noninvasive monitoring of structural integrity is critical for civil
engineering research and has a high national interest on healthy infrastructure
and public welfare. Disasters such as the collapses of bridges and dams have
very high social cost for the society not only for the disaster repair and
relief, but also in terms of preventive maintenance budget and public panic
factors. Previous nondestructive low-strain pile integrity testing methods such
as nuclear radiation, ultrasound, sonic, radar, optical fibers and
accelerometers can retrieve marker displacement and material changes, but all
have applicability limitations in each of their long history of development. To
date, structural integrity assurance would take great benefits from a
convenient, non-invasive, reliable and cost-effective method that can be broadly
deployed for long-term monitoring throughout the lifetime of the structure. In
this project, a new marker-based ultra-high precision positioning system is
envisioned, which employs the passive radio-frequency identification (RFID) tags
to directly measure internal displacement of specific structural points caused
by creep and deformation. These tags can be embedded in new piles and building
materials to provide a novel alternative to structural integrity testing,
replacing or complementing existing methods. As the passive tag never needs
maintenance or recharging, it can have a lifetime as long as the structure.
Integrity testing can be simply executed by placing the custom RFID reader at
designated external points to report the precise location or vibration of the
buried tags. The sensing radio frequency is selected properly so that it is not
too high that would result in poor material penetration or too low that would
result in poor ranging precision. This proposed structural "radar" enables the
seeing of the previously unseen structural concerns and stimulates students'
interest of engineering wonders that will have positive impacts to society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to establish a new precision radio
frequency (RF) ranging and locating method for noninvasive long-term structural
integrity monitoring. The ultra-high frequency signal can penetrate deep into
the building materials to locate specific marker tags buried in the structure
with spatial accuracy around 20 microns and temporal resolutions below
millisecond. The method is based on the passive harmonic RFID platform and
backscattered 2nd harmonic of the impinging signal to minimize the phase noise
from self-jamming. The remaining phase noises were further mitigated by
frequency strategy, stable reference, moving average, and zero-point
calibration. The research tasks include RF frontend improvement, system-level
improvement, and civil structure demonstration, which will bring forth verified
demonstration of the new noninvasive sensing scheme in realistic scenarios with
the targeted performance and reliability. Multiple incoherent frequencies will
be employed in RF frontend to simultaneously improve both operational distance
and the spatial resolution. Multi-path variation tolerance can be further
mitigated by randomizing antennas and artificial beamforming. Geometrical
dilution of precision in 3D locating will be mitigated by antenna placement and
evaluation of angle of arrival, so that the system can achieve 3D locating with
5-micron accuracy and 1 million samples per second. The system will be
experimentally demonstrated in realistic civil structures of concrete mixes and
weight-bearing beams. By using multi-tag method with known tag separation,
permittivity change due to temperature and metal corrosion sensing will be
investigated. If successful, the resulting high-precision strain sensor can
bring forth a cost-effective noninvasive method that will greatly improve the
structural integrity monitoring. The precision locating method can also be
applied to many other applications in precision instrument, foundation
engineering, and human-machine interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.