* 1945286
* CAREER: Toward a Global Understanding of Severe Convective Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* John Allen, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 659,360.00

Severe convective storms (SCS) produce damaging hail, intense wind gusts, and
tornadoes that can result in significant losses, injuries, and fatalities. They
pose a threat on every continent except Antarctica. Current observations of SCS
are very sparse, and data records are limited. As such, our knowledge of where,
why, and how often SCS occur globally is lacking. To address these difficulties,
parameters derived from atmospheric conditions that foster SCS development (that
is, favorable environments) have been used to assess SCS likelihood. Without
these environments, developing storms will struggle to become SCS. The impacts
of SCS are expected to grow with sprawling population centers and as favorable
environments become more frequent with the warmer climate. This proposal aims to
characterize the development of favorable environments across the globe and how
global warming affects their development. While shedding light on the potential
for SCS formation worldwide, this research may improve SCS forecasts and help
manage risks and exposures to SCS. In addition to training students in research,
the work will develop interactive educational contents and online instructional
modules to raise public awareness to the threats posed by
SCS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research objective is to analyze the
frequency at which favorable environments occur globally and assess whether they
will change uniformly in a warming climate. The investigators will evaluate the
capacity of available reanalyses to characterize favorable environments in
different regions and weather regimes. They will assess the global likelihood of
favorable SCS environments and quantify the underlying synoptic and mesoscale
processes. Lastly, they will address how these favorable environments change in
high-resolution simulations of global warming projections. To this end, this
research can provide a new and fundamental understanding of the underlying
frequency and processes leading to the SCS development and in response to a
warming climate at previously unexplored resolutions. Integrating research and
education, this proposal will focus on bringing a global perspective to SCS and
climate change education, and improve the understanding of risk to property,
agriculture and people by developing interactive educational resources and
online modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.