* 1945886
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Long Distance Trade and Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Ben Nelson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2023
* USD 17,138.00

Mr. Christopher Schwartz will conduct research to examine how people draw on
networks of distant interaction and exchange in the process of placemaking, and
how that process changes over time. The archaeological record offers
particularly relevant insight into this topic through its ability to trace the
developmental trajectories of settlements and changes in interaction networks
over time. This research primarily focuses on one object, the scarlet macaw (Ara
macao), and its influence far outside of its endemic homeland. This dissertation
project will employ a novel framework, combining biogeochemical methods with a
material culture theoretical perspective to explore how past people acquired,
treated, and deposited ritually significant, non-local objects at three regional
centers in the past. More broadly, this project will improve anthropological
understandings of the extent to which societies separated by great distances
interacted in ways that had transformative local influences - a form of pre-
modern globalization. Additionally, this project will enhance relationships and
infrastructure for research by creating research partnerships amongst Arizona
State University, the Hopi Tribe, the Museum of Northern Arizona, and the
National Park Service. Because this project directly studies sacred animal
remains and addresses questions of relevance to the Hopi community, this project
was formulated in direct consultation with the Hopi Cultural Preservation
Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research will examine several
dimensions of scarlet macaws that brought them significance in the pre-Hispanic
US Southwest and Mexican Northwest (SW/NW). Despite the distant natural habitat
of scarlet macaws, which is hundreds of kilometers to the south in southern
Mexico and Central America, their importation, exchange, and sacrifice appear to
have played integral roles in the establishment of SW/NW regional centers from
900-1450 AD. This time period saw large-scale migration, rapid population
aggregation, and an expansion of long-distance exchange relations in regional
centers at Pueblo Bonito (900-1150 CE) in northeastern New Mexico, Wupatki
(1085-1220 AD) in north-central Arizona, and Paquim (1200-1450 AD) in
northwestern Chihuahua. Radiogenic strontium isotope analysis of scarlet macaw
skeletal tissue and comparative contextual analyses applied through a material
histories framework will be used to (1) discern whether scarlet macaws
discovered in the SW/NW were imported from Mesoamerica or raised locally, (2)
characterize the treatment and deposition of scarlet macaws at Pueblo Bonito,
Wupatki, and Paquim, and (3) identify patterns of continuity or change in
acquisition, treatment, and deposition of scarlet macaws over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.