* 1945401
* CAREER: Inorganic Scaffolds as Activity Based Probes for 19F Magnetic Resonance Biosensing
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Emily Que, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2025
* USD 675,000.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms-B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Emily Que of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Texas at Austin is developing new
complexes for potential future use in medical applications such as Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI). Organisms and cells must exert precise control over
their environments to maintain their natural balance. Professor Que and her
group are developing metal complexes containing fluorine as these complexes are
sensitive to potential changes in the cellular environment. The long-term goal
of developing such complexes is for use in vivo imaging of biological changes
using fluorine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), an emerging "hot-spot"
(localized) imaging technique that takes advantage of the fact that fluorine is
not normally present in the cells of the human body. This project lies at the
interface of synthetic inorganic chemistry and biology and will provide training
to graduate and undergraduate students. Further educational impacts will be
achieved through a research-focused training program with community college
students including summer research internships, with the goal of recruiting this
cohort of students into careers in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms and
cells must exert precise control over their redox environments to maintain
homeostasis. In order to gain further insight into the roles of redox changes in
biology, Professor Que and her group are developing fluorinated metal complexes
that display changes in fluorine NMR/MRI signals in response to changes in redox
environment. The goal of this project is to understand how ligand structure
influences both the reactivity and fluorine magnetic resonance properties of
first row transition metal complexes (copper, iron and cobalt), and to integrate
this research in inorganic bioimaging probe development through a community
college research program. This project seeks to develop design principles for
irreversible and reversible redox-active probes for bioreduction using copper
and iron scaffolds. The researchers will also investigate how ligand modulation
can improve the reactivity and fluorine magnetic resonance properties of
fluorinated cobalt probes for biooxidation. They seek to improve recruitment and
retention of underrepresented groups into STEM careers through hands-on a
community college research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.