* 1945984
* Catalyst: STEM Academic Intersectional Gender Equity (SAIGE) at Rowan University
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Stephanie Farrell, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,998.00

Rowan University will implement an ADVANCE Catalyst project, called STEM
Academic Intersectional Gender Equity (SAIGE), to conduct an institutional self-
assessment to understand the status of gender equity for STEM faculty. SAIGE
will use an evidence-based approach grounded in social science research on
stereotyping, implicit bias, dyadic professional mentoring, and interactive
coaching, to develop and implement an STEM faculty equity plan that aligns with
the institutional strategic plan. The long-term goal of this proposal is to help
create a climate of inclusion, equity, and diversity for all faculty at Rowan
University that will facilitate their retention and advancement. An explicitly
intersectional approach will be used to acknowledge the multidimensional reality
of faculty experiences. The goals of the proposed project are to: 1)
quantitatively assess the current environment and climate for STEM faculty of
underrepresented gender, race, and ethnicity using climate surveys; 2) identify
barriers to their retention and success by conducting an in-depth examination of
faculty related policies and practices; and 3) develop and implement a five-year
data-driven plan to improve the climate and mitigate the barriers. Complimenting
this work, mentorship programs and professional development training and
workshops focused on diversity, equity and inclusion will also be implemented.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year project will prepare the university for
implementation of the five-year STEM faculty equity plan. The ADVANCE team will
seek to educate and disseminate institutional changes intended to address equity
through the University's web site, which will contain a special web portal
devoted to this ADVANCE project. Videos and workshop curriculum will be shared
with the community to allow adoption of the proposed activities and action plans
by other predominantly undergraduate institutions. SAIGE ADVANCE will contribute
to increasing the representation of women and gender minority faculty in STEM
disciplines, including retention and advancement through the faculty ranks and
into leadership. The project is intended to influence the culture, behaviors,
and norms around faculty decisions and ensuring procedures are applied
equitably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at an academic, non-profit institution of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.