* 1945265
* CAREER: Surface-Inspired Catalysis via an Updated Cluster-Surface Analogy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Neil Tomson, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 576,525.00

Supported by the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Neil Tomson of the University of Pennsylvania is developing new
chemical routes to make transportation fuels. Transportation accounts for one-
quarter of all energy use in the United States. Most transportation fuel comes
from petroleum. This project targets fuels from renewable sources that adapt
well with current infrastructure. One objective focuses on combining hydrogen
with nitrogen to give ammonia, a potentially new "energy storage media". A
second project examines new pathways from carbon dioxide (CO2, an industrial
waste product) to hydrocarbons. Current methods for such chemical reactions are
expensive; to potentially reduce the cost of fuel production from CO2 this
research emphasizes the design of new catalysts. These new catalysts feature
pairs of metals in a manner that resembles bulk metal catalysts. These
particular geometries facilitate the bond making and bond breaking steps
required for producing the fuels. Students working on this project gain hands-on
experience on advanced chemical synthesis and catalyst evaluation. The young
researchers are also trained to communicate scientific results to a broad
audience. This training involves lectures as well as the production of videos
aimed at high school students. The target audiences include those underserved by
traditional educational venues and underrepresented in the STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As of 2018, 92% of the energy used by the transportation
sector came from petroleum mining. The anticipated depletion of this resource,
along with shifting environmental and national security concerns, motivates the
development of fuels that are both derived from renewable resources and
compatible with the nation’s existing energy infrastructure. In this project,
supported by the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Neil Tomson of the University of Pennsylvania, investigates new
catalysts to synthesize ammonia and alkanes. Although solar hydrogen is becoming
increasingly available, methods for performing low-energy hydrogenations of
small feedstock chemicals remain underdeveloped. Professor Tomson's research is
targeting two processes that are likely to be critical for the future energy
economy. The first process aims at dehydrogenation of ammonia. The second, but
related process, aims to generate hydrocarbons from synthesis gas. The research
draws inspiration from heterogeneous catalysis, especially those utilizing
metallic surfaces. The new catalysts incorporate electronic and geometric
flexibility, which may emulate key characteristics of metallic surfaces. In
preliminary experiments, the new catalysts have been shown to stabilize a wide
range of intermediates previously proposed for the Mittasch and Fischer-Tropsch
catalysts. Finally, this project’s focus on mitigating the nation’s reliance on
fossil fuels highlights a need for scientists of the future to be able to think
creatively outside their immediate discipline. By reaching high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, including many from minority populations
that are underrepresented in the STEM disciplines, the project endeavors to
inspire the next generation of scientists, while aiding in the development of
the metacognitive skill sets that are known to be critical to this cross-cutting
creativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.