* 1945279
* CAREER: Investigating aerobic microbial respiration dynamics in coastal hypoxia
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Cameron Thrash, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2025
* USD 914,721.00

Decreasing marine dissolved oxygen (DO) is a widespread and growing global
problem. Among the chief causes for coastal losses of DO are anthropogenic
nutrient inputs that lead to seasonal hypoxia- DO concentrations below 2 mg/L.
Microorganisms are the primary agents of oxygen removal, and although we have a
basic mechanistic understanding of how nutrient enrichment combines with
stratification to stimulate microbial metabolism and oxygen drawdown, we still
do not know which microorganisms are ultimately responsible for oxygen
consumption leading to, and during, coastal hypoxia in any particular region.
Nor do we know the extent to which each hypoxic system arises from universal
microbial mechanisms or whether there may be unique microorganisms and metabolic
pathways involved in each locale. Hypoxic regions are increasing in number and
size around the globe, amplifying the need to better understand the microbial
processes responsible for oxygen consumption. In response, the project pursues
an integrated research and education effort to study the microbial mechanisms of
oxygen respiration in two coastal zones where DO depletion occurs: the northern
Gulf of Mexico “dead zone”, and the Southern California Bight. This work
identifies the microorganism actively consuming oxygen in these systems, what
fuels them, and whether/how those taxa respond to environmental changes. The
investigators are generating microbial DO consumption rate, genetic, and
taxonomic data critical to better constraining respiration models focused on
water column DO depletion. In doing so, hundreds of undergraduate and students
and dozens of high school STEM teachers contribute valuable data by
participating in modern marine microbiological research. The project also
improves integration of authentic research experiences into college and high-
school classrooms in the context of a problem of global
relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regions of low DO take multiple forms, from vast
open ocean oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) which hover in the upper water column, to
shallower coastal zones of bottom water hypoxia fueled by close proximity to
fluvial inputs of human supplied nutrients. Microbial respiration is primarily
responsible for the ultimate consumption of DO, and therefore understanding the
microorganisms that inhabit these systems and their metabolic capabilities is
critical for improving our ability to predict the timing, extent, and severity
of DO depletion, and how these factors relate to environmental change. While
there has been substantial research into the microbiology of OMZs, we know
comparatively little about the microbial dynamics, and in particular, the
microorganisms responsible for oxygen consumption, in coastal hypoxia. This
integrated research and education effort is framed by the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Determine the microorganisms and metabolic processes
responsible for actively respiring water column DO prior to, and during,
hypoxia.&lt;br/&gt;2. Quantify microbial respiration rates for communities and
representative water column species in both the planktonic and particle-
associated fractions.&lt;br/&gt;3. Integrate authentic microbiology research on
a globally relevant topic into undergraduate and high school
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work uses a combination of advanced
cultivation-independent and pure culture measurements to discriminate between
oxygen consumption by planktonic and particle-associated microbial fractions, as
well as by communities at the surface and those in bottom waters, in two
different systems of coastal DO depletion (the northern Gulf of Mexico hypoxic
zone and the Southern California coastal shelf). Direct assessment of actively
respiring taxa are connected with their metabolic potential, gene expression,
and respiration rates. This project is determining, for the first time, the taxa
actively consuming oxygen in these systems. The results also provide size
fractionated respiration rates and bacterial growth efficiency (BGE) with depth
across multiple sites and seasons, and importantly, also yield cell-specific
respiration rates and BGE for active taxa within these systems. This data will
constrain variable respiration across differing environmental conditions. The
investigators are experimentally testing how alterations in environmental
variables affect these respiration rates and BGEs, leading to greater predictive
insight for the range of effects climate forcing will have on DO consumption.
This information also facilitates comparisons between multiple marine systems to
identify whether common or distinct organisms and metabolic processes are
operating to remove DO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.