* 1945010
* CAREER: Toward Rational Discovery and Design of Metastable Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Vladan Stevanovic, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 02/28/2025
* USD 412,514.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metastable forms of matter are long-
lived in environments and conditions at which they would tend to transform to
more thermodynamically favorable stable forms. There are many examples of such
materials in our daily lives. The best-known example is diamond, a crystalline
form of carbon that is known to be metastable at room temperature and ambient
pressure. At these conditions diamond would tend to spontaneously transform into
graphite, but this process is extremely slow making diamond sufficiently long-
lived (metastable) so that its mechanical, optical and electronic properties can
be utilized in a number of technologically relevant applications. Other well-
known examples are glass, which is a non-crystalline metastable form of silicon
dioxide, and solid chocolate in the so-called polymorph-V form, which is its
most utilized form due to its desired melting, textural and mouth-feel
characteristics. Despite the proven importance of metastable materials and
despite a rather extensive knowledge of the phenomenology of metastability, our
ability to predict and design metastable forms of matter for a specific purpose
is rather limited. Significant knowledge gaps remain that prevent accurate
predictions of which metastable states, out of the numerous possibilities, could
actually be experimentally realized and how long they would tend to remain in
that state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main scientific goal of this project is to
fill these knowledge gaps in order to enable rational and reliable discovery and
design of metastable materials. More specifically, this project concentrates on
theory developments to advance our understanding and our ability to predictively
model the realizability of metastable states and the kinetics of their
transformations to thermodynamically more stable forms. This will be achieved
through a combination of modern electronic structure methods and molecular
dynamics simulations, as well as by leveraging previous accomplishments of the
PI and the existing capabilities present in his group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational and outreach activities of this project aimed to integrate the newly
generated knowledge include: (i) development of innovative course materials
designed to promote student engagement and active learning, (ii) increasing
participation of undergraduates in research both through opportunities created
by this project, and continuing participation in the Department of Energy
Science Undergraduate Laboratory Internships program at the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory, and (iii) strengthening PI’s role in the Bridge Opportunities
for Transfer Student Success program at the Colorado School of Mines that seeks
to both recruit and retain transfer students from community colleges through
summer research experiences. Educational and outreach activities will also
include organization of tutorials and symposia at major materials science and
condensed matter physics conferences as well as dissemination through
publications and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metastable systems, both crystalline (polymorphs)
and non-crystalline (glassy, amorphous), offer a vast and immensely rich, but
virtually unexplored space for discovering novel and useful materials. While
there are many examples of metastable materials in our daily lives (e.g.
diamond, glass, chocolate, anatase), our present understanding of metastability
is largely phenomenological and qualitative. First, we are only beginning to
understand the realizability of metastable polymorphs; that is, why there is
only a small number of structures realized experimentally in comparison to the
large number of possible low-energy states. Second, unlike the ground states
which are stable, the metastable states have finite lifetimes and our ability to
predict kinetics of transformations between different phases is presently rather
limited. These remarks also apply to our understanding of the structure-property
relations; we understand much better how changing the chemistry would affect
relevant properties of materials compared to what would happen if the structure
changed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to fill these
knowledge gaps; with the specific objectives which include: (i) extending our
understanding of physical principles governing realizability of metastable
crystalline phases, (ii) enabling predictive modeling of glassy and amorphous
states, and (iii) revealing physical principles governing kinetics of
transformations between different crystal structures. This will be achieved
through a combination of modern electronic structure methods and molecular
dynamics simulations, as well as by leveraging previous accomplishments of the
PI and the existing capabilities present in his group. The work is founded on
the hypotheses that the realizability of metastable solids, in particular
crystalline polymorphs, is determined by their thermodynamic probabilities and
that the dominant contributions to the rapid or slow nature of the kinetics of
polymorphic transformations are primarily crystallographic. These hypotheses,
which are partially validated in the PI’s preliminary work, form a basis to both
advance our present state of knowledge of metastability and for creating
powerful and efficient computational methodologies that would enable
identification of new and potentially ground-breaking metastable functional
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational and outreach activities of this
project aimed to integrate the newly generated knowledge include: (i)
development of innovative course materials designed to promote student
engagement and active learning, (ii) increasing participation of undergraduates
in research both through opportunities created by this project, and continuing
participation in the Department of Energy Science Undergraduate Laboratory
Internships program at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, and (iii)
strengthening PI’s role in the Bridge Opportunities for Transfer Student Success
program at the Colorado School of Mines that seeks to both recruit and retain
transfer students from community colleges through summer research experiences.
Educational and outreach activities will also include organization of tutorials
and symposia at major materials science and condensed matter physics conferences
as well as dissemination through publications and
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.