* 1945174
* CAREER: Harnessing Large Protein Conformational Changes to Perform Remarkable Chemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Markos Koutmos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 11/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Markos Koutmos from the University of Michigan Ann Arbor
to investigate how biological catalysts accomplish "unusual" or "improbable"
chemical reactions. Vitamin B12 dependent methionine synthase (MS) is one
nature's best catalysts, playing an integral role in the formation of
methionine, one of the 20 commonly occurring amino acids that form proteins. MS
catalyzes, or speeds up, a reaction that would be impossible under normal
conditions (e.g., temperature, pressure, concentration). The Koutmos lab uses a
combination of techniques, such as three-dimensional structure determinations
and electron microscopy, along with reaction rate measurements, to understand
how the enzyme is able to accomplish such a challenging reaction. The ultimate
goal of this research is to use the enzyme as a chemical tool: reprogramming MS
to catalyze novel, desired reactions for synthetic applications. This project is
integrated into a public engagement program to enhance visual communication and
general scientific literacy in high school and undergraduate students in
cooperation with the University of Michigan Museum of Natural History.
Collaboration with Fisk University chemists involves under-represented minority
students in research projects at the University of Michigan during the
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to uncover fundamental
principles regarding how enzyme dynamics facilitate challenging chemical
reactions and, ultimately, to exploit these principles in order to reprogram
biological enzymes to catalyze new reactions. Transient kinetic and structural
biology approaches establish how MS module arrangements support three distinct
methyl transferase reactions. The information gained from the mechanistic
studies informs the design of engineered MS-based proteins and
unnatural/synthetic cobalamin analogs to create a customizable biocatalytic
system to direct the reactivity of MS to catalyze methylations, or even
alkylations, on noncanonical substrates. MS is highly flexible and contains
extensive interdomain interfaces that are assembled and disassembled as needed
to support the chemical reactions. This research establishes how stochastic
motions, the oxidation state, and coordination environment of the cobalamin
cofactor contribute to the dynamics of conformational states accessible to the
enzyme. Information from this study provides insight into how large multi-
modular enzymes rearrange to accomplish their reactions. The research has the
potential to open a new area of research into how methyltransferases can be
redesigned to address the need of chemists to efficiently and specifically
transfer methyl-groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.