* 1945972
* A Lagrangian investigation of stable water vapor isotopes in deep convective systems
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Giuseppe Torri, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,971.00

Stable water isotopes have proved to be useful tools in the study of the climate
system and have provided important insights in many disciplines, from
paleoclimate to groundwater hydrology. In addition, stable water isotopes have
the potential to further our understanding of convective dynamics, although this
has been a relatively less explored research path. One of the problems that
often arise in the interpretation of isotope data is that much is still unknown
about how atmospheric processes affect the isotopic composition of rainfall and
water vapor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this research is to provide
a deeper understanding of how different convective processes influence the
isotopic composition of water vapor. This will be achieved through a combination
of an isotope-enabled cloud resolving model and a Lagrangian particle dispersion
model. The models will be used to simulate deep convective systems in radiative-
convective equilibrium. Novel Lagrangian diagnostics will be employed to focus
specifically on the updrafts, downdrafts, and cold pools of convective systems,
and investigate how these dynamical features affect atmospheric water vapor
isotopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research are expected to help
in the interpretation of isotope observations used to study the Earth’s climate
both in past and present conditions. Broader impacts include training of a
graduate student, research exposure for two undergraduate students, and a number
of outreach activities with local communities across the island of
Oʻahu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by NSF Physical and
Dynamic Meteorology Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.