* 1945861
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Bioarchaeological and Biogeochemical Evidence in the Study of Ritual
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Rachel Witt, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2022
* USD 25,194.00

This doctoral dissertation project will examine life histories and ritual using
bioarchaeological and biogeochemical analyses of skeletons from archaeological
contexts. The research will contribute novel methods and perspectives concerning
the role of rituals in ancient societies as well as the integration of
osteological and chemical techniques to reconstruct human behavior. This project
and the dissemination of its results will increase participation of
traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences and encourage future
collaborations by involving the public in this project’s excavations, technical
workshops, and public lectures. As workshop leaders for the Center for K-12 STEM
Education at Tulane University, the investigators will integrate the project’s
results into K-12 student curricular resources and workshops to showcase
innovative research and broaden the education of groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human skeletal trauma
represents direct evidence of conflict, making bioarchaeology, the study of
human skeletal remains from archaeological contexts, well positioned to address
the variability and significance of ritual violence in the archaeological
record. The role of juveniles in such ritual contexts has been relatively
understudied. Recently discovered skeletal assemblages suggest that such rituals
played an important role in some past societies, yet the motivations for this
remain unclear. The investigators hypothesize that individuals from outlying
locations in a sociopolitical system were conscripted for ritual events as part
of a strategy to maintain control over outlying regions. Continued excavations
and biogeochemical analyses of bones and teeth from skeletal assemblagews will
be used to test this hypothesis and better understand the ways in which past
societies justified incorporation of juveniles in these
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.