* 1945502
* CAREER: Mechanistic Modeling of Turbulent Bubbly Flows in the Ocean Surface Boundary Layer
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Junhong Liang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 292,024.00

Oceanic bubbles play important roles in upper ocean dynamics and in air-sea gas
exchange. This project will study their distribution near the ocean surface and
their interaction with turbulence, and improve the representation in numerical
models of their impact on the exchange of gases between the ocean and
atmosphere. Randomly-distributed breaking waves and small- scale currents are
two ubiquitous processes in the upper ocean. Their roles on bubble dynamics and
bubble-mediated air-sea gas transfer have never been studied due likely to the
challenges in observing and modeling of gas bubbles in those two dynamical
processes. Utilizing state-of-the-art computer models that simulate the co-
evolution of the two dynamical processes, gas bubbles, and dissolved gases based
on first principles, this study will advance our fundamental understanding of
bubble dynamics in the upper ocean and its coupling with upper ocean dynamics.
It will also improve representation of bubble-mediated gas fluxes in computer
models. This research improves our understanding of the earth system in terms of
both upper ocean dynamics and ocean biogeochemical cycling. It will reduce
uncertainties in the modeling and budget estimate of climatically and
environmentally important soluble gases such as oxygen and carbon dioxide. It
will also improve our ability to use dissolved gases such as oxygen, nitrogen
and argon, whose dissolved concentrations are affected by bubbles, as tracers
for biogeochemical processes. The anticipated results can also be applied to the
understanding and prediction of buoyant marine pollutants including spilled oil
and marine plastics. Therefore, the study will improve our capability to predict
marine environment and climatic changes, and will provide better scientific
basis for decision makers in politics and industry on a range of issues
including climate, environment, fisheries, energy and marine pollution
mitigation. The educational component of the CAREER project includes developing
a two-day mini-workshop for K-12 teachers, and creating an interactive webpage
for hand-on ocean modelling activities that will be used in a summer camp and a
general education class for non-STEM students that the PI has been teaching. The
purposes of the educational activities are to attract local middle and high
school students to the field of oceanography, to raise the awareness of the
importance of the ocean among students and the general public, and to further
enrich the curriculum for physical oceanography at LSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary research objectives of this project are to better understand the
distribution of gas bubbles and the coupling between bubbles and oceanic
turbulence in the ocean surface boundary layer, and to more accurately
parameterize bubble-mediated air-sea gas flux. Two hypotheses, identified based
on previous studies and preliminary results, will be tested: (1) Stochastic
breaking waves affect bubble trajectories and bubble-mediated gas flux through
altering ocean boundary layer turbulence and generating bubbles at downwelling
currents; and (2) Submesoscale currents alter bubble trajectories and bubble-
mediated gas flux via interaction with ocean boundary layer turbulence. These
hypotheses will be tested using a state-of-the-art large eddy simulation
modeling framework. The coupled modeling framework consists of a Large Eddy
Simulation (LES) model that simulates the ocean surface boundary layer
turbulence with the impact of stochastically distributed breaking waves, a
Lagrangian particle model that tracks bubbles and bubble properties, and an
Eulerian concentration model for dissolved gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.