* 1945520
* CAREER: Revealing the Crystallization Kinetics of Marginal Glass Formers Through In Situ Microscopy and Nanocalorimetry Experiments
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Melissa Santala, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 04/30/2025
* USD 755,612.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Phase change materials (PCMs) are materials,
generally consisting of antimony and tellurium alloyed with other elements, that
are used in memory devices. Data is stored in amorphous (glassy) and crystalline
bits of PCMs, which may be considered “bad” glasses because they can crystallize
extremely rapidly. Rapid crystallization is required for PCM-based memory, but
it makes it difficult to acquire experimental data on the physical mechanisms of
crystallization and on the heat flow during the process. These data are needed
to test the models that form the basis of understanding of PCM behavior that
enables the development of new technologically-useful materials. This project
addresses the gap in experimental data by utilizing recent advances in
microscopy and nanocalorimetry. Calorimetry is used to measure the heat absorbed
or released during a reaction, and now advanced microscopic methods can be used
to directly observe crystal growth while simultaneous nanocalorimetry yields
data on heat flow during crystallization. The results are of value to scientific
communities researching materials for low-power, non-volatile memory. Graduate
and undergraduate students engaged in this research are being prepared for
careers in characterization and development of advanced materials in research
laboratories or high-tech industries. The project supports participation of high
school students from traditionally-underrepresented groups in science and
engineering in a summer educational program. It also supports the establishment
of An Expanding Your Horizons conference for middle school girls, the first of
its kind in Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Crystallization
kinetics are key to understanding glass stability across all classes of
materials. The data needed to extract important relationships between viscosity,
crystal growth rate, and temperature are incomplete for important materials that
are marginal glass formers, such as phase change materials (PCMs). PCMs are
(semiconducting) alloys used in optical- and resistivity-based memory owing to
their fast switching between amorphous and crystalline states. The relationship
between crystal growth and viscosity with changes in temperature is not fully
understood because crystallization can be so rapid the measurement of physical
and thermodynamic properties during crystallization is frustrated. Multiple
recent reports of crystal growth and viscosity behavior extracted from
calorimetric measurements do not satisfactorily fit existing models of crystal
growth. This discrepancy may be due to changes in crystallization mechanism and
flawed assumptions about the relative contribution of nucleation and growth in
different temperature regimes. In this project, crystallization is being studied
with in situ microscopic methods, enabling direct observation of crystal growth
and revealing changes in phase transformation mechanisms. Recent advances in
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) techniques have made this endeavor
possible even at temperatures where crystal growth is extremely rapid. In situ
TEM with simultaneous nanocalorimetry provides a seamless connection between
thermodynamic and kinetic data. Knowledge resulting from this research advances
the understanding of glass stability in PCMs and is of value to scientific
communities researching materials for low-power, non-volatile memory and other
marginal glass formers, such as bulk metallic glasses. Graduate students
participating in this project gain foundational knowledge of the thermodynamics
and kinetics of phase transformations and employ cutting-edge in situ TEM and
calorimetric characterization techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.