* 1945323
* SBIR Phase I:  In-orbit Satellite Servicing Interface for Science and Commercial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Daniel Faber, ORBIT FAB, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2021
* USD 247,713.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will affect numerous science and commercial spacecraft. When science
satellites with high-value payloads are launched, the satellite capabilities and
mission life can often extend well beyond the typical five-year mission life,
sometimes operating for more than 10 years. This means that in many cases, the
actual mission life of a satellite may be governed by the amount of fuel on
board. While the economic benefits of refueling exist for larger commercial
satellites (thousands of kilograms), it is not as clear for smaller satellites
(hundreds of kilograms and smaller). The proposed project, a refueling system
for smaller satellites, can increase the United States’ scientific, military,
and commercial capabilities in space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will remove the complexity of performing spacecraft proximity operations and
docking in order to facilitate commercial refueling through a ‘bolt on’
standardized component with the associated sensors and functions. The system
will be installed during production on the ground. This integrated package of
sensors, communications, fueling valves, and docking latches will provide the
functionality required for a servicing vehicle and a client satellite to safely
approach, securely dock, and exchange fuel between the two vehicles. It would be
contained within a component named the Integrated Servicing Interface (ISI),
simplifying satellite design by standardizing the technologies and interfaces
required to facilitate in-orbit refueling capabilities. This proposal will
define concept of operations and capture requirements, determine the optimal
optical alignment approach for near-field operations and docking, identify the
suite of sensors required for each phase of the mission, select the appropriate
intersatellite link to ensure robust communications between SC, and implement
the design of the ISI by producing a flight-like
prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.