* 1945331
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Thermogenesis and energetic costs in humans
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Cara Ocobock, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 26,476.00

This doctoral dissertation project will examine the energetic cost of brown
adipose tissue (BAT), a heat-producing tissue known to be activated under cold
conditions, in 100 adults from a lower-latitude population. Research on BAT in
adults has been relatively understudied, and this project will expand the
available data and geographic scope for investigating BAT’s role in human heat
production, energy allocation, and cold adaptation. The project will advance
fundamental knowledge in human biology, and may also inform public health
research on obesity and diabetes. In addition to the direct transmission of some
data to study participants, project outcomes will be shared with the greater
public through platforms such as social media, public talks, and publications in
open-access journals. Furthermore, this study will foster research
collaborations with local research assistants, who will develop STEM research
skills and facilitate the smooth and culturally appropriate implementation of
the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BAT has been extensively studied in
hibernating mammals and in human infants, but fewer studies have focused on its
functions in adults. Researchers have suggested that BAT may have played a role
in human evolution as an adaptive defense mechanism against chronic cold and
that it may also be useful in reducing risks of metabolic diseases given its
physiological effects on metabolism. In this study, BAT function will be
examined in a lower-latitude population showing an average body size and shape
that is morphologically best adapted to retain heat despite living in a warm
region. BAT will be inferred by comparing metabolic rates and heat dissipation
in the chest and shoulder area (main BAT location in adults) at room temperature
and at mild cold exposure. Simultaneously, fasting glucose levels as well as
respiratory quotients (a ratio determining metabolic substrates consumed) will
be measured before and after BAT activation to determine BAT’s use of glucose.
By determining the metabolic and heat-producing capabilities of BAT in the study
population, this research will parse out how BAT may be a physiological
reflection of cold adapted morphology and by extension how BAT may have played a
role in the successful dispersal of humans into different ecological settings
independent of their morphology. A better understanding of the energy
consumption and glucose disposal of BAT can provide insight into its potential
utility in weight gain and diabetes prevention. These potential health benefits
of BAT activation are especially important for regions burdened by high rates of
obesity and diabetes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.