* 1945274
* CAREER: Multimodal Nanoelectrochemistry to Characterize Nanometer and Microsecond Resolved Transmitter Release
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Mei Shen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 11/30/2024
* USD 632,319.00

Neurotransmitters, as the chemical messengers of nerve and brain communication,
are involved in many behaviors and emotional responses, such as learning,
memory, and attention. Abnormalities in neurochemical communication are
implicated in disorders and diseases of the nervous system, which include drug
addiction, dementia, diabetes, cancer, and aging. Dr. Mei Shen of the University
of Illinois creates new electrochemical methods and microscopes to detect,
measure, and visualize the presence of chemicals that are used as
neurotransmitters (neurochemicals) that currently cannot be investigated by
other methods. These novel measurement tools enable new discoveries in chemical
communications between nerve cells, which result from electrical and chemical
signals. The tools and techniques promise to provide an increased understanding
of brain function. Professor Shen's program also promotes early-childhood
education, and teaching and learning of both college and graduate students
through an education project called NANO. Educational efforts with young
children in the program help develop positive attitudes toward science and serve
as an early intervention to reduce science achievement gaps that are present
before kindergarten. The college-level educational activities serve local
communities by generating fundamental knowledge to address societal health-care
challenges and provide enriching opportunities for students in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging
Program in the Division of Chemistry is funding Dr. Mei Shen at the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign to develop new neuroanalysis platforms to enable
better understanding of brain chemistry. Until now, it has been difficult to
concurrently measure two different groups of monoamine and cholinergic
neurotransmitters at the location where neurons communicate. This research
program seeks to create chemically-sensitive, multimodal, electrochemical
platforms that provide fast (microsecond), nanometer-resolution measurements of
these two groups of neurotransmitters. This project is interdisciplinary,
impacting the fields of electrochemistry, nanoscience, neuroscience, and brain
chemistry. In education and outreach, "Nanoelectrochemistry And Neuroscience
Outreach (NANO)" education projects are developed to teach nanoscience and brain
chemistry to children from preschool age to grade 12 in public schools. The long
term education goals include helping children develop positive attitudes toward
science through science learning experiences in early childhood and addressing
the science achievement gaps that are initially present during preschool and
continue to occur as children age. Collaborations with the Child Development
Laboratory of Illinois (CDL) and public schools provide opportunities for
teaching brain chemistry to diverse groups of
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.