* 1945132
* CAREER: Population Change and Gentrification in Urban Foodscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Colleen Hammelman, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 06/30/2025
* USD 461,555.00

This project investigates the impact of changing urban economies on landscapes
created and utilized by underrepresented populations. Many urban landscapes are
receiving new investments via dense, modern, transit-oriented development and an
influx of upscale coffee, grocery, and other food retail establishments. The
result is rising rent for homes and small businesses which impacts local
communities in terms of changes to settlement and entrepreneurship patterns.
This research investigates these patterns in order to produce new knowledge
about the variety of gentrification outcomes for diverse population groups while
also providing a more complete understanding of changing foodscapes across urban
areas. This project will broaden participation in STEM while training both
undergraduate and graduate students in geographic research. Results will be
widely disseminated to social service providers, community organizations, and
local government agencies, with implications for human health and wellbeing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing research has not sufficiently examined the
impacts of revitalization processes on urban and suburban foodscapes. Through
the illustrative lens of food systems analysis, this project systematically
investigates the ways that restaurants, groceries, food trucks, etc. are
changing as a result of development pressures, identify where and how new food
landscapes are constructed, and determine the implications of this relocation on
cultural, social, and economic outcomes. This longitudinal and comparative
project analyzes demographic and property data, as well as data generated via
gentrification field surveys and in-depth interviews with key stakeholders. The
project fosters interactive community forums. It will also integrate pedagogical
activities engaging students in landscape surveys and contributing in-depth
interviews to a digital database. Research results will make visible the impacts
of development decisions on diverse communities, while contributing to advancing
theory in urban geography and food studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.