* 1945031
* CAREER: New Synthetic Approaches to Engineering Topology: from Quantum Many-Body Rydberg Atom Arrays to Classical Mechanical Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Bryce Gadway, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2025
* USD 639,293.00

Transport (moving something from one position to another) is central to
describing many important phenomena in the physical sciences. In physics, there
remain open challenges to understanding how physical quantities like charge,
heat, and even information evolve and undergo transport in systems of many
interacting particles, especially when quantum effects are taken into account.
Recently, new approaches to the study of transport in quantum systems have
emerged based on the concepts of "synthetic dimensions" and "synthetic
lattices," in which our normal picture of transport in real space is abstracted
to the transport of population in a space spanned by the internal states of
small quantum systems such as individual atoms or molecules. For example,
population can "move" between the electronic states of an atom (like hydrogen)
through the absorption of light from an incident laser field. In this way, a
collection of atoms, which is well-understood and highly controllable with
lasers or other electromagnetic fields, can be used to "simulate" a more complex
condensed matter system, and lead to advances in our understanding of the
complex system. The experimental effort in the current project will extend this
type of approach to the study of transport to a new regime of strong inter-
particle interactions. The team will conduct experiments based on samples of
atoms that can be individually controlled and detected at the microscopic level.
Microwave electromagnetic fields will be used to precisely control the transport
of population between states of the atoms, allowing for new kinds of
explorations into transport phenomena. Additionally, the team will lead an
effort to broaden the scope and impact of undergraduate research opportunities,
with a primary emphasis on increasing the participation of members from
underrepresented groups. This effort will focus on building a new, undergraduate
student-led research project on networks of mechanical oscillators that are
coupled by "synthetic," or engineered and indirect, forces. This effort will
incorporate undergraduates from diverse backgrounds in cutting-edge research
related to new kinds of transport phenomena, and will use these human-scale
experiments to generate visualization video content that will be utilized for
outreach and instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on previous
work designing synthetic lattices in neutral atoms and photons, extending these
ideas to a new platform for the exploration of many-body transport phenomena
based on the internal degrees of freedom of ultracold Rydberg atoms. By
considering the problem of quantum transport taking place in an internal state
space (driven by coherent microwave transitions and strong dipole-dipole
interactions) rather than real space, this approach leverages the ability to
manipulate internal degrees of freedom with spectroscopic control. This
spectroscopic control allows for the precise engineering of synthetic lattices
with nontrivial band topology, kinetic frustration, and tunable disorder.
Resonant dipole-dipole interactions between Rydberg atoms will lead to new
phenomena with relevance to the interplay of topology and strong interactions,
to the study of relaxation and thermalization in isolated interacting disordered
systems, and perhaps to the emergence of entirely new forms of many-body
phenomena. The research team will explore the ability to engineer novel
synthetic lattice models in the internal state space of Rydberg atoms, and will
explore how resonant dipole-dipole interactions lead to new many-body phenomena
in these synthetic lattices. An additional effort related to broadening the
scope and impact of undergraduate research will lead a project to create
topological lattice models based on synthetically-coupled oscillator networks.
This research effort will enable new functionality of engineered mechanical
networks, including new capabilities for designing non-reciprocity, artificial
gauge fields, disorder, and strong nonlinearities. The undergraduate led
research team will use these newly developed methods to study transport
phenomena in new classes of mechanical oscillator
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.