* 1945160
* CAREER: Multi-Electron Nickel Redox Cycles for Solar Energy Conversion and Storage
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Byron Farnum, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 06/30/2025
* USD 682,034.00

The successful implementation of solar energy as a renewable energy resource
must overcome the critical challenge of improving light to electric energy
conversion efficiency as well as the development of grid-scale energy storage
technologies. Dye-sensitized solar cells and redox flow batteries are two
promising technologies which could meet these challenges. Importantly, both
devices make use of small molecules to facilitate energy conversion and energy
storage. In this project, Dr. Farnum of Auburn University is developing chemical
compounds derived from inexpensive, earth-abundant metals capable of storing two
electrons per molecule. The ability to store more than one electron at a time,
results in increased energy storage density (smaller batteries with longer
life). Furthermore, the molecules are designed to enable large voltages to be
produced, which can lead to improved power. Dr. Farnum's increases student
interest in renewable energy conversion and storage through active outreach
efforts to the local community. His activities include science demonstrations to
middle-schoolers, battery experimentation with high-schoolers, and collaborative
summer research projects with undergraduates from local colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Farnum of
Auburn University is developing mechanistic understanding of multi-electron
redox reactions at mono-metallic, nickel-based coordination compounds. His work
specifically focuses on 4-coodinate nickel (Ni(II)) complexes which undergo two-
electron redox chemistry to generate 6-coordinate Ni(IV). These studies are
inspired by the demand for higher efficiencies in heterojunction solar cells as
well as growing interests in electrochemical energy storage technologies that
will allow further implementation of renewable energy resources. The nickel
complexes take advantage of distinct changes in coordination environment induced
upon electron transfer between d8 Ni(II) and d6 Ni(IV) metal centers. Detailed
mechanistic analysis of this redox cycle using electrochemical, spectroscopic,
and computational methods may result in a thorough understanding of mechanisms
for interconversion between Ni(II) and Ni(IV) oxidation states. Further
understanding of these redox couples could lead to increased solar energy
conversion in dye-sensitized solar cells and energy storage capacities in redox
flow batteries, as well as to new molecular redox couples that take advantage of
similar redox cycles. Dr. Farnum is also actively engaged in outreach programs
designed to raise awareness of the need for solar energy conversion and storage
to the local regions of Alabama and Georgia. Specifically, Dr. Farnum works with
Auburn University’s Destination STEM event and Summer Science Institute to
engage middle and high school students with interactive learning modules focused
on concepts of electrochemical energy storage and energy sustainability. Dr.
Farnum also invites undergraduate students from smaller, regional colleges and
universities to perform summer research projects in his lab, giving theses
students exposure and opportunities to participate in cutting edge research in
the conversion and storage of solar energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.