* 1945650
* CAREER: Resolving the origins of microgalvanic corrosion on metal surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Michael Hurley, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2025
* USD 401,827.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Corrosion (rust) is an age-old
metallurgical problem whose underlying mechanisms are still not well-understood.
The purpose of this research program is to uncover these hidden mechanisms and
fully understand rust by using state-of-the-art instruments that allow us to see
metals rust in liquids at the nanometer scale. By understanding the complex
interplay between a material and its environment, transformative outcomes
include an a priori approach for predicting and assessing corrosion, and a
fundamental framework enabling engineers to design materials with superior
corrosion resistance. Being able to control rust has far-reaching implications,
from enabling ultra-light alloy design for aerospace applications, to materials
for critical infrastructure, such as power generation, transportation,
communications, defense, and water and waste treatment facilities. An integrated
education plan extends the impact of this research by educating the next
generation of corrosion engineers. Educational activities will benefit students
from high school to graduate school, while providing opportunities for
underserved and minority students to contribute to solving problems of national
significance. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineers design and process most engineering
alloys to precipitate secondary phases; while these phases strengthen the alloy,
they also act as the thermodynamic driving force for corrosion initiation.
Inherent corrosion resistance can be tailored by selecting alloy constituents
and processing routes to optimize fundamental electrochemical properties, but
the appropriate constituents and processing routes are known only for select
material systems and perform only under specific environmental conditions. How
to expand beyond these systems to other materials and environments is still a
tedious trial-and-error process. To address this limitation and advance the
fundamental science needed to design for superior corrosion performance, this
research connects the electrode potential of magnesium-lithium (Mg-Li) alloys in
solution to their electronic structure by integrating state-of-the-art scanning
Kelvin probe force microscopy (SKPFM) and scanning electrochemical microscopy
(SECM) with first principles electronic property simulations. Using SKPFM to
measure Volta potential (a surface electronic property) provides an experimental
link spanning atomic structure and macroscale electrochemical properties via the
work function. In complement, SECM quantifies the surface reaction kinetics
during corrosion. Altogether, this research provides a new theoretical framework
for relating local composition and structure to electrochemical properties--a
critical factor governing material operational
lifetimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.