* 1945251
* CAREER: Applied Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* James Freitag, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2025
* USD 238,603.00

This project centers around two broad applications of model theory. The first is
related to algebra and number theory, and the second is in machine learning.
Model theory is a part of mathematical logic which has seen extensive
applications in other areas of mathematics and computer science in the last
several decades. The project aims to resolve several long-standing problems
related to number theory and algebraic differential equations. Number theory and
differential equations are central areas of mathematics with applications
throughout the sciences, and this project aims to resolve fundamental questions
in these areas. Connections between model theory and machine learning have
emerged in the last several years, and this project seeks to build on those
connections to bring new techniques to both disciplines. In the past several
years open problems in both model theory and machine learning have been resolved
using techniques from the other, a process this project will continue. Machine
learning has emerged as one of the most influential technologies of the last
decade and is in the process of rapid growth, and this project aims to attack
foundational problems in machine learning using techniques from mathematical
logic. The education component of the project involves training of graduate
students and undergraduate students through research and outreach to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first main area of this project centers
around nonlinear ordinary differential equations which arise in a number of
classical contexts. The project will study the differential equations satisfied
by automorphic functions and apply the results to prove new transcendence
results as well as obtaining diophantine applications around unlikely
intersections. Here, the techniques include analysis, differential Galois
theory, and geometric stability theory. Painleve equations will be studied,
where the central goal is a classification of the algebraic relations between
solutions. The second main area of this project is machine learning. In this
area, model theoretic tools will be brought to bear to solve foundational open
problems in learning theory. For instance, combinatorial characterizations of
private versions of learnability in various settings will be pursued.
Learnability in automata and other specific mathematical structures will also be
pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.