* 1945463
* CAREER: New Catalytic Strategies Using Metal-Ligand Charge Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Valerie Schmidt, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 662,700.00

Nearly one-third of the United States Gross National Product is based on
chemical manufacturing. This industry relies on the invention of new chemical
reactions to remain competitive. In this project, Professor Valerie Schmidt of
the University of California San Diego (UCSD) contributes to our national
competitiveness through the design of new chemical reactions that produce
valuable products. The new synthetic reactions have the potential to be used to
make new drugs, agrichemicals, and polymers. The specific theme of the research
is to develop new ways to convert carbon-carbon double bonds to 4-membered rings
called oxetanes and azetidines. Her research group is developing methods that
use the copper salts as "photocatalysts" for these conversions. The research
investigates the influence of the copper salts, the starting materials, and the
other reagents on the efficiency of the reaction to produce products. The
research group of Professor Schmidt trains future scientists by providing hands-
on training in the laboratory. Particular emphasis is placed on students from
backgrounds that are under-represented in science. The project also provides
science education to K-12 students in San Diego
County.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Valerie Schmidt of the University of
California San Diego is developing new methods for the selective activation of
alkenes to synthesize 4-membered heterocycles such as oxetanes and azetidines
using a combination of transition metal catalysis and light. The overall
methodology represents a new perspective on the time-honored but complicated
Buchi-Paterno reaction. Overall, the research program has the potential to
impact the efficiency of the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and other simple
chemical building blocks. The development of the new chemical reactions requires
a thorough understanding of the coordination chemistry of the copper(I)
precatalysts. The researchers are testing the mechanistic hypothesis that metal
to ligand charge transfer (MLCT) is a key step in the [2+2] cycloaddition. The
project aims to describe a general catalytic reaction through methodical
modification of the substrate-catalyst system and analyze the products using
multiple spectroscopic methods. The project could broadly impact the synthetic
utility of metal-alkene complexes. Professor Schmidt trains future scientists by
providing hands-on training with a myriad synthetic and spectroscopic tools.
Particular emphasis is placed on including students from backgrounds that are
under-represented in science. The project also provides science education to
K-12 students in San Diego County using pop-culture entry
points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF’s statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation’s
intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.