* 1945493
* CAREER: Locally Homogeneous Geometric Manifolds and Their Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Jeffrey Danciger, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 327,181.00

This project concerns locally homogeneous geometric manifolds. These are
abstract mathematical objects designed to model the universe we live in. The
term locally homogeneous refers to the presence of a high degree of local
symmetry which is captured by a Lie group called the (local) symmetry group. It
is this symmetry group which governs the geometry, in the following sense: the
meaningful quantities we can measure in a geometric manifold (e.g. lengths or
angles) are exactly those which are invariant under the symmetry group. There
are many different possible symmetry groups which lead to different types of
geometric manifolds useful in many contexts across mathematics and physics.
There can also be many different geometric manifolds with the same local
symmetry group. These all have the same local properties, but can look very
different at large scales. The space of all such possibilities is called a
moduli space; it is a topological space whose points are the possible geometric
manifolds of a certain type and whose topology organizes those geometric
manifolds into families whose features vary continuously. While the precise
features (e.g. shape, size, etc.) of our universe is a question for empirical
physics, a moduli space is the mathematical answer to the question of what
possible features could the universe have. The research component of this
project studies geometric manifolds of many types, with focus on flat affine
geometry, real projective geometry, and constant curvature pseudo-Riemannian
geometry. These geometries have just the right amount of symmetry to allow for
large interesting moduli spaces with mysterious but tractable behavior. Core
elements of the educational component include training Ph.D. students, a new
Texas Experimental Geometry Lab for undergraduate research, and the Texas Winter
Workshop on Geometric Structures for early career
mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A guiding philosophy in the PI's research
program is that geometric manifolds of one type may be fruitfully studied by
deforming, or transitioning, to a different type of geometry. For example, the
PIâ€™s work studying Margulis spacetimes as geometric limits of anti de Sitter
(AdS) spacetimes, has yielded many results about the geometry, topology, and
deformation theory of these affine Lorentzian three-manifolds. The PI will
develop new tools, following the geometric limit point of view, for new affine
geometry contexts in higher dimensions, in order to address questions
surrounding important open problems such as the Auslander Conjecture. The PI
will also pursue a broad program to study convex real projective structures on
manifolds. One focus is to identify which three-manifolds admit such structures
and to describe the moduli spaces, with applications to questions in low-
dimensional topology. In a more general context, the PI will conduct a thorough
investigation of a new notion of convex cocompactness in real projective
geometry, generalizing the well-studied notion from the Kleinian groups setting.
Educational goals of this project center on expanding and vertically integrating
the research training program in Geometric Structures at UT Austin being
developed by the PI. The Texas Experimental Geometry Lab (TXGL) will introduce
undergraduates at UT Austin to research in geometry, topology, and/or dynamics
through computational and experimental projects. TXGL will also provide
opportunities for Ph.D. students and post-docs to gain experience mentoring and
teaching undergraduates outside the traditional classroom setting. In addition,
TXGL will produce visualizations that illustrate concepts from current
mathematics research. The Texas Winter Workshops in Geometric Structures will
bring together small groups of early career mathematicians in order to learn an
emerging new topic at the intersection of different (but related) mathematical
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.