* 1945222
* CAREER:The Nonlinear Electrodynamics of Weyl Semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Darius Torchinsky, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 479,522.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The march of progress in electronic devices is invariably
toward smaller, faster and more energy efficient. Unfortunately, the fundamental
limitations of the materials that comprise currently made devices has recently
started to threaten the rate of technological progress. A novel class of
“topological” materials, holds great promise to be a truly paradigm shifting
platform that can help break the impending logjam of technological advancement.
However, the very properties that make these materials unique are not
straightforward to observe directly. This makes deliverable application of new
technologies based on this platform difficult. The current project aims to
develop methods that probe these unique characteristics. Simultaneously, the
educational component of this project is designed to increase the number of
students in Pennsylvania schools that study physics through a two-component
program named “Physics Forward.” The first element of this activity comprises a
seminar series for high school students on engaging topics in physics. The
second component creates a class for high school teachers to teach the topics of
this proposal in layperson's terms as a component of a larger physics instructor
certification program to be run at Temple
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The overarching goal of
this project is to experimentally measure the defining characteristics of Weyl
semimetals using nonlinear optical techniques through three complementary sets
of specific aims. The first aim is centered on using the circular photogalvanic
effect, a nonlinear optical process in which a laser injects a photocurrent into
the sample, in order to generate current transients in the surface Fermi arcs
whose emitted radiation is then detected using the standard technique of
electro-optic sampling. The (001) face of the chiral Weyl semimetal RhSi is
studied here as an ideal testbed system for this approach due to the large
energy bandwidth spanned by the Fermi arcs on this face. The second aim of this
research is to establish difference frequency generation as a direct probe of
topological order. Through its ability to provide an emitted photon resonant
with topological energy bands from two higher energy incoming photons, this
technique is used to directly measure Berry quantization in RhSi, Berry
quantization in TaAs using the chiral anomaly, and the surface Fermi arc
responses of both TaAs and RhSi. The third and final aim of this project is to
leverage the unique bandstructure of RhSi to perform ultra-efficient energy
transfer from a strong, near infrared field into a weaker mid- or far-infrared
field using Floquet drives in this material, and reveal the energy transfer rate
as proportional to its quantized topological charge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.