* 1945136
* CAREER: The Design-Based Perspective of Causal Inference in Complex Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Peng Ding, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 314,860.00

Randomized experiments have been widely used in agriculture, industry, and
clinical trials. R. A. Fisher formally discussed the value of randomization in
experiments: it balances observed and unobserved covariates on average and
serves as a basis for statistical inference. Classical results, however, are
limited to simple experiments without rich covariates and complex time and
hierarchical structures. Modern applications stemming from the social sciences
and technology companies have richer covariates and more complex time and
hierarchical structures. Motivated by these new applications, the PI will
advance the theories and methodologies for the design and analysis of modern
experiments for robust treatment effect estimation in various settings.
Highlighting the role of the design of experiments, the PI will take a coherent
design-based perspective of causal inference. In particular, the PI will propose
various new experimental designs that can better balance covariates across
experimental groups and develop statistical methods for these designs that are
robust to model assumptions on the outcome generating processes. These
theoretical results for experiments will also shed light on principled analyses
of observational studies where controlled experiments are infeasible.  The
training component includes graduate and undergraduate course work as well as
the development of software through the help of both undergraduate and graduate
students. This constitutes a strong plan to integrate research and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design-based perspective of
causal inference does not assume any strong outcome modeling assumptions and
focuses on the treatment assignment mechanism that can be determined by the
experimenters. Under this perspective, the PI will improve existing experimental
designs to have better covariate balance and evaluate many model-based
procedures when the corresponding model assumptions can be violated. The PI will
first propose and analyze rerandomization in blocking, sequential and factorial
settings, focusing on repeated sampling properties of the treatment effect
estimators and discussing the estimators with and without covariate adjustment.
The PI will then propose and analyze linear and nonlinear covariate-adjusted
estimators for treatment effects, including the cases with and without
noncompliance. Moreover, the PI will calibrate randomization tests with targeted
weak null hypotheses and propose randomization tests with robust and efficient
covariate adjustment, based on detailed analyses of completely randomized
experiments with covariates and finely stratified experiments. The PI will also
establish randomization-based inferential frameworks and procedures for
experiments with time and hierarchical structures. Finally, the PI will develop
and disseminate open-source R software packages that implement the
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.