* 1945461
* CAREER: Pockets of Effectiveness and the Diffusion of Organizational Capacity
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Erin McDonnell, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2025
* USD 352,961.00

This project analyzes efforts to spread practices associated with a case of
unusually effective public administration in a challenging environment. There is
a critical need to understand how to increase honest and effective public
administration within low-income, difficult environments because it is in the
national interest for financial commitments to be effective and strategic.
Public sector organizational effectiveness is a critical foundation for other
efforts to improve human wellbeing, whether providing education, improving
public health, broadening opportunities, or stimulating economic growth. This
project will seek to explain observed differences in performance from efforts to
replicate fully a commercial court model in six regions and distinct efforts to
spread Alternative Dispute Resolution to courts throughout all regions. The
project advances the fields of organizational scholarship and macrosociological
scholarship by analyzing how social factors influence the ability to identify
and successfully adopt practices that may enhance organizational effectiveness.
The educational objective of the project is to foster a new subfield of scholars
focused on explaining variation in organizational effectiveness within public
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach is a mixed methods analysis
evaluating five theoretically informed hypotheses. Study 1 assesses the
hypotheses through qualitative comparative case analysis of six newly created
regional commercial courts, drawing on ethnographic observation and interviews
with judges and staff. Study 2 examines the spread of Alternative Dispute
Resolution (ADR) to courts, constructing and analyzing a detailed quantitative
dataset by surveying the population of judges eligible to conduct ADR (n=333),
collecting information on demographics, prior professional experience,
experience with ADR, and professional networks. These distinct but related
studies will advance understanding of variation in organizational strength
within and between organizational systems. The work also contributes to
establishing the social foundations of organizational effectiveness, thereby
contributing to ongoing multidisciplinary debates on why we observe persistent
differences in organizational performance in both public and private sectors.
The proposed work brings crucial sociological variables into the analysis of how
particular features of social context and individual interpretation influence
adaption outcomes, for example analyzing how new practices that are technically
capable of improving effectiveness intersect with social foundations that shape
whether those new practices can be effectively implemented. The research
products will be integrated into undergraduate teaching on social science
methods. The research also will be integrated into graduate-level training
workshops to help foster a broader research community around the topic of socio-
organizational approaches to understanding effective public sector
organizations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.