* 1945446
* CAREER: Developing novel biomarker proxies to constrain Neogene changes in African woody cover and paleoecological contexts of hominin evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Kevin Uno, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 652,125.00

Today humans rely on grasses (e.g., corn, wheat, and rice) as a primary food
source and for feeding livestock. This dependence on grasses has deep roots.
Humans and their ancestors evolved in concert with grassland ecosystems in
Africa over the past 7 million years. Despite the well-documented association
between human evolution and grasslands, little is known about the origin of
grasses in Africa, especially before 10 million years ago. When and how did
grasses rise to ecological dominance? Lack of knowledge on this subject is
largely due to the sparse plant fossil record. To understand how grasslands may
have shaped the evolutionary trajectory of our species and other mammals, new,
widely applicable approaches are needed to reconstruct ancient ecosystems. This
project is developing new methods for reconstructing vegetation in past
ecosystems using molecular plant fossils preserved in ancient sediments.
Combining these approaches with existing isotopic methods, the researcher is
reconstructing the rise of grasslands in East Africa over the past ~25 million
years and exploring the relationships between climate, ecosystem, and
evolutionary change. The results could produce new insights on the
interconnectedness of climate, ecosystems and human evolution over geological
timescales. A parallel objective throughout the project is to support students
in their pursuit of STEM careers with an emphasis on increasing participation of
underrepresented groups in the Earth sciences. The project includes intensive
three-week field and lab courses for graduate students and postdocs from the US
and African nations, lab-based research opportunities for undergraduate and New
York City high school students, and support for a graduate student to conduct
PhD research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;African terrestrial ecosystems underwent
revolutionary change in the Neogene. Sparse paleobotanical evidence suggests
that denser forested ecosystems gave way to more open forests, woodlands, and
perhaps nascent grasslands near the end of the early Miocene to the middle
Miocene. This same period (~19 to 13 Ma) was marked by major changes in the
primate and large mammal communities, yet the paleoecological context remains
poorly known. By the late Miocene (10 Ma), carbon isotopic evidence shows that
C4 grasslands began to spread. Despite the firm record of C4 grassland expansion
beginning at 10 Ma, the role of ecological change in mammalian and human
evolution through most of the Neogene has been insufficiently addressed. The
Principal Investigator is developing organic geochemical approaches for
reconstructing terrestrial ecosystem structure using modern ecosystems. This
includes methods to estimate the fraction of woody cover from n-alkane molecular
distributions and to measure grass abundance using PTMEs. Modern ecosystem
research will also yield carbon and hydrogen isotope enrichment factors between
biomarkers, bulk plant tissue, and soils. The researcher is applying these
methods to terrestrial and marine sedimentary records from the Neogene Period in
Africa to determine when and how grasslands became ecologically significant and
how ecosystem change may have affected faunal and human evolution. The project
will incorporate postdocs and graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
into research, training, and field work. This includes developing a three-week
paleoecology short course in Kenya for graduate students and postdocs from US
institutions and African nations. The Principal Investigator is also providing
research opportunities in his lab, built on a tiered mentoring program, for high
school and undergraduate students from New York City. This program has high
participation rates of students from underrepresented groups and serves as a
pipeline for first-generation college students, many of whom ultimately major in
STEM fields. One graduate student will be trained and supported by this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.