* 1945394
* CAREER: Data-Driven Systematic Hierarchical Modeling
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Jianing Li, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 02/28/2025
* USD 659,826.00

Jianing Li of the University of Vermont &amp; State Agricultural College is
jointly supported by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) to predict the properties of materials using
computer simulation models. The question of how to correlate molecular
structures to material properties has been central to the chemical sciences.
Computer modeling has been invaluable to help answer this fundamental question,
but it is still very difficult to predict the properties of larger structures.
Current simulation methods often reach their limitations, since they are not
able to emulate large systems for long enough times. Dr. Li is now taking
advantage of the immense data from molecular simulations previously completed.
She is inventing an efficient approach to automatically learn from existing data
to build new molecular models. These models are able to decrease the difficulty
of simulating the large amount of underlying molecular components. By connecting
these models to predictions of material properties (like stability, shape, and
size), Dr. Li is using simulation methods to screen natural and man-made
polymers for desirable properties and to accelerate the discovery of new
materials. The materials designed in this project will be biocompatible,
bioactive nanomaterials for numerous applications in sensing, drug delivery,
tissue engineering, etc. The project also provides educational opportunities for
students at multiple stages of their career development, by training graduate
students with an interdisciplinary focus, as well as by encouraging
undergraduate students early on to experiment independently with molecular
modeling. The educational activities will broaden STEM participation by
providing new learning and research opportunities to undergraduate students.
Travel awards will be established to encourage underrepresented students in
Vermont to attend the Green Mountain Winter Camp alongside their mentors and
peers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For future technological advances in soft materials
(e.g. to create new programmable, biocompatible nanostructures formed by
peptides, DNAs, and organic polymers) it is critical to understand complex self-
assembly processes and to be able to accurately predict the resulting
structures. Hierarchical modeling represents an invaluable tool to understand
such processes, since it can examine and predict (often in greater detail than
experiments) how self-assembly occurs at the relevant atomic, nanoscopic, and
mesoscopic scales. However, to invent more powerful hierarchical computational
methods for the future, universal highly coarse-grained (HCG) force fields in
conjugation with effective backmapping methods are needed. To target these
challenges, Dr. Li is creating a systematic, data-driven hierarchical (STAIR)
methodology for multiscale modeling. STAIR is designed to overcome major
drawbacks of currently available methods for systematic coarse graining, which
still require substantial human expertise and labor for force field development.
Specifically, STAIR replaces expensive fitting processes by innovative neural
network algorithms and reduce human efforts in tasks like particle type
determination, ad hoc corrections, etc. With the long-term goal to guide the
rational design of complex nanomaterials from relatively simple building blocks,
the overall objective is to invent hierarchical, adaptive modeling methods to
guide the development of peptide- and DNA-based self-assembled
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.