* 1945023
* CAREER: Novel Electronic and Magnetic Dynamics and Responses in Noncollinear Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Hua Chen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 05/31/2025
* USD 372,924.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research aimed at unraveling the conceptual and practical
challenges associated with describing the magnetic order in the so-called
noncollinear magnetic materials. Unlike the case for conventional ferromagnets
and antiferromagnets, noncollinear magnetic order cannot be visualized as arrays
of parallel and antiparallel microscopic magnetic moments. Traditionally
noncollinear magnetism has been much less studied than ferromagnetism and anti-
ferromagnetism, and has had limited applications. However, recently several
noncollinear magnetic metals have been discovered to have surprising properties
that could potentially lead to useful electronic and spintronic applications.
This cohesive theoretical-computational project aims to identify new principles
in the coupled electronic and magnetic dynamics of noncollinear magnets, new and
unique response functions to external fields, and to predict new material
systems which exhibit noncollinear magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
contributes to the search for new technological breakthroughs in systems with
strong electron interactions. The strongly coupled spin and orbital degrees of
freedom in noncollinear magnets may be exploited for efficient spin-charge
conversion used in energy harvesting in different scales. The educational
component of this project focuses on symmetry and big data, which are
overarchingly important in today’s physics and materials science curricula.
Through organizing a summer school on Principles and Applications of Symmetry in
Magnetism, and redesigning a computational materials physics course to introduce
concepts of machine learning, the PI will help local and national undergraduate
and graduate students receive necessary exposure to these subjects and integrate
them in their professional thinking. Given the multidisciplinary nature of this
project, the undergraduate and graduate students involved in the research will
also receive the essential training for embracing the “Quantum Leap” challenge
in both fundamental science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noncollinear magnetic order cannot be visualized as
parallel or antiparallel magnetic moments arranged on a crystal lattice, as
opposed to ferro- and antiferro-magnetic orders. Recent advancement of the study
on such materials in spintronics and magnetotransport has been hindered by
conceptual and practical challenges associated with the lack of vector-like
order parameters and non-conservation of conduction electrons’ spin. This
cohesive theoretical-computational project aims to address these challenges,
through the following research thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Computational
search for new noncollinear magnets guided by symmetry. Group-theoretic methods
and the Landau theory of phase transition will be used to search for new
noncollinear magnets in materials science databases beyond the very few known
examples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) New response functions, functionalities, and
experimental probes of noncollinear magnets. A hydrodynamic approach
complemented by semiclassical wave-packet theory will be used to elucidate the
unique conserved current in noncollinear magnets and its coupling to itinerant
electrons. Quantum kinetic theory will be used to identify new response
functions such as a counterpart of the giant magnetoresistance but without
approximate spin conservation, and the magnetic spin Hall effect in terms of
spin density polarization. A theory for using magnetic neutron scattering to
detect local orbital magnetization will be formulated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to the search for new
technological breakthroughs in systems with strong electron correlations. The
strongly coupled spin and orbital degrees of freedom in noncollinear magnets may
be exploited for efficient spin-charge conversion used in energy harvesting in
different scales. The educational component of this project focuses on symmetry
and big data, which are overarchingly important in today’s physics and materials
science curricula. Through organizing a summer school on Principles and
Applications of Symmetry in Magnetism, and redesigning a computational materials
physics course to introduce concepts of machine learning, the PI will help local
and national undergraduate and graduate students receive necessary exposure to
these subjects and integrate them in their professional thinking. Given the
multidisciplinary nature of this project, the undergraduate and graduate
students involved in the research will also receive the essential training for
embracing the “Quantum Leap” challenge in both fundamental science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.