* 1945573
* CAREER: Understanding the Role of Inductive Electric Fields in Particle Energization
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Raluca Ilie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 01/31/2025
* USD 758,693.00

The space environment surrounding Earth is filled with plasma flowing among
magnetic and electric fields. Particles in this plasma interact with these
fields, gaining energy that affects their motion and interactions throughout
this region of space, known as the magnetosphere. The understanding of plasmas
embedded in magnetic fields, the goal of this project, has many scientific,
industrial, national security, and medical applications - including direct
relevance to space weather modeling and forecasting. The project will support
research for an early career female researcher, graduate student, post-doctoral
researcher, and four undergraduate students each year. Additionally, 3D
visualizations of abstract electricity and magnetism concepts will be made in
Virtual Reality - an immersive, exploratory, and engaging environment. The
visualizations will be used for physics curricula aimed towards undergraduate
engineering, science, mathematics, and medical students and high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to fill
the gap in our understanding of particle accelerations in the terrestrial
magnetosphere and determine how the nature and structure of the electric field
contributes to energization and particle transport in this region. Specifically,
the goal is to understand how particle injections are formed and driven by
different sources of electric field (potential vs. inductive) and where they
originate from. To do this, the work includes (1) determining the role of
inductive electric fields to ring current particle energization leading to
understanding of the injection driver mechanism; (2) determining and quantifying
the role of inductive electric fields due to intensification of the magnetopause
current vs inductive electric fields due to magnetic field dipolarizations to
ring current development and decay; and (3) determining the role of inductive
electric fields in predicting geomagnetic activity. This involves detailed
numerical computer simulations and data-model comparisons with in-situ
measurements from NASA's Magnetosphere Multiscale (MMS) and Van Allen Probes
missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.