* 1945916
* Ion channel contributions to developmental signaling in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Emily Bates, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 875,000.00

How does a single fertilized egg develop into a complex and perfectly patterned
organism? Cells need to divide, migrate to the correct location, take on the
correct shape, and make all of the parts that are needed for their specialized
role. Cells need to communicate with each-other to tell each-other where to go
and what to become. Over the last hundred years, researchers have used fruit
flies to identify components of the “language” of cell-cell communication
required for development of an animal. These developmental chemical signals are
essentially the same between flies, worms, birds, and mammals. Recently, the
Bates lab discovered that electrical signals are also important for cells to
communicate with each-other during development. These electrical signals are
conducted through proteins called ion channels. The Bates lab used fruit flies
to identify the types of ion channels that are important for a tissue to develop
properly. The experiments will determine how some of these ion channels work
with the chemical “language” for precise cell-cell communication. This project
will also provide science communication classes for graduate students to give
them skills to share their research with the community in various forums. In
addition this grant will fund ongoing mentoring of high school, undergraduate,
and graduate students in their pursuits of scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion channels have emerged as regulators of
development, but the mechanism that connects ion channels to conventional
developmental signaling pathways is far from clear. Using past NSF funding, the
Bates lab showed that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling requires the
inwardly rectifying K+ channel (Irk2) to correctly specify development of the
fruit fly wing. This project focuses on the provocative idea that bioelectric
signals induce BMP and other developmental signaling. The objective of Aim 1 is
to identify the ion channels that contribute to morphogenesis of the fruit fly
wing, determine how they influence calcium transients in the wing disc, and
determine how these changes to calcium activity impact canonical developmental
signaling pathways. The team has chosen to prioritize Stim, Orai, Bestrophin 2,
and SERCA for this analysis, and will follow up on other ion channels as time
and resources allow. Aim 2 determines the molecular connection between calcium
activity in the wing disc and Dpp/BMP release. In addition, broader educational
goals include developing and teaching a science communication class for graduate
students. Students will utilize skills gained from the class to reach adults in
the community through a “science in the news” TED-talk type seminar series and
at science comedy events. The Bates lab will continue to mentor high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students to include them in transforming current
understanding of developmental signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.