* 1945102
* CAREER: Discrete Structures and Orthogonal Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Paata Ivanisvili, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 10/31/2020
* USD 25,756.00

How much can quantum algorithms outperform classical algorithms? This open
question has been recently formulated as a mathematical problem that has
challenged the mathematical community but has yet to be solved. The question is
related to another one: what is the most "efficient" way to encode and transmit
given information? For example, a) one can try to minimize the number of symbols
used in encoding the information, or b) one can maintain "certain structures"
(say by repeating some "pattern") in encoded messages in order to avoid loss of
information, provided that a couple of errors can be made during its
transmission. The goal of this project is to investigate what the best way is to
approximate given information or a given signal using only zeros and ones. The
principal investigator will involve undergraduate and graduate students in
research projects described in the proposal. The PI will organize a yearly
summer school in analysis and probability for graduate students. This will be a
good opportunity for PhD students to participate in research discussions with
leading experts and to learn about emerging areas in mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of quantum algorithms described above can be
formulated as an explicit Fourier–analytic question on the boolean cube. On a
technical level the proposal focuses on hypercontractivity, i.e., boundedness of
a semigroup between normed spaces, its holomorphic extensions to complex
domains, applications in moment comparison estimates, Markov—Bernstein type
inequalities (for polynomials living on low and high frequencies), discrete
approximation theory, and complexity of classical and quantum algorithms. One of
the important examples involves the Hamming cube, equipped with a product
measure. This project focuses on dimension independent estimates and proposes a
program, a series of fundamental questions together with steps towards the
resolution of these questions (heat flow arguments, martingale techniques,
conformal maps, and probabilistic arguments), necessary for advancing and
developing Fourier analysis on the Boolean cube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.