* 1945589
* CAREER: Programmable Assembly of Glycine-Rich Peptides on a Graphitic Surface
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Jeffrey Comer, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2025
* USD 450,513.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research, computer simulations, and validating experiments to design molecules
that can be programmed to arrange themselves into complex devices. A modern
smartphone that fits in a pocket has more computing power than a hefty laptop of
20 years ago, while also including a digital camera, GPS, and the ability to
make wireless calls. The miniaturization of devices has been so successful that
the size of some components is growing close to the size of molecules and atoms,
requiring big changes in how devices are built. It is as if building sandcastles
has given way to building tiny castles out of individual grains of sand. While
making devices from individual molecules may be difficult, it can be done;
living things make thousands of different proteins with single-atom precision,
each performing a different function while often arranging themselves into
larger, more complex structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to design protein-like molecules that are similarly able to arrange
themselves, but in a way that can be easily programmed by a human engineer. To
make imaging and design of the devices easier, the project is focused on
molecules that arrange themselves on top of an atomically flat graphene surface.
The research team will use computer simulations to optimize control over the
arrangement, checking the computer predictions against experiments. This
research should reveal new theoretical principles for designing future devices
from single molecules. Also, the biological nature of the molecules means that
they might be applied in medical applications. Undergraduate and graduate
students, including those from minority groups underrepresented in scientific
research, will participate, learning cutting-edge computational
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team also seeks to develop
computer simulations of molecules for use in college classrooms and in K-12
outreach, letting students see how molecules move and giving them a feel for how
the world works at this tiny level. The interactive simulations will include
those aimed at helping students understand how medicines work and how new
medicines can be designed. The educational modules and simulation programs will
be made freely available to educators and the public, and will include English-
and Spanish-language versions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research to address a
fundamental problem in engineering self-assembled structures: how to design
molecular elements that possess both the flexibility to adopt arbitrary useful
structures and the selectivity to adopt a unique programmed structure with high
fidelity. The goal of the project is to develop a theoretical framework and
computational tools for designing building blocks for programmable assembly. The
project is focused on glycine-rich peptides that fold into unique conformations
on graphitic surfaces and self-assemble in predictable ways. This peptide-
graphene system seems optimal for creation of programmable materials because the
effectively two-dimensional architecture simplifies imaging and reduces the
peptides' conformational and configurational freedom, favoring ordered
structures and facilitating analysis by theory and molecular dynamics
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use molecular dynamics
simulations and state-of-the-art free-energy calculation techniques to screen
large numbers of peptide sequences to find sets of elements suitable for
programmable assembly. The computational predictions will be experimentally
validated using atomic force and electron microscopy. The results of this
project are anticipated to advance the field of molecular self-assembly by
establishing theoretical and computational tools to find sets of molecular
motifs with optimal interaction thermodynamics for programmable assembly of
nanodevices. The project will involve the development of new algorithms and
freely available software for enhanced sampling, free-energy calculation, and
interactive molecular design, likely advancing the field of molecular
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award also supports education
activities related to the research area. The team will also create interactive
educational modules leveraging easy-to-use browser-based simulations, which will
be tailored to a graduate course on drug design, undergraduate courses on
thermodynamics, and K-12 outreach activities. These modules will include
English- and Spanish-language versions. Graduate and undergraduate students
participating in the research, including some from populations historically
underrepresented in science and technology fields, will gain exposure to
nanoscience and advanced computational techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Condensed-Matter-and-Materials-Theory program
in the Division of Materials Research and by the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.