* 1945646
* CAREER: CAS: Understanding How Catalyst Modification Impacts Performance Thermodynamic and Kinetic Parameters Pertinent to Catalytic Hydrogenation of Polar Carbonyl Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Caroline Saouma, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 03/31/2025
* USD 675,000.00

To meet our future energy needs, new chemical reactions that use carbon dioxide
(CO2) and other waste products to produce fuels and chemical feedstocks need to
be developed. The use of CO2 as a starting material is challenging because it is
a gas and not very reactive. Scientists like Dr. Saouma at the University of
Utah develop cheap and readily-available catalysts to speed up these reactions.
This research project focuses on developing an understanding of how catalyst
structure impacts the catalyst performance. This knowledge allows more efficient
and effective better catalysts to be prepared. Dr. Saouma is actively engaged in
outreach activities that aim to increase female representation in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) fields. She is an instructor and mentor
for the College of Science’s ACCESS program, an intensive summer-long program
for incoming freshman women that provides them with a comprehensive view of how
energy is produced and used in our society. A survey of high school seniors in
Utah indicates that prior to college a gender gap exists in students interested
in STEM fields. To help offset this, Dr. Saouma is developing an offshoot of
ACCESS that is geared towards increasing the number of rising ninth grade women.
participating in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B and the Chemical Catalysis Programs of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Saouma of the University of Utah is developing a
fundamental understanding that correlates the thermodynamic properties of a
catalyst with catalyst performance for systems that reduce carbonyl bonds. The
research measures how ligand and metal identities impact parameters such as
hydricity and propensity to add H2 in systems that undergo metal ligand
cooperativity and these characteristics are compared through equilibrium
measurements. These measurements are also correlated to the catalyst performance
in terms of kinetics, mechanism, and scope. Parallel work on developing ligands
that are designed to allow separate tuning of the thermodynamic parameters is
also under investigation. Dr. Saouma is part of the College of Science’s ACCESS
program, whose mission is to increase the representation of women in leadership
in the STEM disciplines. In addition to mentoring and instructing the incoming
freshman women of ACCESS, Dr. Saouma is developing a sister program that will
encompass a summer camp for rising 9th graders, to help address the gender
discrepancy in STEM interest that exists amongst high school students in
Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.