* 1945971
* EAGER: IIBR Informatics: A reinforced imputation framework for accurate gene expression recovery from single-cell RNA-seq data
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Qin Ma, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,999.00

Single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) analyses have revolutionized the methods in
which researchers can investigate tissue samples of specific cell types. While
single-cell sequencing technologies have provided a new frontier for
researchers, they also come with a complex set of problems. One of these
problems is related to the quality of gene expression estimates, which are used
in numerous downstream analyses from the prediction of the cell
types/trajectories to determining differentially expressed genes between cell
types or tissues. The low coverage and sequencing inefficiencies can affect up
to 90% of gene expression estimates for scRNA-Seq studies, and hence, are
challenging to overcome. However, there are two critical problems in the way
that current methods attempt to address this problem: (1) inadequate use of bulk
data to compensate for low expression genes and (2) under-utilization of
iterative procedures to optimize highly-connected steps for imputation of gene
expression estimates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a novel
computational framework to integrate bulk RNA-seq data into scRNA-seq data
modeling and analyses, aiming at accurate gene expression estimates from the
sparse scRNA-Seq data, and high quality, reliability, and precision of
downstream analyses. The aim is to model particular features of the
heterogeneous gene expression patterns among various cell types. Integration of
bulk RNA-Seq data through de-convolution will be used to develop heterogeneous
compensation distributions and probabilities. Utilization of the gamma
distribution to determine empirical distribution for single-cell gene expression
estimates will improve the baseline expression in a specific cell type and
identify estimates of interest through the high level of noise in sequencing
data, which will then be combined with compensation information from bulk RNA-
Seq data to correct biases from the high noise scRNA-Seq data. Finally, the
updated expression estimate will be used to iterate back through the process to
provide improved results for each stage of the process. The outcome will be a
novel imputation framework that should enable scRNA-Seq expression estimates
through the integration of the above three new
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.