* 1945366
* CAREER: Unprecedented Searches for New Particles with Non-Universal Fermion Couplings at the LHC, and the Increase of Minority Representation in Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Alfredo Gurrola, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 12/31/2024
* USD 333,327.00

The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics has been a successful theory,
explaining experimental observations involving weak, electromagnetic, and strong
interactions over the last few decades. However, as experiments probe deeper
with increasing energies, it is evident that the SM is an incomplete theory: it
fails to account for the mass of neutrinos and does not explain astronomical
dark matter (DM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As members of the Compact Muon Solenoid
(CMS) Collaboration, the Vanderbilt group exploits the rich particle physics
program at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. The
LHC, the premier particle accelerator operating at the CERN laboratory, is
expected to significantly expand the realm of discoverable BSM physics
signatures, leveraging the synergy between particle physics and cosmology. This
work will probe BSM particles with TeV scale masses, such as the so-called
Z-prime/W-prime bosons and leptoquarks, by targeting their production at the LHC
by considering new and rare mechanisms involving non-universal couplings to the
SM fermions. This research could potentially shed light on important questions
in physics, such as the particle nature of DM, the evolution and structure of
our universe, and the anomalies in precision measurements of the B-meson
branching ratios and the muon anomalous magnetic moment, which show deviations
of more than three standard deviations from the SM expectation. The physics
goals are to search for new physics, to improve the algorithms for the
reconstruction and identification of third generation fermion particles, and to
contribute to hardware activities of the pixel detectors and pixel luminosity
telescope, including the luminosity measurement of
CMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also address the underrepresentation
of women and minorities in particle physics through a partnership with Fisk
University, a Historically Black University near Vanderbilt University. The plan
includes a formal network of peer-to-peer mentoring via research experiences
that are integrated with the groupâ€™s research program. These experiences will be
individually tailored to each participating URM student transitioning from their
undergraduate studies into the Fisk-Vanderbilt Bridge Program and will provide
opportunities to the Bridge students to engage in particle physics research and
interact with scientists in other fields to tackle cross-disciplinary issues. In
addition, this project will also hold a yearly summer school for URM high school
juniors and seniors from the local community and surrounding suburbs who are
transitioning into their post-secondary college
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.