* 1945856
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Investigation of the Sub-ice Environment and Crustal Composition of Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Weisen Shen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 262,933.00

Part I: Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;The geology beneath the Antarctic Ice Sheet sets
up a key condition to its moving glacial systems: a weak, porous, and possibly
water bearing sedimentary layer provides a slippery bed, whereas hard basement
rock at the contact may reduce the ice flow. Knowing the geology, however, has
been extremely difficult since the continent is remote and the ice cover is
thick. Using seismic stations deployed on top of the ice sheet provides an
alternative tool to see the continent through the ice, as seismic signal they
record contains sensitive information about the base of the ice-sheet and the
geology of the crust below. For example, a thick and porous sedimentary layer
will cause the seismic waves to travel more slowly. In this project, the
investigators will 1) utilize the seismic data collected in the past 18 years at
more than 200 sites in Antarctica, 2) perform a suite of modern seismic data
analysis tools to produce a variety of seismic signals, and 3) translate them
into sets of maps about the physical properties (such as the speed of the
seismic wave) and chemical composition (such as silica content) of the
underlying crust. These seismic speed maps, with accuracy quantified by
uncertainty measurements, provide a first-order assessment to the distribution
of the sub-ice sedimentary layer. Additional information such as other crustal
properties and inferred chemical composition beneath these sites will further
shed light on the geological evolution of the continent buried by the thick ice
sheet. Notably, determining the silica content of the crust will help produce
better estimates of the thermal profiles of the sub-ice crust.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The underlying
crust of Antarctica Ice Sheet holds strong importance from perspectives of both
cryosphere and lithosphere: at local and regional scale, the shallow physical
properties at the base of the Antarctic Ice Sheet sets an important boundary
condition for the dynamics of the fast moving ice sheet; at a greater scale, the
architecture (thickness and Poissons ratio) of the crust that varies across the
continent retains the signature of the past geological evolution and its
chemical composition contributes significantly to the geothermal structure.
However, these properties have not been systematically studied due to both the
remoteness of the continent and its thick ice-coverage. In this proposed study,
the investigators will analyze 18 years of seismic records from more than 200
permanent and portable seismic stations, to constrain the sub-ice seismic
structure, crustal architecture, and draw implications on the chemical
composition of the bulk crust using multiple seismic techniques. Their analysis
will include: 1) systematic measurement of the broad-band Rayleigh wave
horizontal-vertical ratios (H/V) from both ambient noise and earthquakes; 2)
analysis of high frequency receiver function waveforms and 2-layer h-k stacking
to provide information on Poissons ratio and the depth of sub-ice
discontinuities; 3) measurement of Love wave dispersion and inversion for radial
anisotropy; 4) measurement of Rayleigh wave azimuthal anisotropy from both
ambient noise and earthquakes; 5) Joint interpretation of Rayleigh wave
dispersion, H/V ratios, and receiver function waveforms for detailed sub-ice
isotropic structure; 6) a Monte Carlo transversely isotropic (TTI) modeling of
all seismic anisotropic measurements. These analyses will be combined and
synthesized to produce a set of seismic deliverables including the determination
of a map of thickness of the sub-ice sediments with hierarchical-resolution,
more accurate crustal thickness and Poissons ratio determination, and
quantification of crustal composition. The proposed work will meet two major
scientific objectives. First, it will provide detailed information about the
bottom contact of the Antarctic ice-sheet and sediment thickness at localities
of seismic stations, improving the boundary conditions for the ice-sheet
modeling and determining the locations of major sedimentary basins within
Antarctica. Second, constraints on the thickness and composition of the
Antarctic crust will improve the understanding of the geology history of the
continent. Notably, the crustal architecture and composition will further
facilitate future geological investigation to various tectonic processes that
have shaped Antarctica, such as rifting, lithospheric removal, orogeny, and
mountain building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.