* 1945264
* CAREER: Path Dependent Slip of the Shallow Subduction Megathrust
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Melodie French, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 02/28/2025
* USD 483,061.00

This project is an integrated research and education plan to study the processes
generating earthquakes and tsunamis in tectonic environments like the Pacific
Northwest of the United States. "Subduction zones" are tectonic plate boundaries
where one plate dives beneath another. They host Earthâ€™s largest earthquakes and
tsunamis. Both hazards are controlled by the mechanical properties of the rocks
present along the boundary. These properties vary regionally due to different
mineralogy in the host rocks. Rocks also undergo different physical and chemical
changes as they are dragged into a subduction zone. These changes affect their
mechanical properties as well. Here, the team study the effects of different
physical and chemical paths on the mechanical properties of subduction-zone
rocks. They carry out deformation experiments on rock specimens collected in
targeted plate boundaries. Results helps unveiling the behavior of faults
generating megathrust earthquakes. They also allow better assessing regional
hazards. This project includes support for an early-career female scientist. In
addition, it promotes a 3-part education plan to train students in rock
mechanics at all levels, from K-12, to undergraduate and graduate levels. The
5-year award is co-funded by NSF Geophysics, Tectonics, and Marine Geology &amp;
Geophysics programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shallowest extent of subduction
megathrusts hosts a variety of slip modes, including tsunamigenic earthquakes.
The mode of fault slip at shallow conditions is proposed to be controlled by the
physical properties of the sediments and rocks along the plate boundary, as well
as external conditions like pore fluid pressure and temperature. However, there
is no comprehensive model for which lithologies control slip behavior. How
extrinsic variables control the deformation of these lithologies is also
unclear. Here, the team studies experimentally the path-dependent strength and
deformation behavior of shallow subduction-zone rocks. The project has a field-
based component to collect naturally deformed specimens with relevant mineralogy
and microstructures. The goals of the research and education plan are: (1) to
determine how changes in mineralogy and porosity, experienced by subducted
sediments and basalt, promote or inhibit different slip modes; (2) to quantify
how the paths that lead to elevated pore fluid pressures affect different modes
of slip; (3) to launch a 3-part education plan that includes the development of
a mobile teaching laboratory, that of an inquiry-based electronics course, and
the integration of undergraduate students in research and teaching
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.