* 1945966
* Directed Self-Assembly of Block Copolymers Under Dynamic and Orthogonal Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Chinedum Osuji, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2022
* USD 225,415.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need to control order in self-
assembled block copolymers (BCPs) is well recognized from a technological
perspective. At the same time, there is incomplete understanding of the complex
field-matter interactions and dynamics with which BCPs undergo self-assembly
under the action of external fields. The overall objective of this project is to
build a body of knowledge that enables high fidelity control of orientational
and positional order of BCP nanostructures by the application of external fields
and to understand the mechanisms of such action. Specifically, this work
pertains to: (1) the use of magnetic fields which vary in their intensity and
direction and a function of time and/or location, so called dynamic fields, and
(2) the use of more than one external field where the fields act along
perpendicular directions, so called orthogonal fields. This work will be
accomplished by the development of new materials and methods which permit fast
biaxial alignment of BCPs under magnetic fields and effective coupling of
multiple fields to a single system. New BCPs that display paramagnetic behavior
and/or biaxial order will be designed and synthesized, to enable fast, biaxial
alignment. New methods will be developed based on local perturbation of external
magnetic fields using nanoparticles for dynamic field studies. Apparatus will be
designed to enable studies of self-assembly under the simultaneous action of
shear and magnetic fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives are: (1)
development of BCPs that exhibit biaxial order and paramagnetic properties, (2)
development and study of dynamic magnetic field-directed self-assembly, and (3)
investigation of directed self-assembly under orthogonal magnetic and flow
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers represent a technologically
important class of synthetic materials and are made up of two or more different
types of polymer molecules connected to each other. Depending on the chemical
nature of each of the polymer molecules, the resulting materials consist of
regularly arranged structures having dimensions of around 3-100 nanometers. The
ability to control the position and alignment of these structures is highly
desirable from a technological perspective. Compelling examples include
applications of such aligned block copolymers for energy generation (e.g.
photovoltaics) and water purification. This project addresses current gaps both
in capability and fundamental understanding of alignment of block copolymer
materials using external fields such as electric or magnetic. As such, it is in
a position to impact or facilitate a broad spectrum of technologies with
societal impact such as those mentioned above. This project involves a wide
range of broader impacts including curriculum development for undergraduate and
graduate students, K-12 outreach activities through Science Fair and Science
Pathways programs, and summer research projects with science teachers. The PI
will embark on specific initiatives aimed at improving recruitment of under-
represented groups in collaboration with other stakeholders.