* 1945114
* CAREER: Probing Polysulfide Redox Chemistry in Tunable Metal-Organic Frameworks for Energy Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* V. Sara Thoi, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 12/31/2024
* USD 603,816.00

Part 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Although lithium ion batteries have
revolutionized the development of portable devices and electric vehicles, they
are still limited by their low charge storage capacity and high cost. Lithium
sulfur batteries, which utilizes inexpensive sulfur materials, are attractive
energy storage devices with up to 10 times the storage ability of current
lithium ion batteries. However, lithium sulfur batteries have short lifetimes,
leading to frequent battery replacement. This CAREER award project, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, elucidates the critical electrochemical processes that have so far
hindered the adoption of lithium sulfur batteries by using metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs) as a well-defined model system for evaluating the sulfur
chemistry inside a battery. MOFs are porous materials that are composed of a
network of connected metal ions and organic compounds arranged in an ordered
fashion. The metal ions and organic linkers can be easily changed to generate a
series of materials with different structures and chemical functionalities. In
this way, MOFs can be manipulated to simulate battery environments for
uncovering chemical mechanisms. The PI and her research group advance the
fundamental knowledge on an important electrochemical challenge to Lithium
sulfur batteries, and discovery of new battery materials. Alternative high-
density energy storage devices, such as lithium sulfur batteries, may enable
applications in smaller portable devices, long-range electric vehicles, and
reliable electric grid management. Through this project the PI also promotes
engagement between local elementary school students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral fellows in scientific discourse, particularly in the area of
energy. Additionally the PI designs a new interactive curriculum for
incorporation into an existing afterschool program that serves inner-city
elementary school students in Baltimore. This hands-on demonstration series aims
to provoke 5th graders to evaluate their role in the advancement of energy
technologies as consumers and future scientists. The scientific and educational
merits of this project advance the frontiers of energy storage technologies,
promote public engagement between researchers and young students, and align with
the national interest of a sustainable energy future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Essentially all degradation processes in today's
modern batteries involve poorly understood reactions at complex interfaces. This
project uses molecular functionalization techniques on geometrically and
atomically well-defined chemical systems to establish materials design criteria.
Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are used to elucidate factors that influence
charge transport in porous materials and develop new strategies to promote
efficient polysulfide redox in lithium sulfur (Li-S) batteries. Li-S batteries
can reach up to 10x the energy density of LiBs and sulfur is earth-abundant and
affordable. However, the commercialization of Li-S batteries is challenged by
unstable cycling performance due to polysulfide dissolution and incomplete
sulfur utilization. This CAREER project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, takes
advantage of the tunability and modularity of MOFs to decouple structural and
chemical variables to acquire fundamental knowledge of the underlying charge
transport and redox processes in Li-S batteries. Using Zr MOFs as robust model
systems, the Thoi research group works to 1) identify structure-property-
function relationships between pore structure, ion diffusion, and polysulfide
redox properties, 2) incorporate redox-active components to control electron and
ion transport, and 3) embed chemical anchors to trap polysulfides for obtaining
mechanistic insights into their redox chemistry. Atomistic understanding of
structure-property relationships provides design criteria for new functional
sulfur electrodes. The fundamental knowledge acquired also enables the
development of new charge conducting materials for electrochemical applications
in the future, thus extending the application of MOFs beyond traditional gas
storage and separation to electronic devices. This CAREER award project also
promotes engagement between local elementary school students, graduate students,
and postdoctoral fellows in scientific discourse, particularly in the area of
energy. A demonstration series, entitled “EnergyNOW!” is developed for 5th grade
students in an afterschool STEM program, with the objective of having students
examine their relationship with energy. Each lesson includes a Q&amp;A segment
that stimulates scientific inquiry, a demonstration that involves role play
and/or an experiment, and a hands-on activity that encourages problem-solving
and decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.