* 1945035
* CAREER: Light-matter interactions at the single emitter level:  Precise control of plasmon-exciton coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Esther Wertz, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 04/30/2025
* USD 483,955.00

When light interacts with matter, its properties – color and energy, for example
– can be drastically modified. New techniques for manipulating light will enable
better solutions to some of today’s biggest challenges, from maximizing
efficiency in transforming sunlight into electricity to building faster
computers. This project aims to control light at the quantum limit—one particle
of light (or photon) at a time—using nanometer-scale metal structures. However,
many questions remain about how such nanometer-scale structures affect
individual photons. Thus, the first goal of this project is to develop new
microscopy methods that will permit the study of light-matter interactions near
these metal structures with unprecedented resolution. With this newfound
understanding, the second goal is to use the nano-particles to construct the
first step towards a quantum computer, which promises an explosion of power and
speed in the computers of the future. This project also has broad goals to
create space for all students to thrive, regardless of gender, race, and
socioeconomic background. This will be achieved, in part, by expanding the scope
of the Rensselaer Women in Physics group’s outreach activities to the local
elementary and middle schools, and by incorporating diversity education into the
physics curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential of quantum information
science is fueling demand for the design and generation of new qubits and
devices, such as transistors, operating at the single-particle level. Localized
surface plasmon resonances in metal nano-particles offer the ability to confine
the electromagnetic field to scales well below the diffraction limit of light,
and promise the possibility of integratable devices operating at the quantum
level. In particular, these plasmon resonances can strongly couple with
molecular or semiconductor excitons to form new hybridized states. These states
can be used to develop single-photon transistors and other building blocks of a
functioning quantum circuit. However, several roadblocks have up to now limited
plasmons’ practical use. Indeed, although plasmonic modes present the advantage
of coupling very strongly to matter, the very small mode volume in plasmonic
cavities makes it difficult to get good spatial overlap with single emitters
such as quantum dots. This research project proposes to design, develop, and
characterize new methods for the fundamental investigation and precise control
of the coupling between single quantum emitters and plasmonic nano-cavities. The
research objectives include: (1) Developing a new tool to experimentally measure
the local density of states using single-molecule super-resolution microscopy,
and to understand light-matter interactions in the vicinity of plasmonic nano-
structures, beyond what can be learned from simulations of the structure design;
(2) Achieving reproducible and controllable coupling between individual quantum
emitters and a plasmonic nano-cavity using plasmonic optical trapping; (3)
Studying the transition from weak to strong coupling regime in real time and
using the strongly coupled system to demonstrate single photon
blockade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.