* 1945148
* CAREER: Picoliter Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy with Diamond Quantum Sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Victor Acosta, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/28/2025
* USD 668,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET), Professor Acosta and his group at
the University of New Mexico are developing new measurement tools called
“quantum sensors” to identify the molecular composition of samples with spatial
resolution compatible with analysis of single cells. A quantum sensor uses a
qubit (the logical element of a quantum computer) to detect its local
environment. Specifically, Acosta’s lab uses defects in diamond, called
Nitrogen-Vacancy centers, as the qubit sensors. The Acosta group is using these
sensors to detect the oscillating magnetic fields naturally produced by chemical
and biological samples via a technique that is analogous to medical magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). The information obtained by these methods is being used
to identify the type and quantity of molecules in samples of a size comparable
to individual cells. Prof. Acosta is working with a startup company to develop
portable quantum sensor technology that can be used in undergraduate chemistry
and physics teaching labs. His educational efforts also include designing the
curriculum for a summer school that will introduce undergraduates from a diverse
range of backgrounds to the field of quantum
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Acosta is implementing a synergistic
research and educational plan to develop a platform for small-volume nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy which uses diamond quantum sensors to
generate and detect nuclear magnetization. Specifically, he seeks to develop two
different implementations of diamond NMR hardware: (i) a microfluidic platform
suitable for parallel chemical analysis of picoliter analyte volumes and (ii) a
hyperspectral NMR microscope for quantifying metabolic composition with single
cell resolution. The research is based on the hypothesis a non-inductive
detection modality (diamond quantum sensors) can lead to improvements in
sensitivity, spectral resolution, spatial resolution, and microfluidic
integration beyond what is currently available in small-volume NMR spectroscopy.
Dr. Acosta is integrating diamond NMR into undergraduate teaching labs and
assessing the learning outcomes. He is also designing a curriculum for a one-
week summer or winter school in quantum engineering targeting undergraduates,
with an emphasis on women, under-represented minorities, and first-generation
college students. His aim is to attract a diverse student body into the
physical/chemical sciences and specifically to quantum sensing and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.