* 1945735
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating taxonomic efficacy of the skeleton in a primate genus
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Noreen von Cramon-Taubadel, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 23,158.00

The classification of species based on skeletal morphology (shape) often has
been focused on characteristics of the cranium (skull). However, research has
also begun to address the taxonomic signal of other parts of the skeleton. This
doctoral dissertation project will use state-of-the art 3D scanning technology
to provide a systematic taxonomic assessment of the cranium and numerous post-
cranial skeletal elements among closely related species of macaques. Macaques
are an ideal model system because they are geographically widespread, there are
numerous species, and they occupy a wide range of dietary and climatic niches.
The results will provide novel insights into which aspects of skeletal
morphology best reflect the genetic relationships of macaques, as well as which
bones best reflect dietary, locomotor, and environmental differences among
species. Findings in extant primates also will inform the study of fossil
species where genetic information is typically not available. The research
advances the career of a female scientist, and results will be disseminated to
K-12 students from historically underrepresented groups. In addition, 3D models
will be used to educate students about how animals with different morphologies
adapt to their environments. Public outreach also will be achieved through blog
posts, workshops, and seminar presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to determine if morphological data inferred from the skeleton tracks
genetic distances, and therefore, can be a useful tool for species assessment.
Skeletons of the relatively specious and geographically widespread macaque will
be used to test the hypotheses that (1) taxonomy can be accurately predicted
based on morphological patterns, and (2) post-cranial elements may reflect
taxonomy at the same level, or better than, the skull. Data will consist of 3D
morphometric analyses of eight macaque species and three non-macaque out-groups,
each chosen for their diverse genetic, geographic and behavioral relatedness. In
cases where bones do not follow the pattern expected by genetics, additional
statistical analyses will be performed to test the extent to which skeletal
morphology is driven by climatic, dietary or locomotor differences between
species. The outcomes of this research will include a large dataset of 3D bone
scans from a single primate genus, which will be publicly shared. Moreover, the
results will provide an important bridge between the analysis of living primate
species and extinct fossil species for which only fragmentary skeletal
morphology is known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.