* 1945058
* CAREER: Topology and Geometry in Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Barry Bradlyn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2025
* USD 420,069.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education in the rapidly developing field of topological materials.
The discovery of topological phases of matter is one of the most transformative
recent breakthroughs in condensed matter physics, revealing new conceptual
surprises in established topics such as the phases of matter and the behavior of
electrons in insulators. Mathematically, topology refers to a property that
remains unchanged when a sample is distorted in some way. Topologically
nontrivial materials exhibit metallic surface states that are present regardless
of how dirty the system is. However, from a practical perspective, the promise
of devices harnessing these topological effects remains--for the most part--
unrealized, due both to the lack of tools for finding realistic topological
systems and the need for an improved understanding of the response of
topological systems to external probes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One tool that can
be leveraged to address these issues is geometry. Geometry enters into the
description of crystal symmetry (example: an equilateral triangle looks the same
after rotation by 60 degrees) and places constraints on the behavior of
materials in the presence of electromagnetic fields and strain. The focus of
this research is to use the interplay of geometry and topology to develop new
insights into topological materials. The PI will use symmetry principles to
determine ways to characterize topological materials through their behavior in
external fields. Additionally, the interplay between crystal symmetries and
electron-electron interactions in topological materials will be investigated
with the goal of enabling the discovery of the next generation of topological
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major part of this research is directly
applicable to ongoing work in experimental research laboratories. This research
is closely integrated into an education plan at the undergraduate and graduate
levels involving 1) the development of an advanced-level graduate course on
Berry phases and topology in electronic structure, which is not currently
covered in detail in current course offerings, 2) mentoring of undergraduate
students in research both over the summer and during the school year, and 3) an
outreach plan using techniques from statistical physics to study online
harassment, in order to demonstrate the applications of physics to data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research into the
interplay between crystal geometry and topological phenomena in order to develop
a deeper understanding of quantum matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of
topological materials has revolutionized the understanding of quantum matter,
demonstrating that not all insulators are created equal. The most striking
experimental feature of topological materials is the existence of protected edge
states, leading to protected non-dissipative conduction. However, topological
materials also host remarkable bulk properties, such as non-dissipative
transport coefficients, lack of localized electronic orbitals, and
counterintuitive coupling to crystal geometry. The central goal of this award is
to apply geometric data to compute previously unstudied properties of
topological systems. This will be achieved through the study
of&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Response as a probe of topology: geometric transport
coefficients such as the Hall viscosity will be studied to elucidate the
interplay between anisotropy, geometric, and hydrodynamic response in
topological systems. The proposed work will also determine the connection
between topology and nonlinear electromagnetic response in a variety of
experimentally relevant systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Role of symmetry in
free-fermion band topology: the mathematical underpinnings of topological band
theory will be extended in order better to understand the role of crystal
symmetry in allowing for topologically nontrivial bands. Furthermore, symmetry
principles will be applied to incommensurate and quasiperiodic structures to
develop the theory of topological phases in quasiperiodic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Crystal symmetries in interacting topological
systems: the constraints of crystal symmetries will be incorporated into the
study of many-body topological phases, and the theory of band representations
for the elementary excitations in correlated phases will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will serve to provide a
richer understanding of topological and strongly correlated phases of quantum
matter. A major part of this research is directly applicable to ongoing work in
experimental research laboratories. This research is closely integrated into an
education plan at the undergraduate and graduate levels involving 1) the
development of an advanced-level graduate course on Berry phases and topology in
electronic structure, which is not currently covered in detail in current course
offerings, 2) mentoring of undergraduate students in research both over the
summer and during the school year, and 3) an outreach plan using techniques from
statistical physics to study online harassment, in order to demonstrate the
applications of physics to data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.