* 1945701
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Early-life adversity: Maternal effects in a wild primate
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Jacinta Beehner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2023
* USD 23,646.00

In early life, organisms receive cues about their environment from their mother,
specifically her hormones. But how offspring respond to these signals is not
fully understood. This doctoral dissertation project will examine how the early-
life environment and maternal “stress” hormones impact development in a long-
lived, wild primate. In humans, high maternal stress can result in low offspring
birth weight, which in turn predicts poor physiological status later in life. By
studying a wild primate, this research will help identify why these connections
exist and could inform interventions designed to help prevent negative outcomes.
Additionally, this project will contribute to conservation and education at the
research site and surrounding areas, through frequent presentations to local
community members, tourists, and park management officials. The co-PI will also
continue to mentor undergraduate women in the laboratory throughout her
dissertation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When faced with adversity, mammalian mothers
have fewer resources to invest in their offspring. These mothers also experience
higher levels of “stress” hormones. These hormones, through the placenta and
breastmilk, can reach the offspring and indicate the mother’s divestment,
potentially leading to adjusted offspring development in response to these
signals. There are two possible adjustments that can occur in offspring: 1) a
delay in all aspects of development, or 2) trade-offs in development, for
example favoring growth over investment in the immune system. Using non-invasive
fecal hormone samples, this project will first identify the social and
ecological factors of the environment that result in higher maternal stress
hormones. Next, using behavioral observations, the researchers will examine if
maternal stress levels impact maternal behavior towards their offspring. Lastly,
the researchers will non-invasively assess four aspects of offspring development
(growth rate, motor skill acquisition, time to independence, and immune
function) to determine if offspring respond to maternal stress hormones by
delaying all developmental markers or by making trade-
offs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.