* 1945306
* CAREER: Toward Improved Understanding of Solar Eruptive Events
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Maria Kazachenko, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 02/28/2025
* USD 699,558.00

This five-year CAREER project aims to better understand the physical processes
of energy storage and release that drive solar eruptions, and hence affect the
space weather. Determining the details of the energy accumulation and release on
the Sun during solar eruptions is one of the most important problems in solar-
heliospheric physics; it addresses two out of four science goals from the
2013-2022 Solar &amp; Space Physics Decadal Survey, namely "determine the
origins of the Sun's activity and predict the variations in the space
environment," and "discover and characterize fundamental processes that occur
within the heliosphere and the Universe." The research investigations will
combine recently developed numerical simulations framework from the Coronal
Global Evolutionary Model (CGEM) with unprecedented quality observations of the
NSF-funded Daniel K. Inoue Solar Telescope (DKIST). The CGEM is one of the most
advanced data-driven (DD) methods that implements observations into simulations.
The DKIST, scheduled to start operating in 2020, will become the largest solar
telescope in the world. The CAREER project will allow to reach a new level of
understanding of solar eruptions using a synergy between novel DKIST
observations and recently developed simulations framework. The PI has unique
science expertise and a leadership position to make this project successful: she
is a member of the DKIST Science Working Group, a Co-I of the CGEM project, and
has worked extensively on active regions magnetic fields. The project will fund
undergraduate students, two PhD students and one postdoctoral fellow, and
support the PI's mission to establish a strong solar research program, fostering
connection between research at NSO and education at CU Boulder in preparation
for DKIST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five-year CAREER project aims to accomplish
the following science goals: (1) conduct DD numerical simulations of several
observed, evolving flaring mini active regions (coronal bright points, CBP) and
an active region (AR); (2) validate these simulations using multi-wavelength
observations; and, (3) quantify key AR and CBP properties, including spatial and
temporal distribution of coronal magnetic energy, current density and helicity
before and after the flare. The project will leverage the PI's existing effort
to create one of the most realistic, observationally-driven simulations of the
flaring ARs, allowing to relate the observable photospheric field evolution to
the evolution of unobserved coronal field and leading to a deeper understanding
of solar eruptions and potentially their trigger mechanism. The PI's long-term
career educational goal is to increase diversity in heliophysics and STEM in
general. In this CAREER project, diversity goals will be advanced by three
complementary efforts, namely: (1) the PI will expand highly-successful CU-STARs
(University of Colorado Science, Technology and Astronomy Recruits) outreach
program by recruiting a group of bilingual undergraduate students and developing
new heliophysics/astronomy modules in Spanish for CU-STARs outreach activities;
these activities will be integrated into high schools in different parts of
Colorado, where the Hispanic population reaches up to 50-90%; (2) the PI will
lead an effort to bring a group of K-12 students from South Texas and
undergraduate students from University of Colorado Boulder (CU Boulder) to learn
about and conduct outreach activities during two total and one annular solar
eclipses in Chile and the US (Texas); (3) The PI will mentor students and
postdoctoral fellows in solar research and involve them in the above activities.
The research and EPO agenda of this CAREER project supports the Strategic Goals
of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.