* 1945431
* CAREER: Understanding the Effects of Bedrock Fractures and Weathering on Shallow and Deep-seated Landslides
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Seulgi Moon, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 12/31/2024
* USD 492,373.00

Landslides are one of the most significant geologic hazards that currently
threaten human society and infrastructure. As landslide hazards increase as a
result of urban expansion, climate variability, and disturbances of land cover,
understanding the mechanisms and controls of landslides will be critical for the
prediction and assessment of future hazards. Although mechanistic models are
somewhat successful in predicting landslide susceptibility, scientific experts
still do not know what controls the exact location, size, depth, and, in some
cases, the timing of landslides. Moreover, the role of underlying weathered
bedrock on subsurface hydrology and landslide occurrence is not well understood.
To date, the influence of bedrock fracture patterns and weathering extent on
landslide patterns is not adequately quantified. This project aims to improve
predictions of landslide occurrence and characteristics by incorporating a
fundamental and quantitative understanding of bedrock influences on landslides.
Results of the research will be disseminated through teaching, community
service, and public outreach. The project will contribute to enhancing academic
diversity by encouraging the participation of underrepresented minority students
and supporting the early-career development of a female faculty member, a
graduate student, and a postdoc. The investigators will integrate research and
teaching efforts through the incorporation of landslide studies in undergraduate
courses. They will develop an innovative teaching-outreach module for UCLA’s
physical sciences division that will strengthen undergraduates’ learning and
engage K-12 students through topics in “landslide science.”
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess the role of bedrock properties in the
occurrences and characteristics of landslides, a robust model of slope stability
is required that incorporates the structural and hydromechanical properties of
the critical zone, that is the heterogeneous, near surface environment in which
complex interactions involving rock, soil, water, air, and living organisms
regulate the natural habitat and determine the availability of life-sustaining
resources. The investigators plan to incorporate 1) the effects of bedrock
fracture patterns and weathering in the critical zone and 2) the transient
response of subsurface hydrology on the propensity of shallow and deep-seated
landslides. They will synthesize existing datasets of landslides, bedrock, soil,
weathering, and fracture patterns, as well as hydrologic properties and
signatures within catchments in California and Oregon. These datasets, augmented
by their fieldwork, will enable them to develop an integrated approach that
resolves the influence of the bedrock weathering and fractures on subsurface
hydrology and landslide potential--both the likelihood and extent. This
integrated modeling of critical zone structure, subsurface hydrology, and slope
failure will allow them to evaluate the effects of 3D topography and subsurface
structure on slope stability for shallow and deep-seated
landslides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.