* 1945986
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing Multiple Lines of Evidence for Gene Flow in Archaeological Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Benjamin Auerbach, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 23,113.00

Reconstructing the movements and interactions of humans in the past informs our
broader understanding of the biological and cultural processes that have shaped
human populations through time. In this doctoral dissertation project, the
investigator will compare two methods used to reconstruct human population
dynamics in the past based on skeletal data. Understanding the relative merits
of these biological methods will support more complex analyses that rely on both
biological and cultural data from past populations. The interdisciplinary
project draws upon theory and methods from evolutionary anthropology, genetics,
statistics, and bioarchaeology. Through free and low-cost courses and outreach
talks, a broad audience, including members of descendant communities, interested
members of the public, and underserved students in STEM fields, will engage in
discussions about the complexities of human population dynamics and the
relevance of these processes in the modern world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate two methods for identifying signatures of gene flow
from osteological data, in order to address larger questions about the social,
cultural and biological aspects of population interactions in the past. The two
methods compared in this study determine the presence of gene flow by looking at
two of its potential effects: a greater degree of similarity in morphology
between groups (the biological distance model), and an increase in group
morphological variation (the quantitative genetic model). The study will address
three primary research questions: Does the inference of gene flow differ between
studies using two different models to investigate the same skeletal remains? Are
important nuances about group interactions captured using one biological method
that are not inferable from the other, or do both methods need to be used
together to achieve better resolution about gene flow? And finally, how does
each method compare to hypotheses of migration established from material
culture? These questions will be addressed by comparing the results of two
analyses in two different archaeological contexts within a region with a well-
researched archaeological record. The first context has evidence from material
culture that is indicative of past migration (and possible gene flow) between
groups, and the second has material culture evidence indicating cultural
separation and likely no gene flow. Through these tests, the investigators will
evaluate the ability of individual models to estimate gene flow in contexts with
no written records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.