* 1945249
* CAREER: Visualizing single-chain conformation and dynamics of bottlebrush polymers in the bulk state
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Muzhou Wang, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2025
* USD 504,737.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are used everywhere in our
daily lives in almost every application imaginable. After decades of research,
it is still nearly impossible to directly see the shape of a single polymer
molecule and how it moves in its native environment, because the typical sizes
of polymer chains are too small. This project uses the next generation of
optical techniques called super-resolution microscopy to achieve this goal of
directly imaging how single polymers behave in the solid state. While these
techniques have been explored in several biological applications for achieving
tens of nanometer resolutions, their use in materials science has been much more
limited. This work will focus on a specific class of polymers called
bottlebrushes, which have attracted interest for photonic materials and drug
delivery, and happen to be a perfect size to be imaged by super-resolution. This
project will directly address the question of how the structure and behavior of
single polymers connect to the properties of the material at everyday length
scales. Beyond the fundamental understanding that this offers, it will also
enable efficient design of new materials for societal benefit. In addition, the
further application of super-resolution microscopy to materials science will
make it easier for others in this community to adopt these methods to their own
research problems. In line with this theme of nanotechnology and materials
science, this project will also support new curriculum development for Junior
Science Club, an afterschool activity for underrepresented youths of grades 3-5.
Graduate students and volunteers across campus will mentor students weekly over
new 6-8 week modules, which will be publicly available and ready for adoption by
others offering similar programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The connection between single-chain behavior and
macroscopic properties is a central tenet in our modern understanding of polymer
physics. However, direct visualization of single polymers is difficult
particularly in application-relevant configurations, because single polymer
chains are typically nanometers in size. This project tackles the grand
challenge of imaging the conformation and dynamics of single polymer chains
within a bulk material. The experiments will utilize super-resolution
microscopy, which can image structures at tens of nanometer resolution, both
non-invasively and with chemical specificity through fluorescent labeling. The
specific polymers in this study are bottlebrushes, exploring the conformational
rigidity in the bulk vs. previous dilute solution results, and directly
visualizing entanglement dynamics. The questions posed here can be directly
answered by visualization of single chains, while other techniques such as
scattering, rheology, and simulation can only probe these questions
indirectly&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.