* 1945436
* CAREER: Prediction and Reward in Auditory Statistical Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Psyche Loui, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2025
* USD 564,878.00

Every human culture creates music, which drives a multi-billion-dollar industry
worldwide. The societal impact is also important, as music is tightly linked to
social bonding. For groups of individuals, making music together can promote
empathy and cooperative behavior. The positive experience of music is known to
depend, in part, on predictability (the knowledge of what comes next). However,
little is known about how predictable musical features (e.g., melody, harmony,
and rhythm) come to be rewarding. This CAREER award uses an unfamiliar tonal
system to explore how people learn to respond to novel acoustic relationships.
More generally, it evaluates the roles of prediction and reward in auditory
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work exploring how people learn to
respond to structured sequences of auditory stimuli have exposed participants to
novel features and then monitored changes in subjective ratings of reward value.
However, even new compositions use familiar structural features, which activate
a large knowledge base of predictions acquired implicitly throughout our lives.
This poses a serious confound to the study of prediction and reward. To
circumvent this challenge, the investigator will use a novel system, known as
the Bohlen-Pierce scale. By exposing participants to novel, acoustically
controlled sounds, the investigator can test whether reward value can be
acquired solely from newly formed predictions. The investigator will also
compare how typical listeners and listeners with one of two auditory/perceptual
disorders (amusia and anhedonia) learn novel sound patterns. The overall aim is
to understand the dual roles of repetition and variation of sound patterns in
driving learning, memory, and reward. The work merges perceptual testing,
functional MRI, and neuropsychological testing with sound design. These
activities will be integrated with an educational plan to develop a unique
Bachelor of Science degree program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.