* 1945038
* CAREER: Probing the High Energy Frontier With the CMS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Christopher Rogan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 12/31/2024
* USD 759,981.00

A complete understanding of the physics describing interactions at the smallest,
subatomic lengths is elusive. Through the high-energy proton-proton collisions
of CERN’s Large Hadron Collider (LHC), we can momentarily open a window to the
highest energies known and simultaneously probe these tiny sizes, providing the
opportunity to directly study fundamental physics in an otherwise inaccessible
regime. This work includes a program of research at the University of Kansas
(KU) which confronts open questions at these high-energy scales using existing
and future data from the CMS experiment at the LHC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rogan’s KU group are members of the Compact Muon Solenoid
(CMS) experiment at the LHC, with most of the activities included in this
project related to this effort. The project has two primary components: the
analysis and interpretation of data collected by CMS, and the CMS detector
itself. In both cases, there are elements that focus on already collected data
and the operation of the experiment, with others looking forward to new
approaches to analyzing data and future upgrades to the detector. A significant
portion of this work is for a new comprehensive search for physics beyond the
Standard Model related to new symmetries and Dark Matter, which includes
development of a novel analysis paradigm that incorporates elements of
unsupervised machine learning into searches for new physics, with proof-of-
concept demonstrations planned with the existing CMS dataset. The group is also
developing new, precision timing detectors for CMS, which will introduce an
additional dimension to event reconstruction, facilitating searches for new
physics involving long-lived particles. The group is also studying the timing
reconstruction performance of the existing CMS electromagnetic calorimeter, with
the goal of mitigating degradations in resolution through an improved
reconstruction algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The KU group is also focused on
two initiatives targeting the public and the KU academic community. With KU
undergraduates, the group is developing the "Fantasy Physics" outreach project,
where students can compete with teams comprised of selected particle physics
experiments in an online fantasy-sports-inspired format. The group also
developed an inter-departmental "Learning Machine Learning" forum, which
includes lectures, tutorials, and seminars serving members of the KU academic
community who are interested in incorporating contemporary machine learning in
their research. The group is also active in disseminating its research through
public talks and outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.