* 1945924
* EAGER: Navigating Unmanned Underwater Vehicles (UUVs) at the Ice-water Boundary
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Brice Loose, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Olivia Lee
* 08/31/2022
* USD 293,134.00

In the Arctic, air-sea interactions and biological-chemical processes in the
ocean are strongly affected by the extent and thickness of sea ice cover.
Presently, due to safety concerns, data collection involving Unmanned Underwater
Vehicles (UUVs) in the Arctic typically operate far away from the ice-water
boundary and are recovered using customized systems. As a consequence, critical
scientific processes (e.g., phytoplankton blooms and air-sea exchanges at
offshore leads in the sea ice) are under-sampled. Challenges still exist for
navigating UUVs in the ice-covered ocean, especially in proximity to the ice
shelf. The goal of this project is to develop and test a safe, long-distance
autonomous UUV-based instrument for under-ice observations and data collection
by designing and implementing a new advanced system for near ice-water interface
measurements through the use of multiple sensors and in situ decision-making
including artificial intelligence algorithms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to develop and test an enhanced Unmanned Underwater Vehicle (UUV) system
with an accurate ice-relative localization solution, an in-situ collision
avoidance re-planning mechanism, and a robust water-opening detection
capability. Specifically, the primary objective is to develop new underwater
autonomous sampling capabilities that will provide critical measurements and
observations for advancing our knowledge about under-ice biological productivity
and the physical-chemical transports at the air-ice-water boundary. To make it
adaptable to a variety of UUVs, a suite of low size, weight, power, and cost
(SWAP-C) sensors will be selected, and the algorithms will be developed using
open-source software. The system will localize the vehicle relative to the ice
via fusing the inertial measurements and the perception information (e.g., ice
topography, texture, and air bubbles). During under-ice operations, the system
will also detect ice keels and extrusions, then adapt its path for collision
avoidance if necessary. Finally, the designed navigation system will perform a
robust detection of water openings in the sea ice. This will allow a safe UUV
surfacing event for transmitting data, updating mission plans, and collecting
unique cross-boundary measurements at the ice openings. In this project, the
developed navigation system will be integrated on a portable underwater robot
and tested in a frozen freshwater pond and a subpolar lake. A compact science
sensor suite will also be attached to search for under-ice blooms at the ice-
water interface. This project also supports an early career scientist and
includes a commitment to education and training by involving undergraduate
students in data processing and analysis, as well as outreach and science
communication activities that engage a broader audience using varied community
and media outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.