* 1945825
* GP EXTRA: MINORITIES STRIVING AND PURSUING HIGHER DEGREES OF SUCCESS in GEO REU (MS PHD?S-GEO REU) PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Ashanti Johnson, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,029.00

Numerous reports from the President's Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology (PCAST) and the National Research Council (NRC) have documented the
need to increase diversity within STEM disciplines as being vital to our
nation's innovation agenda, economic prosperity, and global competitiveness.
Although slow progress in broadening participation in some STEM disciplines is
being made, the geosciences community still has a long way to go before the
number of African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, and persons with
disabilities are earning degrees and pursuing careers in the geosciences at a
level that is consistent with their demographic representation. Both recruitment
of new underrepresented minority (URM) students into STEM majors and retention
of those students who are already in the education and career pipeline are
needed to make progress on this goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Texas at Arlington (UTA) and the Institute for Broadening Participation (IBP)
are implementing a 3-year program to provide virtual and on-site professional
development, networking, community building and mentoring activities to 45 URM
students who have participated in geoscience-related Research Experiences for
Undergraduate (REU) Site programs. The goals of this program are focused on
retention of students who have already demonstrated an interest in the
geosciences, but who are at risk of leaving the field because of isolation, lack
of role models, and lack of mentors who can help guide them to the next stages
of their professional success. The "Minorities Striving and Pursuing Higher
Degrees of Success in GEO REU" (MS PHD'S-GEO REU) program builds on a successful
pilot effort, leveraging previous NSF investments to build model programs for
recruitment, retention, and leadership development of traditionally
underrepresented students in STEM disciplines. The program uses evidence-based
mentoring concepts that are rooted in the theories of situated learning and
authentic learning. Career exposure and professional socialization activities
are embedded. A rigorous recruitment, application, and selection process is
being used to identify three cohorts (15 each) of students from a national pool
of REU Site participants. The program involves two main phases: 1) on-site
mentored professional development in conjunction with the annual Fall meeting of
the American Geophysical Union; and 2) virtual and face-to-face mentoring and
networking at discipline-specific conferences, supported by on-going virtual
professional development webinars. Formative and summative evaluation components
are included in the project design. Impact evaluation studies will investigate
whether students participating in the MS PHD'S-GEO REU program show greater
persistence in STEM and the geosciences, as well as more informed career
decision-making, compared with other REU students who are not selected for the
program.