* 1945661
* CAREER: CAS: Spectroscopic Investigations of Biological Tellurium and Selenium Detoxification
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Kelly Chacon, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 03/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

Tellurium (Te) is a toxic chemical element that poses a potential problem as an
environmental contaminant as a result of its increased use in electronics,
mining, batteries, and optics. A set of related tellurium ion resistence (TeR)
proteins have been discovered in bacteria that are able to survive exposure to
tellurium ions. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Kelly N. Chacón from Reed College to use
cutting edge light-based measurements to characterize the structural and
biochemical properties of these bacterial TeR proteins. Understanding these
proteins helps explain the relatively unknown biological reactions of tellurium,
while exploring potential bioremediation methods for mining Te as a precious
resource and detoxifying Te from contaminated soil. With this award, Dr. Chacón
uses an assertive, multifaceted approach to increase the retention of students
from underrepresented minority groups in the science, technology, engineering,
and mathematical (STEM) disciplines. Her program increases inclusiveness in the
STEM curriculum by emphasizing practices based on the principles of
belongingness, capacity, and interest. She is hosting a yearly two-day
conference and workshop that will bring graduate students of color and “other”
(including diverse gender, low-social economic status and first generation
groups) from across the country to Reed College to provide a broader view of
science and scientists to students at this small liberal arts college.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of tellurium-resistant (TeR) bacteria has
led to the identification of a plasmid-encoded tellurium-resistance operon.
There is a large gap in our knowledge of structure and function of the proteins
expressed from the TeR genes. Furthermore, a paucity of information exists on
the biochemical role of Te, despite its similarity to the other essential
chalcogens (oxygen, sulfur, and selenium). The soluble anions tellurite
(TeO3[2-]) and tellurate (TeO4[2-]) are xenobiotic compounds. Little is
understood about the biochemistry of their toxicity and efflux. Bacteria must
contend with exposure to non-essential toxic metals and expend energy toward
rapid detoxification, and many have developed resistance to Te. Dr. Kelly N.
Chacón will apply a combination of fundamental biochemistry,
Selenium/Tellurium/Arsenic k-edge Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure
(EXAFS), Cryo-electron microscopy (Cryo EM), and crystallography to characterize
the essential TeR protein components and begin to fill in the blanks of
fundamental Te biochemistry. In addition to giving new insight into chalcogen
bioinorganic chemistry, understanding of the TeR proteins could potentially
provide an intriguing Te bioremediation method for mining this precious resource
and for detoxifying contaminated soil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.