* 1945271
* CAREER: Photomodulation of Polymer Molecular Weight Distribution
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Melanie Chiu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 03/31/2025
* USD 738,373.00

With this CAREER Award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Melanie Chiu at Stony Brook
University in New York is developing a new method for controlling polymer
dispersity using light to mediate the chemical reactivity of polymer chain-ends.
Polymers, long chains of small molecular units called monomers, are essential
and ever-present in our everyday lives, from industrially-manufactured plastics,
to naturally occurring cellulose in plants and plant-derived materials, like
cotton. The material properties of such polymers, including stiffness, melting
temperature, electrical conductivity, and degradation profile are often affected
by the polymer’s dispersity, or the uniformity of the molecular chain lengths
within a given sample. Controlling polymer dispersity—whether the chains are of
similar or dissimilar lengths—is a promising means of tailoring a polymer’s
physical properties without changing its molecular structure. This research is
developing a one-pot system in which the polymerization initiator is turned on
or off with light. This photo-switch results in two states: one that yields low
dispersity polymers and another one that yields high dispersity polymers. Once
these polymers are made, the research project features studies on how different
reaction parameters affect optimize the dispersities that can be accessed. The
second part of the research project focuses on systematically studying how
polymer dispersity affects polymer properties. While these efforts focus on
specific types of polymers, polyvinyl ethers, the last research activity expands
the concept of using light to control polymer chain-end reactivity to form other
types of polymers. Results associated with this award have the potential to
significantly impact various fields of science and engineering where molecular
control over polymer properties is of interest. Professor Chiu fosters
integration of research and education by developing curriculum materials in
collaboration with the New York State Master Chemistry Teacher's program to
enhance the education of high school chemistry students throughout New York
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is focused on establishing a
deterministic method for photoswitchable regulation of polymer dispersity and
its applications to block copolymer synthesis by photochemically manipulating
the rate of chain propagation versus deactivation of the chain-end in controlled
cationic vinyl ether polymerizations. The project features the development of
photochromic Bronsted acid initiators that yield polymers with low dispersity in
one photoisomeric state, and high dispersity in the other photoisomeric state.
In the first objective, the mechanism by which the carboxy-functionalized
dithienylethenes enable photocontrol over polymer dispersity in cationic vinyl
ether polymerizations is studied, and a comprehensive kinetic model is
constructed to guide further optimization of the system. The second objective
focuses on the application of the carboxy-functionalized dithienylethene
initiators to the synthesis of block copolymers and investigation of their
materials properties. The final objective expands the concept of externally
manipulating relative rates of chain propagation and chain-end deactivation to
achieve control over dispersity in other types of controlled polymerization
reactions. The chemistry in this work expands the repertoire of polymerization
reaction parameters that can be externally modulated and enables a better
understanding of how dispersity influences polymer
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.