* 1945871
* The Global Circuits Paradox
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Earle Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/29/2024
* USD 805,788.00

The long-term sustainability of Earth calls increasingly for a global
perspective. This research involving simultaneous measurements of the two global
circuits is decidedly global in nature. The two globally invariant (at any given
time) quantities under study are (1) the ionospheric potential, representing the
totality of electrified weather and (2) Schumann resonance activity, the global
totality of lightning, both of which are experienced by all of humanity.
Thunderstorms and lightning are both threats to all human activity, and so
deserve to be monitored. The monitoring of the Earth’s Schumann resonances lends
itself naturally to international cooperation. Both global electrical circuits
have been shown to be responsive to surface air temperature on a variety of time
scales, with much relevance on longer time scales to fossil fuel consumption and
global warming given these natural frameworks for global monitoring. The
observed trends will be of value to policy makers. The interest in the variable
source strengths of continental “chimneys” (continental scale regions of strong
convection) is also directly linked to the large-scale circulation of the
atmosphere, and hence global weather patterns are likely linked with the global
circuit variations under investigation here. Thunderstorms are important players
in global warming because they produce large areas of cirrus cloud that affect
incoming solar radiation, and also redistribute water vapor from the planetary
boundary layer to the upper troposphere where it is radiatively more important.
A critical aspect of global heat balance also lies with tropospheric aerosol and
this study is the first to take on the monitoring of cloud condensation nuclei
(CCN) on the spatial scale of the continental chimneys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
large body of evidence, some of it a century old, supports the view that the
ionospheric potential characterization of the DC (“Direct Current”) global
electrical circuit is maximum over the diurnal cycle in Universal Time (UT) when
the American continent is electrically predominant near 19-20 UT. In contrast, a
comparable body of evidence shows that global lightning activity, and the AC
(“Alternating Current”) global circuit (aka, Schumann resonances) is maximum
when Africa is electrically predominant (14-15 UT). This apparent contradiction
is referred to hereafter as the “global circuits paradox”. This research is
aimed at a resolution of this paradox. The thesis of this investigation is that
the “global circuits paradox” has long gone unresolved because essential
quantities have not been examined in comparisons of contributions from America
and Africa, the dominant chimneys driving the global circuits. Thermodynamic
contrasts have previously been examined and fall short in resolving the paradox.
Electrified shower clouds were identified as possible fundamental sources
additional to thunderstorms for the DC global circuit by C.T.R. Wilson, but
careful comparisons between America and Africa are only recently possible with
satellite and lightning observations. Increased pollution in the form of CCN
have been shown to increase lightning flash rate in thunderstorms in both
observations and models, but only recently have CCN been accessible on the
continental scales relevant to the global circuits. In this study, coordinated
measurements of the DC and AC global circuits when Africa and America are most
prominent, together with electrified shower clouds and CCN (and with appropriate
controls on thermodynamic quantities) to resolve the global circuits
paradox.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.