* 1945092
* CAREER: Bottlebrush polymers as gateways to multiresponsive structures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Yoan Simon, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2025
* USD 581,187.00

Part 1: Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living cells control what
enters them and what leaves using carefully regulated transport across membrane
pores made up of transmembrane proteins, which act as gatekeepers. In doing so,
cells are able to assess what goes on in their environment and respond
accordingly. Inspired by this function, the objective of this CAREER project is
to develop unique strategies that enable the introduction of responsive pore-
forming structures into polymeric vesicles. Specifically, the work aims to use
tube-like macromolecules, known as core-shell bottlebrushes, to emulate the
gating function of transmembrane proteins and enable a new class of materials
that respond to mechanical activation, optical stimulation, changes in acidity,
etc. These cell-like structures will help devise multiresponsive systems that
may ultimately be capable of mimicking senses such as touch, sight, and smell.
Building upon the results of this research endeavor, one can readily envision to
use similar systems for applications such as targeted drug delivery, sensing, as
well as active filtration devices for high-value applications. Concomitantly
with these scholarly activities, community events will be used to promote STEM
education to the general public and, particularly, underrepresented minorities.
These activities will include initiatives that transcend the arts and sciences,
encourage budding grade-school scientists to become makers, and provide graduate
students with the tools to be scientific/technological global thinkers and
leaders of tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying goal of this research is to
comprehend the crucial phenomena directing the co-assembly of blocky linear and
bottlebrush (BB) amphiphilic copolymers towards the fabrication of bioinspired
multiresponsive polymersomes. To this end, an integrative and directed strategy
that relies on three connected aims was devised: (i) structural evaluation of
amphiphilic triblock copolymers (e.g. stiffness, interdigitation, side-chain
length), (ii) understanding of the co-assembly of amphiphilic linear and BB
block copolymers, and (iii) bestowing of multi-stimuli-responsiveness to
polymersomes by incorporating pore-forming BB triblocks in membranes using
stimuli such as pH, light, and mechanical force. The numerous parameters that
can be controlled in BBs, often orthogonally, such as persistence length,
grafting length and density, make them especially alluring for this project.
This work aims to bring about hitherto underexplored aspects of the self-
assembly of complex polymeric architectures and their co-assembly with
conventional linear block copolymers. The broader results of this work may be
implemented in the fabrication of intricate, compartmentalized polymersomes that
emulate cellular processes, but also in systems such active filtration membranes
and/or targeted delivery systems that rely on on-demand cargo release. The PI
will also implement several activities to encourage diversity and promote STEM
universally and enhance participation of underrepresented minorities. These
activities will include maker conferences and hackathons, as well as blending
arts and sciences by exploiting the inherent visual appeal of stimuli-responsive
materials. Promotions of global views of sciences and inclusion of active
learning in curricula are amongst the other integrated objectives of this CAREER
project.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.