* 1945479
* CAREER: Climate-change vulnerability in the Marshall Islands: learning from the past &amp; inspiring a new future
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Diane Thompson, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 804,696.00

Low-lying islands of the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) are projected to
become uninhabitable by 2040 due to seawater flooding of their drinking water
supply. Several factors threaten the freshwater resources of the RMI. These
include high rates of local sea-level rise, year-to-year sea-level extremes,
flooding during storms, and droughts. In addition, the seasonal northward shift
of the tropical rain belt is critical for renewing the RMI water supply each
year. Planning for the future in this and other low-lying island nations in the
Pacific requires an improved understanding of the response of the tropical
Pacific to climate change. Those responses include changes in temperatures,
winds, precipitation, and sea level. The research goal of this study is to use
climate data from corals, sediments, and models to document the response of the
tropical Pacific to past natural climate change. The integrated education and
research aspects of this CAREER program will build on existing partnerships with
the Biosphere 2 (B2), Tucson Unified School District (TUSD), and the Marshall
Islands Marine Resource Authority (MIMRA). This study will improve our
understanding of the risks of drought and salt-water flooding in the Marshall
Islands, train the next generation of scientists, and inspire solutions for an
improved future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This CAREER program will expand the
network of high-resolution records to the northwest equatorial Pacific Ocean,
developing the first coral paleoclimate reconstructions from the Republic of the
Marshall Islands (RMI). These coral records, which provide a monthly history of
temperature, salinity, and wind conditions, are particularly critical in this
data-poor region. Further, RMI sits on the axis of the Pacific Decadal
Oscillation and at the northern limit of the Intertropical Convergence Zone
(ITCZ), providing a critical end member for assessing their climate impact.
Finally, westerly wind events are common in this region and drive severe coastal
flooding, making these sites promising candidates for the application of a novel
wind proxy to improve our understanding of trade-wind variability and inundation
risk. This CAREER program will utilize new and existing cores from living and
fossil coral boulders to develop the first coral-based reconstructions of ITCZ
variability (Objective 1), last-millennium hydroclimate (Objective 2) and
inundation risk (Objective 3) in the RMI, and assess Pacific hydroclimate
dynamics over the last millennium (Objective 4). These results will therefore
improve our understanding of tropical Pacific hydroclimate and water resources
(e.g., drought and inundation risk) under natural and anthropogenic climate
changes. This integrated science and education program will also provide unique
research and educational opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and K-12
students in both the USA and RMI. Through progressive and cooperative solution-
oriented learning activities, this program will bring together Arizona and
Marshallese communities to develop and evaluate new K-12 educational modules,
train a diverse group of next generation marine scientists, and share powerful
Marshallese stories to promote urgency for solutions. These modules will create
hands-on activities with 3D printed corals, and interactive virtual reality
tours of reefs and coastal communities under a changing climate. To maximize the
impact of these educational activities, the resources and outcomes will be
disseminated at professional development workshops for teachers in TUSD and RMI
schools. The material will also be integrated into the B2 website and marine
educational program (reaching over 100,000+ visitors and 10,000+ K-12 students
each year) and posted on Carleton Cutting Edge website for educators
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.