* 1945521
* CAREER: Nature-Inspired Strategies for Protein Stabilization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Sarah Perry, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/28/2025
* USD 514,904.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Proteins and enzymes perform a wide range of
functions inside cells and tissues for long periods of time, and are able to do
so at body temperatures. However, most purified proteins used in scientific
endeavors, or are present as vaccines or other medical treatments are extremely
sensitive to temperature, and must be kept refrigerated. This need to maintain
refrigeration during the storage and transportation of these materials
represents a significant expense and logistical challenge for both doctors and
patients. This proposal will study how different materials can be used to
encapsulate such therapeutic proteins to improve their shelf life and
temperature sensitivity. This work will also use this funding to create new
educational opportunities for students in the lab, and help to develop science-
based activities that students at the university could bring home to inspire
scientific curiosity in their
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; This
proposal draws upon inspiration from nature, where liquid-liquid phase separated
granules in cells are able to selectively sequester specific proteins and other
biomolecules, and hold these targets in storage during times of stress. This
work will use sequence-controlled polypeptide based complex coacervates as a
synthetically accessible mimic for these biological condensates. The effect of
charge sequence, hydrophobicity, and hydrogen bonding on the phase behavior of
the resulting coacervates will be studied. Furthermore, the effect of these
various parameters on the ability of complex coacervate phases to uptake
different members of the caspase family of apoptotic enzymes will be evaluated,
and correlated with the potential for the different coacervate environments to
improve the thermal stability and shelf life of these enzymes. The goal of this
effort is to enable the development of general strategies for engineering
biomimetic materials for applications ranging from biosensors to thermostable
vaccines. Additionally, this proposal will increase educational opportunities at
the interface of biology, materials, and engineering at the undergraduate and
graduate levels and engage female and minority students through outreach
activities with the college's Diversity Programs Office. A new “Innovation in a
Box” program will challenge undergraduate outreach leaders to develop easily
translatable modules for use in the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.