* 1945276
* CAREER: Quantum Embedding of Wave-Function Methods as Path to High-Accuracy Thermochemistry in Heterogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Gerald Knizia, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 02/28/2025
* USD 576,853.00

Gerald Knizia of Pennsylvania State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop an accurate
and efficient theoretical approach to heterogenous catalysis. The focus is on
reactions that take place on a hard surface, such as a metal, which acts as a
catalyst. Catalysts are used in the production of household products and almost
all industrial chemicals as they help speed up the chemical synthesis. Almost
25% of the global industrial-sector energy consumption is due to the catalytic
production of basic chemicals and fuels alone! A sound microscopic understanding
of the processes of chemical reactions at the smallest scale, obtained by
computational analysis, could help substantially in developing new catalysts or
improving existing ones. However, a key challenge is that the present
computational methods applicable to surface reactions are not accurate enough to
reliably identify which of the many competing reaction pathways are actually
taking place in reality. This research addresses this challenge by enabling the
use of high-accuracy computational methods from small-molecule theoretical
chemistry, for use in the complex environments of realistic catalysis at
surfaces. The research activities are integrated with an educational approach
aimed at senior undergraduate and incoming graduate students. The goal of the
educational activities is to help these students become proficient users of
computational techniques. The broader technical impacts of the research may
result in improvement in industrial processes (e.g., reducing waste, increasing
energy efficiency, reducing dependence on imported precious metals, etc.), and
thereby contribute to the economy of independence of the US. The educational
materials will be made available to everyone, and may provide disadvantaged but
bright students with poor access to educational resources with a starting point
for learning powerful computing techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concretely, the research targets the
development of wave-function based electronic structure methods which have
sufficient accuracy (~1 kcal/mol in relative energies) to allow for definitive
thermochemical calculations on the surfaces of hard materials, such as current
industrial heterogeneous catalysts. First, a suitable quantum embedding
framework, based on the Density Matrix Embedding Theory (DMET) is developed. The
method is specialized for embedding a single target fragment. This allows the
polarization functions needed by thermochemical wave function methods and
facilitates to be introduced using fast Kohn-Sham DFT for the mean-field
description of the environment. Second, high-accuracy local coupled cluster
methods will be developed which are capable of being used in the presence of the
embedding. Third, the techniques from the first two steps will be adjusted to
incorporate a coupling to an actual periodic surface system via imposing fixed
boundary condition from ideal bulk/surface systems (as opposed to imposing
periodic boundary conditions on the target system
itself).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.