* 1945639
* CAREER: Factorization homology and quantum topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* David Ayala, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2025
* USD 325,039.00

This CAREER award funds a research project that will develop factorization
homology, a mathematical device for organizing long-distance/long-time
observables in quantum physics. Scale-independence and locality are two
favorable and tenable features of quantum observables. Scale-independence lends
to stable phases of matter that can be codified via a field of mathematics
called topology. Observables possess locality if each observation on a large
region of space-time is determined by those on smaller domains, such as by
point- or line-observables. Point-, line-, plane-, … -observables organize as a
mathematical entity known as a higher category, which is a higher-dimensional
graph. Factorization homology is a device that assembles such localized
observables to global observables on space-time and it possesses several
structural features that give a theory advantage once cast as so. Generally, it
offers conceptual and combinatorial access to long-distance/long-time quantum
theory, notably even to ones that are not determined by their point-observables.
To integrate research and education between students and researchers, and to
increase mathematics and physics activity in the EPSCoR State of Montana and its
surrounding states, the PI will organize two conferences. These conferences will
bring together renowned researchers in mathematical physics, and will draw
regional participation. The PI will compile and disseminate literature for bias-
sensitive selection processes for such events. The PI will produce and publicly
post two video series. One series will behold research-level mathematics
generated through activities related to this award. The other series will be for
experimental in-class instruction for upper-division mathematics classes.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project continues the development and explicit
identification of the theory of factorization homology for higher categories,
partly in collaboration with John Francis. Factorization homology can be
conceived as the study of sheaves on moduli spaces of stratifications, much like
Beilinson-Drinfeld’s construction of conformal blocks in terms of sheaves on Ran
spaces. One goal is to fulfill an essential aspect of this theory: the exact
relationship between orthogonal groups and higher categorical adjunctions. A
consequence of such a relationship is a proof of the cobordism hypothesis, of
Baez-Dolan and Lurie, after Atiyah. Another goal is to recover known, and
establish new, manifold and tangle invariants from representation theoretic
data. Expected examples of such include the Jones polynomial, and Reshetikhin-
Turaev's invariant. Now, factorization homology depends continuously in
diffeomorphisms/isotopies; it possesses subtle functoriality and local-to-global
principles; it is expected to carry natural filtrations as well as a general
form of Poincare/Koszul duality. Such a goal thusly lends advantage for
computational access to manifold and tangle invariants arising through
representation theory. Such a goal also lends to surprising dualities between
state-sum type topological quantum field theories and sigma-model type field
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.