* 1945676
* CAREER: Accurate, Reliable, and Routine First-Principles Prediction of the Structure and Stability of Molecular Crystal Polymorphs
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Robert DiStasio, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 02/28/2025
* USD 650,000.00

Professor Robert A. DiStasio Jr. of Cornell University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop methods which enable accurate and reliable
predictions of the structure and stability of molecular crystals. Molecular
crystals are ubiquitous and versatile materials that are used in alternative
energy and the environmental sciences, pharmaceuticals and medicine, as well as
technology and industry. Of crucial importance to these applications is the fact
that molecular crystals often have many accessible polymorphsâ€”alternative
structures that are nearly identical in stability yet display drastically
different physical and chemical properties. When used to improve device
performance or enable novel functions in alternative energy applications, these
distinct properties can be very beneficial. The existence of polymorphs can also
have devastating and potentially catastrophic effects, e.g., when a
pharmaceutical agent unexpectedly converts into an unknown (and inactive)
polymorph, and thereby reduces the amount of the disease-fighting (and
potentially life-saving) form. DiStasio and his research group are developing
accurate and reliable methods which use computer simulations to predict the
structures and stabilities of molecular crystal polymorphs based on the laws of
quantum and statistical mechanics. In doing so, DiStasio is developing a
computational framework that addresses new opportunities to use molecular
crystal polymorphs in novel energy solutions and pharmaceutical agents. The
DiStasio research group is also developing an interactive molecular dynamics
(MD) package which allows students at all levels (K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate) to visualize the abstract mathematical concepts encountered in
chemistry, and to build physical and chemical intuition regarding the complex
interplay between observed properties and the microscopic structure of
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing and utilizing state-of-the-art
methods that combine quantum and statistical mechanics, numerical analysis, and
high-performance computing, DiStasio and his research group are creating a
theoretical and algorithmic framework which exploits sparsity to enable highly
accurate ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations of complex and large-
scale condensed-phase systems of interest throughout biology, chemistry,
physics, and materials science. This framework simultaneously accounts for the
quantum mechanical nature of the electrons (including sophisticated exchange-
correlation effects) and the nuclei, as well as realistic experimental
conditions (i.e., finite temperatures and pressures), and therefore enables
accurate, reliable, and routine predictions of the structures and stabilities of
all thermodynamically (and kinetically) relevant molecular crystal polymorphs
from first principles. These research efforts pave the way towards an enhanced
fundamental understanding of complex polymorphic energy landscapes and the
routine use of predictive first-principles based crystal structure prediction,
both of which are crucial to accessing the vast and largely unexplored potential
of molecular crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.