* 1945961
* Training Engineering Students to Ask Better Questions
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Amy Masnick, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2024
* USD 225,040.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing student learning
in undergraduate engineering courses. Specifically, the project will investigate
if training students to ask better questions improves STEM learning outcomes,
such as course knowledge, awareness of their own learning, and their ability to
ask better questions in future courses. The ability to recognize one's own
confusion and to ask a question to dispel that confusion is an essential
thinking skill that supports independent learning. Evidence from studies in
primary and secondary school settings confirms that school children can be
trained to ask more sophisticated questions. In addition, the more limited
college-level studies link the ability to ask better questions to better reading
comprehension. However, the results do not reveal whether the ability to ask
better questions can lead to better understanding of course material and/or
improvements in thinking processes. This project aims to train engineering
students how to write questions that lead to higher-level thinking. It will also
study whether this training results in improved content knowledge and thinking
processes, such as metacognition. The project will provide undergraduate
students an engineering statics course with training in how to write high
quality questions. The project will also measure the effects of this training on
the students’ STEM learning outcomes. It is expected that helping engineering
students to ask good questions will contribute to the students’ academic success
in engineering programs and support lifelong learning throughout their
engineering careers. The project will organize the training materials and
interventions into toolkits that can be used easily by other students and
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students in the intervention group will be
provided training and practice in writing high quality questions that address
their own confusions in an engineering statics course. Quantitative, qualitative
and mixed method approaches will be used to explore the effect of this
intervention on content knowledge and metacognitive knowledge, as well as the
relationships between improved question quality and these learning outcomes.
This project will contribute to demonstrating how question-asking may be taught
effectively within engineering courses and to understanding the measurable
learning outcomes that result from students asking better questions. By
determining the effect on learning outcomes that are of concern to STEM
educators, the intervention should be useful to many other STEM faculty.
Further, for easy distribution to both faculty and students, the intervention
will be packaged into toolkits that are designed to be scalable and adaptable,
such that the intervention can be feasibly implemented in other engineering
classrooms and other disciplines. The toolkits will include background
information from the educational literature, training materials for rating
question quality, and guidelines for conducting training sessions. This project
is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources, which supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. The project is
in the Engaged Student Learning track, through which the IUSE: EHR program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.