* 1945130
* CAREER: Developing Next Generation Gravitational Waveforms for Generic Black-Hole Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Sean McWilliams, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 11/30/2024
* USD 319,341.00

The measurements of gravitational waves by the Advanced Laser Interferometer
Gravitational wave Observatory (LIGO) are becoming ever more precise with time.
The need for more accurate and efficient gravitational waveform models for
black-hole binaries (BHBs) is substantial and urgent if we hope to realize a
wide range of potential applications in terms of performing high precision
astronomical observations, such as determining the formation mechanism of BHBs
throughout the Universe, or searching for small deviations from General
Relativity. This project will help realize the full potential of future Advanced
LIGO measurements, by creating a far more accurate and efficient waveform model.
In addition to the scientific components, this proposal will help facilitate a
program of outreach that will reach schools and venues for the general public
throughout the state of West Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's group will
apply the current Backwards One-Body (BOB) model to study recoil, generate
merger models for well-motivated alternative theories, and compare to the small
number of available numerical relativity (NR) results. This work will be
concurrent with, but independent from, the separately funded work developing a
new approximant within LALSuite that evolves the most state-of-the-art Effective
One-Body (EOB) model, SEOBNRv4P, in spherical coordinates, and replaces the
ringdown attachment with BOB. The team will then modify the inspiral evolution
to utilize a co-precessing frame, separate the relevant dynamical timescales,
and create an integration routine to maximize timesteps. Finally, they will
develop a new version of BOB with an evolving background spacetime in order to
ensure accuracy at earlier times, and thereby create a model with comparable
accuracy to NR, but entirely independent from NR. They will apply this model to
conduct a detailed comparison with existing NR-calibrated models, in order to
better establish systematic uncertainties. This work will ensure that future
gravitational-wave observations are only limited by the sensitivity of the
instrument, and not by the presence of modeling error. In addition, this
proposal will help facilitate a program of outreach that will reach schools and
venues for the general public throughout the state of West Virginia, by
developing new demonstrations and presentations and training students within the
WV SPOT program and the WVU Astronomy Club to present them, and also by bringing
a major outreach event, an updated version of the Celebrating Einstein
performances previously hosted at WVU, to multiple venues, and to numerous
audiences including entire classes of students from schools throughout the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.