* 1945703
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Data Mining and Fusion Between Unmanned Aerial Systems and Social Media Technologies to Improve Emergency Operations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Anand Puppala, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 106,000.00

Disasters such as Hurricane Barry, Hurricane Harvey and others provide an
opportunity to document how emergency operation centers (EOCs) can use
technology to respond to a natural disaster by understanding and mitigating the
uncertainties involved. The use of social media, Unmanned Autonomous
Systems/Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), real-time disaster modeling, and
widespread connectedness means more efficient analysis and flow of information.
Immediate information on the location of most damaged areas of a city or
stranded people will save lives. Real-time data allows emergency management to
develop more targeted response and post disaster recovery plans, and this is
regarded as a technological leap from the previous search and rescue strategies
attempted decades ago. The proposed research plan formulated by team will not
only collect relevant information from real hazard events, but will also analyze
and integrate the data to develop the post disaster management frameworks using
advanced technologies including UAVs, and various other modes of data
collection. Documenting the current operational inefficiencies, technology gaps,
and data analysis limitations of EOCs are important for improvements in disaster
preparedness and response. Furthermore, this project has time urgency due to the
need to collect and utilize time sensitive data from this recent set of storms
in the construction of the framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project
will leverage Hurricane Barry as a mechanism for creation of a framework that
will be integrated into Emergency Operations Centers (EOCs) to support post-
disaster analysis and decision-making. Hurricane Barry was accompanied by
extensive flooding in coastal Louisiana communities and this has provided a
perishable and voluminous data set of social media and UAV imagery for analysis.
The project will develop tools for data mining of the social media and fusion
with collected UAV imagery for post-disaster analysis. As part of this project,
feedback from EOC operators and decision-makers will be provided that will
enable enhancement of algorithms and analyses to support recovery as well as
response to social media generated rumors. Data from Beaumont EOC from Hurricane
Harvey, which also includes data on the recovery of the community will also be
collected. By combining data from both regions, a richer dataset will be
produced to make comparative analyses and linkages across space, time, disaster
level, and socioeconomic factors. This RAPID project will culminate with
collecting and archiving (in the National Science Foundation's Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure DesignSafe) a rich dataset of EOC operations
and technology application from Hurricanes Harvey and Barry. However, it is
vital that the knowledge gained be reciprocated back to the EOCs so that they
can make improvements for the betterment of US citizens. Research team will
develop a manual documenting lessons learned for EOC in Beaumont and Louisiana
and how to adopt and implement technology. Technology adoption and
implementation requires active learning to retain knowledge. Thus, one-day short
courses will be developed that will provide UAV and Twitter demonstrations along
with examples of data analysis and fusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.