* 1945388
* CAREER: Acid Rain to Agriculture: An Integrated Research and Education Platform to Understand Human Manipulation of the Sulfur Cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Eve-Lyn Hinckley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 01/31/2025
* USD 469,454.00

Humans’ changes to the sulfur (S) cycle are changing from mining and fossil fuel
emissions to sulfur additions in croplands. Now, similar to nitrogen and
phosphorus, large amounts of S are also applied to some crops as fertilizers or
other soil additives. In locations where atmospheric S deposition is down due to
air quality policies, farmers now add S fertilizers to meet plant requirements.
Often two-to-ten times the amount of S that was in rain before the Clean Air
Act, S applications to croplands may have negative consequences for areas
downstream. In particular, transport of excess S into wetlands can cause
movement of heavy metals into the food chain, which is dangerous for animals and
people. There has not been thorough study of how agricultural S additions behave
in the environment and the consequences of their use. This project will fill
that knowledge gap by addressing three primary objectives. The first is to
develop scientific methods to measure key S cycling processes and chemical forms
in crop systems. The second is to create exercises that provide middle school
and undergraduate students with experience doing environmental research. The
final objective is to hold workshops for farmers to discuss research findings
and inform crop S management. Together, these activities will improve
understanding and promote interaction to address how humans are changing the S
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses a major knowledge
gap in the field of biogeochemistry: quantifying how reactive S additions to
agricultural systems behave in the environment and investigating the processes
that control their ultimate fates and ecological consequences. The early career
PI will build on her body of research in the Napa River Watershed (California,
USA)—a perfect regional agricultural system where wine grapes are grown
exclusively and S is applied ubiquitously at 150 kg ha-1 yr-1, on average. She
has designed a focused field- and laboratory-based investigation that relies on
her background in biogeochemistry and leverages her growing network of academic
and stakeholder collaborators to build capacity within her research group, field
of study, and the agricultural sector. Specifically, the PI will increase
scientific knowledge in three main areas: (1) developing methods to quantify
sulfate reduction in soil microaggregates; (2) determining chemical and S stable
isotopic composition of organic S exported from agricultural systems; and (3)
identifying how the forms of S and S stable isotopic composition of soils and
solution waters vary not only across one agricultural area (the Napa River
Watershed) but also across other croplands in the U.S. where S is used heavily.
Integrated with the research activities, the PI will lead the following
education and outreach efforts: (1) creating work-based learning field trips and
data exploration exercises for 280 7th grade students at the Silverado Middle
School where ~60% of the students are Hispanic and many are the children of
workers in the local agricultural industry; (2) designing a publicly-available
case study module that builds quantitative and critical thinking skills for
undergraduate environmental studies students; and (3) leveraging collaborations
with the Sustainability Innovation Lab at Colorado and University of California
Extension to hold stakeholder workshops that communicate project findings and
inform solutions for sustainable S management. In addition, the PI will continue
her commitment to recruiting students from underrepresented groups to
participate in this project and train them to become the next generation of
interdisciplinary scholars. Ultimately, this effort will yield a broad
understanding of where, when, and how S reacts in the environment—advancing
knowledge of how humans are changing a fundamental element cycle and informing
what to do about it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.