* 1945420
* CAREER:Light-Matter Interaction in Van der Waals Heterostructures  of Atomically Thin Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Sufei Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2025
* USD 590,915.00

Light-matter interaction plays a critical role in modern technologies, including
solar cells, photodetection, and light-emitting devices. This interaction takes
a new form in the atomically thin semiconductors, in which new particles
combining positive and negative charges are created by light. Understanding and
manipulating these particles could improve devices and even realize new
functions that are not currently possible, such as power-efficient memory
devices and quantum computing. Stacking different layered semiconductors
together and tuning the layer-layer interaction could further engineer these
particles and lead to new properties not feasible in conventional materials. The
main objectives of this CAREER project are to explore and investigate the unique
light-matter interaction and emerging properties in individual and stacked
atomically thin semiconductors. The gained understanding can shed light on how
to exploit this new light-matter interaction in confined space for future
optoelectronics with better efficiency, faster speed, or even novel functions.
The integrated education component trains the next generation workforce for
science and engineering at the nanometer scale through research opportunities,
curriculum development, and outreach activities, with a focus on encouraging the
participation of women and underrepresented groups. Both existing programs at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and newly developed outreach programs will be
utilized to encourage K-12 students to study in the field of advanced optical
science and nanoscale technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of two-
dimensional semiconductors, especially monolayer transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMDCs), ushers in unprecedented opportunities in exploiting the
excitonic physics for quantum optoelectronics, while the understanding of
intrinsic properties of the exciton is often hindered by the sample quality. By
fabricating high-quality monolayer TMDC devices, this CAREER project aims to
employ advanced optical spectroscopy techniques to study the unique light-matter
interaction in monolayer TMDCs, with a focus on many-body physics that is
critical for the exciton properties. The device and measurement configurations
enable the control of doping, electrical field, and magnetic field, which
provide additional tuning knobs for the spectroscopy study. Van der Waals
heterostructure TMDCs devices with clean interfaces will also be constructed to
investigate fascinating interlayer excitons, with the electron and hole residing
in different layers. In addition, the twist angle of the hetero-bilayer TMDCs
will be controlled to create a Moir√© potential to further engineer interlayer
excitons for emerging quantum states. The closely integrated research and
education components provide training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate,
and K-12 students on advanced optical spectroscopy, nanoscale device
fabrication, and quantum materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.