* 1945685
* A framework for modeling flow over flexible submerged aquatic vegetation
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Xiao Yu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 02/29/2024
* USD 498,824.00

Submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV) plays an important role in riverine and
estuarine processes. By attenuating flow and modulating flow turbulence, SAV
promotes sediment stability, provides food and shelter for numerous important
species and improves water quality. SAV thus forms a critical link between
physical habitat and biological communities. Flexible SAV blades interact with
the flow field and with each other in complex, but ecologically significant
ways. For example, above a critical flow velocity threshold, continuous SAV
canopy motion (monami) occurs, which is associated with the abundance of
attached algae on SAV. To date, our understanding of how SAV structure affects
flow attenuation and mass transport is still limited, and physical interactions
among vegetation blades are not included explicitly in most observational
efforts, theoretical analyses or modeling studies. This project will develop an
integrated modeling framework supported by field observations and experiments.
The new model will support engineers and natural resources managers tasked with
developing legally mandated minimum flow requirements for springs restoration.
The project supports two PhD students, who will receive interdisciplinary
training in hydrodynamic modeling, aquatic ecology, and data analysis. A hands-
on outreach activity and K-12 lesson plan will be developed using a portable
racetrack flume at the UF Coastal Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
this study is to quantify the influence of vegetation structural properties and
blade-to-blade interactions on hydrodynamics and characterize the collective
behavior of flexible vegetation canopies under different flow conditions. The
study develops a structural solver that integrates soft-body dynamics into a
finite element model to investigate the deformation of vegetation blades and
interactions between multiple blades. The structural model will be coupled with
a computational fluid dynamics model to study flow over interacting submerged
flexible vegetation. Field observations in multiple Florida springs will be
carried out, in which velocimeters and video cameras will collect hydrodynamics
and vegetation canopy data (such as effective vegetation heights and monami
characteristics). The model will be validated with observational data, and then
used to identify different flow regimes based on vegetation structural
properties and flow conditions. This project will develop an improved
parameterization of the effects of SAV on hydrodynamics on river reach-scale
using observation data and model results, which can be implemented in large-
scale modeling framework to study the effects of SAV on key ecosystem processes,
such as sediment transport and algae growth dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.