* 1945448
* CAREER: Regulating Vulnerability: Reproduction, Risk, and the Social Production of Biomedical Research Ethics
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Miranda Waggoner, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2025
* USD 359,661.00

.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;_________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project examines regulatory changes regarding
obstetric patients and biomedical research over time. In so doing, it
contributes to pressing scientific, medical, ethical, and policy discussions
about the goals and consequences of research regulations and scientific
knowledge production. The project also elucidates how the production of
knowledge about reproduction matters for health and health disparities. This
project's education plan centers on expanding instruction in science and
technology studies and ethics. It will offer students who will be going into
applied research, clinical work, public sector positions, and academia
productive training for critically assessing, managing, and studying key issues
in population health and research ethics. The broader impacts of this project
also include producing white papers, training graduate students, and convening
an interdisciplinary workshop that advances academic and public dialogue about
reproduction and research. This project will be of interest to biomedical
researchers, obstetric patients and their families, educators in the biomedical
field and medical policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on multiple
methods, including archival research, content analysis, oral histories,
ethnographic observations, and interviews with experts and multiple stakeholder
groups, this project documents past and present changes in research regulations
pertaining to obstetric patients, and it analyzes how stakeholders respond to
regulatory revisions related to reproduction. It asks: What social, cultural,
political, and ethical factors have influenced research regulations regarding
obstetric patients over the past eight decades? How do changes in regulatory
categories with respect to obstetric patients and clinical research get taken
up, deployed, and implemented? How do stakeholders respond to cultural, ethical,
and regulatory changes in the context of reproduction and biomedical research?
In answering these questions, this project enhances basic understanding within
the history and sociology of medical science, and advances theory in science and
technology studies about processes of knowledge production and outcomes of
regulatory change. This project also increases scholarly and public
understandings of the ethics and morality of human subjects research and builds
a theoretical framework for the social production of ethics at the intersection
of science studies and bioethics. Organizing a national workshop enables this
project to bridge science studies scholarship with wider conversations about
reproduction and bioethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.