* 1945465
* CAREER: Riemannian Reformulation of Collective Variable Based Free Energy Calculation Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Mahmoud Moradi, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 02/28/2025
* USD 650,000.00

Mahmoud Moradi of University of Arkansas is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry. Professor Moradi develops chemical theories that improve the accuracy
of computational methods used for investigating the functions of biomolecules
such as proteins at the molecular level. These theories specifically improve
geometric models that describe how proteins change their shape and how such
changes change the protein's behavior. Professor Moradi bridges the gap between
the state-of-the-art computational methods and biomolecular applications by
developing rigorous theories. Moradi and his research group pursue advanced
geometric tools necessary to provide a robust molecular picture of protein
changes. This research enables researchers to understanding biomolecular
processes involved in protein function and leads to a better understanding of
disease and a more efficient computational framework for drug design and
discovery. By taking advantage of state-of-the-art supercomputers incorporating
advanced computational methods, statistical physics techniques, and statistical
analysis tools this research will quantify conformational changes of membrane
proteins that will impact biological and biomedical sciences. This research lies
at the intersection of Biology, Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, Statistics, and
Computer Science, and offers a firsthand experience in interdisciplinary science
to students and trainees, in particular those underrepresented in science. The
research outcomes also provide new materials for teaching at both the graduate
and undergraduate level. The project equips the high school science teachers
with a user-friendly molecular dynamics visualization platform to illustrate the
dynamic nature of biomolecular processes to their students. In
addition,&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary training opportunities are provided for
undergraduate students from various departments who are interested in receiving
short-term and long-term training in biomolecular
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Moradi and his research group
develop a Riemannian framework for free energy calculation methods for
biomolecular simulations. Riemannian geometric tools are employed to both modify
previously established non-Riemannian algorithms and design novel Riemannian
algorithms aimed at describing protein dynamics. A detailed picture of such
phenomena can currently be addressed using all-atom molecular dynamics
simulations, that are often computationally intensive. These simulations cannot
describe many biomolecular processes such as large-scale protein conformational
changes due to their timescale differences. Although various enhanced sampling
techniques have been developed over the past few decades to address this
“timescale gap”, the application of these methods to biologically relevant
systems remain challenging due to both computational costs and methodological
flaws. Moradi and his research group address a molecular level characterization
of conformational changes of membrane proteins using free energy calculation
methods and path-finding algorithms within a Riemannian framework. Methodologies
that are both robust and result in transition pathways and free energies that
are invariant under coordinate transformations may
result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.