* 1945050
* CAREER: Enhancing Future Liquid Argon Neutrino Experiments With Xenon
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Denver Whittington, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 12/31/2024
* USD 516,243.00

The Standard Model of particle physics was a formative intellectual development
of 20th century physics. While the discovery of the Higgs mechanism in 2012 was
a crowning achievement for the Standard Model, many mysteries remain, including
the role of the elusive neutrino. Neutrinos are elementary particles that rarely
interact with ordinary matter. The Standard Model predicts three types of
massless neutrinos. However, experimentally, we know that neutrinos do have very
small masses, and yet they permeate the universe. Because they have mass, they
can change from one type to another. Measuring properties of these changes, and
comparing them to theoretical predictions, provides a promising pathway to
discover how neutrinos shape our universe. To that end, the neutrino community
is embarking on a challenging quest to complete the picture of neutrino physics
through the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE), which will be a
massive, 40,000-ton instrument optimized to detect neutrino interactions about a
mile underground at Sanford Lab in South Dakota. This facility, being built
during the next 10 years, will observe interactions of neutrinos produced at
Fermilab and traveling 800 miles to DUNE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to its large
volume, the DUNE experiment offers a unique opportunity for a rich astroparticle
and exotic physics search program, including observations of low-energy
astrophysical neutrinos, e.g. from supernova core-collapse, thus lending itself
to multi-messenger astrophysics, and searches for other rare processes, for
example proton decay. If observed, these signatures would have profound
implications for particle physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. The rarity of
these signals requires continuous, high-resolution readout using electronic and
optical techniques and processing of Time Projection Chamber (TPC) data from the
entire DUNE detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis of this CAREER award is
to improve the light collection and optical triggering of DUNE by investigating
the co-doping of the Liquid Argon TPCs with very-low concentrations of Xenon,
whose introduction into the liquid has the potential to improve significantly
the optical performance of the DUNE detectors beyond what is possible with
Liquid Argon alone. Xenon’s desirable property of longer fluorescence wavelength
combined with a significantly foreshortened time scale of scintillation light
emission from the liquid medium holds promise to substantially improve the
overall level and uniformity of light collection from the DUNE TPCs as well as
reduce the effects of radiological backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technique and its development are to be extensively investigated and assessed
both in a compact laboratory test facility at Syracuse University as well as in
the 700-ton Prototype Liquid Argon TPC at CERN called ProtoDUNE-SP. The results
of these systematic studies will inform further DUNE program development and
refinement, as well as provide input into simulations of expected performance
improvements for the DUNE TPCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
program will leverage experience from the frontier particle physics experiment
DUNE to provide educational opportunities at the high school level and inspire
the next generation toward careers in scientific and technological fields.
Activities will focus on developing a neutrino oscillation Masterclass program
of lectures, novel hands-on demonstrations, and activities working with
simulated neutrino interactions provided by the DUNE collaboration, with
evaluation and feedback provided through the Syracuse University School of
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.