* 1945777
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Violence, Structural Inequality, and Institutionalization
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Carlina de la Cova, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,546.00

State hospitals in the United States have generated considerable discussion
among practitioners, government officials, and the general public, from the rise
of the asylum in the 19th-century through deinstitutionalization efforts
originating in the 1950s. This doctoral dissertation project will examine the
biological impact of institutionalization through skeletal analysis of persons
who were institutionalized in the past. The research will advance our
understanding of institutionalization beyond what can be gleaned from historical
accounts alone, and offers a framework for future biological anthropology
research to incorporate interdisciplinary approaches. The research may raise
mental health awareness and presents an innovative method of linking health
disparities in past institutionalized samples to modern-day psychiatric
treatment. The project will support graduate training as well as public and
descendant community science engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
research uses skeletal samples from asylums in four states (Colorado,
Mississippi, Missouri, and Ohio) to understand how incarceration impacts
institutionalized women’s health and how it is differentially embodied across
ancestry and geographical region. In bioarchaeology, evidence can be seen
through varying skeletal pathologies that reflect health disparities indicative
of negative conditions that people endured during life. The analysis will focus
on skeletal trauma, disease, and fracture analysis which will be statistically
examined through hierarchical log-linear analysis and binomial logistic
regression. The project highlights the heterogeneous physiological impact of
past mental institutionalization in their socio-cultural and historical
contexts. It investigates whether skeletal health and epidemiological
differences or trends exist across institutionalized geographical samples and
attempts to determine if differences in trauma and disease patterns between
African-American and Euro-American groups are present in order to gain insight
into the impact of racism and segregation within the institutional
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.