* 1945529
* CAREER: Floquet Route to Non-Equilibrium Phases of Matter in Cavity QED
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Michael Kolodrubetz, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2025
* USD 397,717.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education into states of interacting light and matter that are not
in usual steady states of equilibrium. The world around us is described by
quantum mechanics, yet quantum mechanical phenomena are absent from our day-to-
day life. This anomaly comes from the enormous complexity of the many
interacting atoms that make up everyday objects, which wash out quantum effects
to give the classical world. By isolating electrons and atoms from this complex
environment, experimentalists have made enormous strides towards realizing
quantum effects in increasing large and practical devices, which has become
known as the second quantum revolution. This revolution will further the need
for understanding quantum physics at its most fundamental level, which is the
overarching goal of this CAREER award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
focus on a class of systems known as many-body cavity quantum electrodynamics
(QED), which gives access to quantum properties of light and insight into the
interaction between light and matter. Quantum mechanics tells us that light
comes in individual units called photons, but conventional lasers contain so
many photons that seeing quantum effects from each one is impossible. Cavity QED
works by confining the light between two nearly perfect mirrors. One then
prepares states where there are not millions or billions of photons in the
cavity, but rather one or two. When the photon number is so low that individual
photons can be seen, the photons behave quantum mechanically. Many-body cavity
QED consists of these photons interacting with atoms that behave quantum
mechanically as well. This project will study how these systems respond when
they are kicked out of equilibrium, which is anticipated to give qualitatively
new features due to the quantum mechanical push and pull between the light and
the matter. These interactions should further provide applications down the road
in a variety of quantum technologies, such as next-generation lasers and high-
precision sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be complemented by an
educational program built around designing a virtual reality (VR) module
allowing users to interact with simple quantum mechanical systems such as the
hydrogen atom. By virtually shrinking the user to the size of the hydrogen atom,
the VR module will enable them to interact with the quantum mechanical world
directly. From an educational standpoint, the quantum VR module will provide a
new route to learn about the fundamental rules of quantum mechanics without the
mathematical overhead. This will create understanding and excitement which is
relevant to training next-generation scientists and engineers, as quantum
mechanics becomes an increasingly indispensable part of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education into nonequilibrium states of interacting light and matter. Time-
periodic, or Floquet, driving is one of the most powerful tools for engineering
quantum systems. Traditionally, a strong high frequency drive is used to modify
the effective Hamiltonian, enabling the realization of artificial structures
such as strong effective magnetic fields in neutral atoms. Recently, new phases
of matter have been discovered that exploit the fundamentally nonequilibrium
nature of the Floquet drive. Examples such as the Floquet time crystal were
quickly realized after their theoretical discovery, opening the door for novel
nonequilibrium routes to symmetry breaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In practice,
the Floquet drive is often done by microwave or optical photons. Confining these
photons to a cavity, they may also be treated as quantum degrees of freedom, a
paradigm known as many-body cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED). The
semiclassical Floquet limit is obtained when the cavity photon occupation is
large, but cavities afford the intriguing possibility of going to quantum limit
by decreasing the photon number, thus accessing a different regime of strongly
coupled quantum light and matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study
the many-body cavity QED limit of nonequilibrium Floquet phases of matter. Doing
so naturally leads to new nonequilibrium states of matter with anomalous
behavior, which may be thought of as arising from competition between native
local interactions and global interactions mediated by the cavity. The research
will involve three broad directions: (1) understanding the competition between
thermalization and many-body localization in a cavity, (2) demonstrating
symmetry breaking states such as time crystals in the presence of the cavity,
and (3) classifying topological states of matter coupled to one or more
cavities, including quantized photon pumps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
bridge the active but mostly independent fields of many-body cavity QED and
Floquet physics, providing a pathway to new phases of matter that lie between
the limits that are often considered. The research team will extend the
classification of nonequilibrium phases of matter, where anomalous states
induced by the interplay of short- and long-range interactions remain
particularly challenging. Experimental realizations will be explored in nitrogen
vacancy centers, superconducting circuits, ultracold atoms, and trapped ions.
The resulting entangled states of strongly coupled light and matter will have
relevance to the fundamental science of quantum information and applications in
quantum metrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be complemented by
designing a virtual reality (VR) module allowing users to interact with simple
quantum mechanical systems. The quantum VR will illustrate some key aspects of
quantum mechanics, such as the wave nature of electrons, quantum measurements,
and radiative decay, which have proved elusive to many learners. This is vital
for both public science and technological applications as quantum technologies
become increasingly relevant, lowering the barrier to entry for scientists,
engineers, and members of the public. Feedback from users will serve as a seed
for future development of visualization methods in a broader range of quantum
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.