* 1945762
* Regulation, Repair, and Transportation Infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Lori Leonard, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 231,000.00

Drawing on insights from the fields of information science and human-computer
interactions, supply chain analysis, and science and technology studies, this
project asks how processes of valuation are prioritized or achieved in a single
niche secondary market, the used vehicle. The researcher traces the socio-
material assemblages and forms of valuation that come together around the
purchase, process, maintenance, and repair of vehicles through the exploration
of two supply chains for automobiles in differing regulatory contexts. Data from
this project will be disseminated to enhance understanding of science and the
scientific method among researchers, planners, and public officials engaged in
reconciling the demands of effective transportation infrastructures with
concerns about public safety and affordability. The project also provides
training for undergraduate students in methods of rigorous, scientific data
collection and analysis, through summer internships and mentored research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores what values, for
reliable transportation, public and road safety, occupational health, and
environmental protections, are prioritized and achieved along supply chains and
in moments of breakdown and repair. The project follows the supply chains and
circulation of vehicles in two contexts, each which regulate imports
differently, have varied inventories, supply chains, and regimes of maintenance
and repair. Ethnographic methods of shadowing and interviewing will be used to
examine the assemblages that keep vehicles on the road as well as the socio-
material constraints to doing so, asking what factors (such as differences in
regulatory and repair regimes, creativity and innovation in repair and
maintenance) contribute to variability of market behavior and the economic
viability of these secondary markets. This project approaches the question of
value in an open-ended manner, by examining ongoing processes of valuation as
they occur along supply chains and during moments of breakdown and repair.
Findings from the project will improve economic anthropological and sociological
understandings of maintenance and repair networks and processes, planned
obsolescence practices, recycling, and the workings of the circular
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.