* 1945484
* CAREER: Uncovering the origins and biological purpose of the orphaned branched GDGT temperature biomarker
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Sebastian Kopf, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2025
* USD 476,094.00

Understanding Earth’s past is often the key to understanding our planet’s
future. Towards this goal, geochemists use many different tools to study Earth’s
climate history. Different tools provide different clues that together help
solve the puzzle of what happened in the past. A new set of clues first
discovered at the turn of the century (~2000) comes from so called branched
tetra ether lipids. Lipids are organic molecules that form the boundary between
the inside and outside of cells in all known cellular life including animals,
plants, and bacteria. Lipids provide important clues about Earth’s history
because they are made by living organisms yet can persist in the environment
long after the organism dies. Unlike DNA, sugars and enzymes which tend to break
down quickly, some lipids can be preserved in rocks for millennia. This helps
uncover at what times in the past different organisms were present.
Unfortunately, most lipids do not contain much information about the environment
the cell that produced them lived in. This is why the newly discovered tetra
ether lipids are of such great scientific interest. These lipids occur in
different variations that seem to correspond to the temperature and pH of the
environment in which they were formed. In theory, this makes it possible to
infer the temperature and pH of past environments. These lipids thus pose a
great opportunity to help understand Earth’s climate history. However, it is not
known which organisms produce these lipids and why they produce them. This makes
it difficult to fully assess how reliable the information is that they can
provide about Earth’s past. It also makes it difficult to study what else we
could learn from them about Earth’s history. So far it is clear that the
organisms that produce them are widespread. These lipids have been found almost
everywhere in nature since their discovery 20 years ago. They are twice the size
of most plant and animal lipids and are built with stronger chemical bonds. They
are especially common in soils and some aspects of their structure suggest they
are most likely produced by bacteria. Several types of soil bacteria have been
tested in the past decade but no clear source has emerged. The goal of this
project is thus to find and study the source of these branched tetra ether
lipids by systematically investigating two important reasons they might have
gone undetected. First, microbes often produce large organic molecules only when
they are needed. Soil bacteria tested in the past might have been prevented from
producing these lipids because standard laboratory conditions do not reflect
common soil environments. This project will work with a range of soil bacteria
in conditions that mimic soil habitats to test this possibility. Second, the
bacteria that produce these lipids in the environment might not yet be cultured.
To address this possibility, this project will develop a new Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE). The focus of this CURE will be
student-driven isolation and testing of new soil bacteria for these lipids from
sites all around Colorado. This CURE will be taught every year at CU Boulder and
nearby Red Rocks Community College. In addition, this project will evaluate how
undergraduate research experiences impact students’ views on science and
interest in science &amp; engineering career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Branched tetraether (brGDGT) lipids are well-
preserved, vastly distributed molecular biomarkers with tremendous potential for
paleoclimate reconstruction. First described in 2000, brGDGTs are now recognized
to exist in virtually all natural environments and their abundance and
structural variations are being applied to topics of broad biogeochemical
interest. This includes brGDGT-based paleotemperature records that are
increasingly used to address fundamental questions in paleoclimate research.
However, this rapid expansion has greatly surpassed our fundamental
understanding of what brGDGT-based proxies actually represent and how they might
have differed in Earth's geologic past. The root of this problem lies with the
fact that brGDGTs remain one of the most puzzling "orphaned" biomarkers today.
We know little about their biological origins and next to nothing about their
biological function. This implies either that potential source organisms
cultured to date have not been exposed to the environmental conditions that
trigger brGDGT production, or that key source organisms have not yet been
cultured or studied in the lab. This projects aims to address both of these
possibilities by integrating research and education to advance our understanding
of the origins and biological purpose of brGDGTs. The hypothesis that brGDGT
production is environmentally induced will be tested using a range of
microorganisms that produce potential brGDGT precursor molecules. In particular,
the dependence of brGDGT production upon O2, CO2, nutrient flux, and soil
microbial interactions will be investigated. The research team will employ
chemically static (chemostat) culturing approaches and evaluate the resulting
production of brGDGTs and their biosynthetic precursors. The hypothesis that the
source organisms of brGDGTs remain uncultured will be pursued by evaluating the
production of a brGDGT precursor in bacteria isolated by undergraduate students
in a Course Based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) class. This class
will be developed with a focus on student-driven research into the isolation and
study of novel soil bacteria, their metabolites and lipid products. CURE classes
provide more inclusive access to early research experiences which are often
transformative to students' science identity by increasing self-efficacy and
basic research skills. This can lead to increased retention in STEM fields with
particularly positive outcomes for first generation and minority students. The
development and implementation of the proposed CURE will expose more than 900
undergraduate STEM students to hands-on, cross-disciplinary scientific research
practices, collaboration and discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.