* 1945572
* CAREER: New Probes of Heterogeneity in Next-Generation Nanocrystal Emitters
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Justin Caram, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2025
* USD 659,590.00

Professor Justin R. Caram of the University of California-Los Angeles is
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A) Program of the
Division of Chemistry to develop new spectroscopic measurement methods to study
the emission of short-wave infrared light from quantum dots. The quantum dots
are incredibly small, man-made nanocrystals with diameters about 10,000 times
narrower than a human hair. The research seeks to overcome the current
limitations on instrumentation and methods at the single nanocrystal level. This
goal is important because the nanocrystals come as an non-uniform mix of
particles with different sizes, shapes and structures. This mixture complicates
their study and hinders their use in optoelectronic devices. The knowledge
obtained on single crystals may open the way for the systematic formation of
uniform quantum dot materials with decreased toxicity and new functionality in
the short-wave infrared -- a spectral region beyond where human eyes can see.
Success in conducting the research may widens the use of quantum dots in
biomedical imaging, next-generation optoelectronic devices, optical
communications, and solar energy conversion. During the course of this research,
Professor Caram is revamping general chemistry courses through the development
of learning laboratories that incorporate new pedagogical technologies to help
students develop skills and motivation to continue their schooling in STEM
majors after their first year in college. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this
project, Professor Caram and his research team are supported to develop
spectroscopic techniques to probe the intrinsic photo properties of short-wave
infrared emitting (SWIR) colloidal nanocrystals, including HgX and CuInS2. The
statistical variations from nanocrystal to nanocrystal and the average and
distribution of exciton and mutilexciton lifetimes, yields and spectra of these
nanoparticles in solution are assessed. SWIR photon-counting and correlation is
achieved using recently developed spectroscopic tools. The project combines new
infrared active detectors suitable for efficient photon counting, timing and
correlation in shortwave infrared; path-length Mach-Zehnder interferometry to
attain simultaneous temporal and spectral resolution, and fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy to probe emitters as they diffuse through a focal
volume in dilute solution. The research starts with a focus on HgX (X=S, Se, Te)
quantum confined nanocrystals, which exhibit tunable bandgaps from 0 to 1.6 eV
and have a wide range of applications in lasing, quantum communications, and
infrared sensing. The focus shifts to the toxic cadmium-free nanostructure
(CuInS2), which displays complex ensemble photoluminescence, including
trap/defect emission, electrochemical doping and non-stoichiometry. The method
employed resolves and correlates the energies of emitted photons as a function
of inter-photon spacing, creating a two-dimensional map of emitter stream from
dilute ensemble, in analogy to two-dimensional electronic
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.