* 1945162
* CAREER: Next Generation Kinetic Isotope Effect Measurements for the Analysis of Glycosyltransferase Enzyme Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Myles Poulin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 03/31/2025
* USD 690,000.00

Glycosyltransferases are enzymes that chemically facilitate (catalyze) the
assembly of sugars into complex long chain polymers. Such polymers are involved
in a number of different biological processes, including formation of biofilms
that protect microbes at surfaces (such as the surfaces of teeth) and pathways
that lead to antibiotic resistance. With this CAREER award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Myles Poulin of
the University of Maryland at College Park to develop new methods to study the
transient chemical structures (the transition states) that are key to the
reactions in the catalytic mechanisms of bacterial glycosyltransferase enzymes.
Dr. Poulin is developing a new quantitative approach to precisely follow how
heavier atoms affect the reactions along catalytic pathways (kinetic isotope
effects). Combining these precise measurements with computational studies allows
for detailed analyses of transition state structures in the mechanisms of
glycosyltransferase enzymes. The results of this research help in the design of
new antimicrobial agents that target biofilm formation and antibiotic resistance
pathways. In addition to these research activities, Dr. Poulin is developing an
integrated educational outreach program that engages high school and first year
university students in research experiences and hands-on laboratory activities.
The goal of this program is to increase enrollment and retention of
underrepresented minority students in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glycosyltransferase enzymes play a
critical role in numerous biological processes and yet, the transition states
for these enzyme reactions have not been studied in detail. Kinetic isotope
effect (KIE) measurements are a powerful tool to study enzyme mechanisms and
transition states, which further help guide the design of potent transition
state analogues as inhibitors. However, KIE measurements are not widely applied
due to the complex analytical workflows required to measure KIEs with high
precision. The primary objective of this research is to develop a general,
quantitative, whole molecule mass spectrometry approach for KIE determination
that simplifies the analytical workflow required to precisely measure heavy atom
KIEs. This approach is applied to study the mechanisms and transition state
structures for two bacterial glycosyltransferase enzymes: PgaCD, which is
involved in bacterial biofilm exopolysaccharide assembly, and BshA, which
functions in Fosfomycin antibiotic resistance. Combining these highly precise
KIE measurements with computational modeling provides a detailed picture of the
transition states of the enzymes. This research may provide important new
insights into the mechanisms of glycosyltransferase enzymes involved in the
assembly of exopolysaccharide biofilms and the biosynthesis of bacillithiol.
Results from these studies may also help guide the design and development of
inhibitors targeting these pathways. In addition, the methods developed from
this project are generally applicable to other enzymes and are of general
interest to researchers studying enzyme mechanisms and thus this research topic
is included in NSF's Understanding the Rules of Life Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.