* 1945094
* CAREER:Tethered biofilm dispersal signals for long-term protection of engineering materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Jessica Jennings, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2025
* USD 428,043.00

Non-Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial attachment to surfaces,
known as biofilm, can lead to negative consequences in the fields of healthcare,
environmental engineering, chemical engineering, and food preparation, among
others. The research focus of this CAREER project is to design materials with a
novel synthetic biofilm-disrupting molecule bound to the surface. This research
will explore whether tethered biofilm inhibitors are active against bacteria
while attached to the surface and how these molecules are released from the
surface under different environmental conditions. Application of tethering
strategies will then be designed for different types of surfaces used in
engineering, including metals, polymers, and ceramics. Effects of these
engineered surfaces on viability of mammalian cells will also be determined.
This interdisciplinary project will invite students from different science and
engineering fields to innovate through collaborative research. Students at the
undergraduate, graduate, and community-college level will be trained in
effective communication strategies for different audiences in order to overcome
fear of public speaking that might limit progression of students into advanced
studies in science and engineering. Interactive activities will be designed to
engage students at the middle school and high school levels, promoting
advancement of underrepresented and socioeconomically disadvantaged groups in
science and engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to design biomaterials
that control bacterial biofilm. Toward this goal, a biofilm-disrupting synthetic
cyclopropanated fatty acid will be bound to material surfaces through different
configurations using covalent linkages, hydrophobic interactions, or click-
chemistry conjugation. This research plan will characterize the type of bonding
at the surface, surface energy, and cleavability of the surface-tethered
molecules. Material characterization will be followed by assessment of activity
to inhibit and disperse different types of bacterial biofilm, as well as
cytocompatibility with mammalian cells. Evaluations of bioactivity, release, and
fabrication are designed to answer three overarching research questions: 1) can
surface-bound signaling factors activate biofilm inhibition and dispersion in
the same manner as freely diffusible factors?, 2) is release of ester-bound
signaling molecules increased in the presence of bacterial enzymes?, and 3) can
active signaling factors be bound to multiple types of biomaterials? Project
research will support advancement of students across disciplines into
professional STEM roles through training to increase the impact and
effectiveness of science communication to broader audiences. Introversion and
fear of public speaking are common among students in STEM fields, which may be a
particular barrier for underrepresented and socioeconomically disadvantaged
groups in science. Therefore, the primary educational task of this proposal
consists of training in the assertion-evidence presentation style through a new
course offering and workshops at student professional organizations. Effective
communication of fundamental science will promote self-efficacy and interest of
students at the middle school, high school, and community college levels in STEM
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.