* 1945781
* RAPID: Collaborative Proposal: Response to the Searles Valley Earthquake Sequence
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Yehuda Ben-Zion, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This project will support rapid geologic, geodetic and seismological field
investigations associated with the Searles Valley earthquake sequence in the
Eastern California Shear Zone, which included a magnitude (M) 6.4 earthquake on
July 4, 2019, and a subsequent M 7.1 event on July 5. The immediate field
response is essential because the seismic and geodetic signals decay rapidly
with time and geological evidence becomes obscure quickly. Rapid field studies
should provide a wealth of data to facilitate understanding of the earthquake
rupture properties and fault damage zones, 3D crustal structures around the
ruptures, post seismic transients of geodetic fields, and effects of the events
on the subsurface and human structures. This study should help clarify
earthquake processes and structures in the highly active and complex Eastern
California Shear Zone, which hosted three M &gt; 7 events in the last three
decades, and contribute significantly to improved understanding of the tectonic
deformation and seismic hazard in Southern California. The field studies and
recorded data will provide valuable experience for students and early career
scientists, and produce excellent material for education and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will include obtaining differential
lidar and optical image surveys, campaign Global Positioning System
measurements, seismic deployments of across-fault linear and 2D arrays, and
mapping effects of the ground motion on infrastructure. The obtained multi-
disciplinary observations will enable researchers to address numerous
outstanding questions about earthquake ruptures, spatio-temporal seismicity
patterns, fault zone and crustal structures, intensity of ground shaking and
postseismic deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.