* 1945278
* CAREER:Cyclotron resonance spectroscopy of interacting fermions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Erik Henriksen, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 684,643.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The way in which electrons move through
materials determines many of the fundamental properties of any system, such as
conductivity or reflectivity. In most materials, however, these properties are
qualitatively the same whether we consider one electron in isolation, or many
moving in concert. More subtle and interesting effects can arise if the
electrons interact with one another, in which case emergent behaviors appear
that cannot exist for just one or a few electrons: a simple analogy is that
ocean waves are the coherent motion of vast numbers of water molecules. Yet
connecting the microscopic behavior of interacting electrons to the overall
behavior of a material is often challenging. In this work, the principal
investigator uses measurements of infrared light shining through thin materials
to probe the behavior of interacting electron systems in several interesting
cases. These include ultra-clean graphene devices, comprised of single-atom-
thick sheets of carbon atoms in which the electrons interact to generate
fascinating many-particle quantum states. These devices are also placed in small
cavities to greatly amplify the intensity of the infrared light; under these
conditions the electrons and waves of light are thought to merge into novel
quantum states that forget their origins as separate entities. Finally, in some
materials the electrons interact so strongly that none can independently move;
yet they are free to rotate in a correlated fashion to yield fascinating, fluid-
like behaviors. This physics is exceedingly difficult to isolate and probe, but
recent theoretical work suggests that infrared light can discern whether such a
fluid-like state is present. In addition, the principle investigator leads
diversity initiatives within the Physics Department that are leading to an
increase in Latino/a graduate students. These efforts are being coupled to
bridge programs operated in the university at large and also by the American
Physical Society, toward making the faces in the physics community more
representative of the nation as a whole.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Systems of many interacting particles are both fascinating
and enigmatic, exhibiting macroscopic correlated behaviors that are often poorly
understood. In this project the principle investigator explores correlated
electron physics using infrared magnetospectroscopy, which acquires a novel
sensitivity to many-particle interactions when applied to materials that have a
linear band structure or non-parabolic dispersion. Such linear systems were once
incredibly rare but now arise in multitudes of modern quantum materials. The
principle investigator utilizes a dedicated infrared magneto-spectroscopy
capability to study graphene and strongly correlated materials in fields up to
14 T and temperatures approaching 100 mK, with optics capable of working with
microscopic samples of atomically-thin materials. Upgrades will further enhance
signal-to-noise, resolution, and spectral range. This enables explorations of
three distinct but inter-related projects: first, spectroscopy of electron-
electron interaction effects in the integer and fractional quantum Hall regimes
in graphene, toward elucidating their role in symmetry breaking and formation of
many-particle ground states. In the second project, these graphene devices are
placed in mirrored cavities having a resonance in the infrared to enhance the
interaction of light with the cyclotron resonance transitions in graphene. This
is predicted to achieve the ultrastrong coupling regime of cavity quantum
electrodynamics, vaulting graphene to the forefront of systems hosting strongly
interacting light and matter. Moreover, the uneven spacing of graphene Landau
levels implies a proper two-level system is achievable, presaging a novel
graphene-based qubit operating in the infrared and native to high magnetic
fields. In the third project, strongly correlated insulators including SmB6,
YbB12, 1T-TaSe2 and 1T-TaS2 are explored. These materials are thought to host an
unusual Fermi surface of neutral spinons, specifically predicted to exhibit
novel cyclotron resonance modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.