* 1945078
* CAREER: Rapid H/D Exchange-Mass Spectrometry: Novel Methods for Identifying Glycan Isomers and Glycoconjugate Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Elyssia Gallagher, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2025
* USD 655,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Elyssia Gallagher and her group at Baylor University are
developing new methods to study the structures and changes of glycans - chains
of carbohydrates that are involved in many biological processes, including
molecular recognition, cellular signaling, and immune responses. The methods
being developed by the Gallagher group will provide new tools to correlate the
structures of glycans with their biological functions. The Gallagher group is
also implementing a comprehensive educational plan designed to increase teacher
competency in chemistry. K-12 science teachers need continued training in high-
level content and active-learning science pedagogy so that they can teach
contemporary science in ways that engage student interest. Dr. Gallagher and her
group are hosting summer workshops to introduce K-12 teachers to advanced
chemistry concepts and to develop active-learning activities and lesson plans
for broad dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen/deuterium exchange-mass
spectrometry (HDX-MS) has become a standard method for analyzing protein
dynamics and binding interactions. However, exchange rates of glycan hydroxyls
are on the order of microseconds to milliseconds – faster than those typical for
conventional HDX studies. The Gallagher group is developing and validating
rapid, reproducible HDX-MS methods for accurately characterizing glycan
structures and dynamics. Specifically, the Gallagher group is developing and
utilizing rapid HDX during electrospray ionization (referred to as in-ESI HDX)
coupled to ion mobility and tandem MS, to separate and identify carbohydrate and
glycan isomers. They are also applying in-ESI HDX-MS to monitor changes in
glycan dynamics when present in glycoconjugates. The reproducible methods can
monitor exchange on the timescale needed to enable analysis of the structural
and biological properties of glycans and
glycoconjugates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.