* 1945805
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hard tissue correlates of primate growth rate variation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Gary Schwartz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2021
* USD 22,077.00

Growth is a central aspect of a species’ biology, and modern humans are
fundamentally different in the timing, duration, and pace of our growth compared
to other primates. Understanding when and why the modern human growth pattern
evolved is key to understanding part of what makes modern humans unique among
primates. This doctoral dissertation project examines the links between
variation in primate growth rates and hormonal underpinnings via the pituitary
gland and a bony structure, the sella turcica. In doing so, it will develop a
novel, non-destructive method for estimating individual growth rates and will
investigate the effects of ecology and environment on living primates’ growth
rates. The insights into pituitary and sella turcica growth and evolution
provided by these data also have the potential to inform diagnoses of abnormal
pituitary conditions and the etiology of growth deficiencies or diseases related
to pituitary hormones. This project will support graduate training and
undergraduate research experiences at Arizona State University (ASU), expanding
educational opportunities and providing undergraduates with advanced
visualization and 3D processing skills that can be applied to fields as varied
as engineering and medicine. In addition, the researcher will communicate
project findings through science education outreach activities for student and
public audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the importance of growth, the
ultimate causes (or selective pressures) that shape growth rates have long been
the subject of research, but the proximate mechanisms that underpin variation in
growth rates are less well studied. At the proximate level, body growth is the
direct result of hormones produced by endocrine glands such as the pituitary.
This project builds upon the relationship between the size of the pituitary,
which is positively correlated with growth rate across mammalian taxa, and the
sella turcica, the bony structure within which the pituitary gland is housed, to
first test whether the size of the nonhuman primate sella turcica reflects body
growth rate. This goal will be achieved by pairing 3D cranial morphology data
with growth data from well-studied primate populations. Second, this research
will assess how aspects of ecology and demography (i.e., ultimate causes such as
resource availability, food quality, mortality) relate to living primates’ body
growth rates both within the study populations and across a comparative sample
of 51 species. It will then assess whether these ecological variables also
explain variations in relative sella turcica size. Together, the complementary
components of this project will contribute to a better understanding of primate
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.