* 1945127
* CAREER: The Transformation, Cross-shore Export, and along-shore Transport of Freshwater on Antarctic Shelves
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Carlos Moffat, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* David Porter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 734,550.00

Freshwater discharges from melting high-latitude continental ice glacial
reserves strongly control salt budgets, circulation and associated ocean water
mass formation arising from polar ice shelves. These are different in nature
than freshwater inputs associated with riverine coastal inputs. The PI proposes
an observational deployment to measure a specific, previously-identified example
of a coastal freshwater-driven current, the Antarctic Peninsula Coastal Current
(APCC). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research component of this CAREER project
aims to improve understanding of the dynamics of freshwater discharge around the
Antarctic continent. Associated research questions pertain to the i) controls on
the cross- and along-shelf spreading of fresh, buoyant coastal currents, ii) the
role of distributed coastal freshwater sources (as opposed to 'point' source
river outflow sources typical of lower latitudes), and iii) the contribution of
these coastal currents to water mass transformation and heat transfer on the
continental shelf. An educational CAREER program component leverages a series of
field experiences and research outputs including data, model outputs, and
theory, to bring polar science to the classroom and the general public, as well
as training a new polar scientist. This combined strategy will allow the
investigator to lay the foundation for a successful academic career as a
researcher and teacher at the University of Delaware. The project will also
provide the opportunity to train a PhD student. Informal outreach efforts will
include giving public lectures at University of Deleware's sponsored events,
including Coast Day, a summer event that attracts 8000-10000 people, and remote
lectures from the field using an existing outreach network. This proposal
requires fieldwork in the Antarctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.