* 1945113
* CAREER: Climate Controls on Hurricane Landfall via the Subtropical High
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Daniel Chavas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 719,608.00

Hurricanes making landfall pose significant risks to society. While we can
forecast hurricanes a few days ahead, having predictions with longer lead times
is preferable for better preparation against the impending hazards. Currently,
seasonal hurricane predictions are skillful at letting us know of the possible
hurricane activity over the entire ocean basin. However, such forecast does not
pinpoint the coastal vicinity where hurricane may strike. Over the ocean, the
large-scale wind pattern consists of gyres around high atmospheric pressure
centers in the subtropics (or “subtropical highs”). This pattern evolves very
slowly and can steer hurricanes toward or away from the coast. Here, the project
will investigate the evolution of these subtropical highs and their connection
to hurricane tracks and landfall. Emerging results may enhance seasonal
hurricane forecast and help us mitigate future hurricane hazards. The project
also aims to develop a future workforce that can combine weather and climate
information to minimize environmental risk and improve decision
making.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research goal is to understand the co-
variability between subtropical highs and hurricane landfall. The project
objectives are to (1) quantify the variability of subtropical highs and
hurricane landfalls globally, and (2) assess this relationship with respect to
the impact land-sea temperature contrast and sea surface temperature. The
investigator will analyze historical data and current climate simulations and
conduct new experiments using idealized aqua-planet climate model and realistic
climate models. The educational goal is to train citizens to address problems
related to weather and climate. The project will develop a cohort-based
internship program with various partners to provide real-word experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students in atmospheric science. The investigator
will use this internship to assess skill gaps and enhance university atmospheric
science curricula to better prepare students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.