* 1945782
* Genetic evidence on the deep history of human populations
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Alan Rogers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2024
* USD 267,670.00

Recent research has shown that modern humans carry DNA derived from archaic
hominin populations, such as Neanderthals and Denisovans, in the distant past.
This project will use genetic data, together with a newly-developed statistical
method, to study the history of humans and their close relatives during the past
two million years. The results will inform us about the speed with which
populations become reproductively isolated after separation. The methods will be
of interest to conservation biologists, who must estimate rates of interbreeding
in order to decide whether a species deserves protected status. The results also
will be useful to medical researchers who must control for the effects of
history as they study the causes of genetic disease. The project will support
graduate training, as well as a workshop that will train geneticists from
throughout the US in methods of bioinformatics and computational genetics and
support efforts to broaden participation in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern humans carry genetic signatures of past
admixture with Neanderthals and Denisovans. Research has also documented
episodes of very small population size, during which natural selection was
ineffective, and harmful mutations were able to accumulate. Our understanding of
these events is incomplete however, because of limitations in the statistical
methods used. The current project will use a new method, which corrects these
problems and allows us to see farther into the past. It will (1) estimate the
fraction of Denisovan DNA in several human populations of Asia and Oceania; (2)
study interbreeding between modern humans and “superarchaics,” who separated
from other hominins early in the history of the genus Homo; and (3) test the
hypothesis that Middle Eastern populations received gene flow from a
hypothetical population of “basal Eurasians,” which separated from other
Eurasians before the separation of Europeans from East
Asians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.