* 1945230
* CAREER:Single-neuron mechanisms of social attention in humans
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Xin Li, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 500,488.00

The ability of people to focus visual attention on salient objects or people in
our visual field is one of the most fundamental cognitive functions in humans.
This ability is critically important in order to learn and interact socially
with others. In particular, visual attention to social stimuli (i.e., social
attention) plays a vital role in guiding social behaviors. Impaired social
attention underlies many psychiatric and neurological disorders, such as autism
and ADHD. However, very little is known about human visual attention at the
single-neuron level. The goal of this CAREER project is to understand the
underlying neural processes involved in human social attention using technology
that provides the highest degree of spatial resolution (location of brain
activity) and temporal resolution (timing of brain activity) currently
available. The investigators will collaborate with neurosurgeons and record
directly from neurons in the human brain, as patients undergo treatment of
epilepsy. These neurons reside in brain regions involved in attention, decision
making, or processing of socially relevant images. The research will elucidate
how single neurons, within specific brain regions, contribute to visual
attention. Results will provide novel insight into how these processes differ in
psychiatric and neurological disorders. This study will contribute to teaching
materials and outreach to clinical communities. The data acquired and analysis
tools developed will be made freely available to other researchers in order to
advance science in the field of cognitive neuroscience research and human neural
recordings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate the neural
circuits of social attention in humans for both goal-driven attention (Aim 1)
and stimulus-driven attention (Aim 2). The research will: (1) characterize
social attention signals in the medial temporal lobe (amygdala and hippocampus)
and prefrontal cortex (in particular the orbitofrontal cortex); (2) analyze
attention signals from different brain regions using comprehensive functional
connectivity analysis; and (3) compare neural mechanisms for goal-driven vs.
stimulus-driven attention. Together, with the unique human single-neuron
recordings, the research will address important fundamental neuroscience
questions by providing comprehensive analysis of the neural circuits underlying
social attention in humans. The outcomes of this research are important to
understand the neural mechanisms of impaired visual attention in patients with
psychiatric and neurological disorders and will be informative for development
of future targeted intervention strategies. This research will also integrate
undergraduate education and generate tools and methods to enable new research
groups to conduct state-of-the-art human single-neuron
recordings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Cognitive
Neuroscience Program and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.