* 1945141
* CAREER: Theory of Membrane Shape Sensing at the Micron Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Brian Camley, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2025
* USD 434,052.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research, and associated education to investigate how protein
molecules can tell the shape of a cell membrane. For cells to divide or make
protrusions, proteins must end up in the right position in the cell – for
instance, being localized to parts of the membrane that have particular curved
shapes. Surprisingly, this can happen even when the scale over which the
membranes curve is far larger, some thousand times larger, than the size of a
protein. Because membranes are soft, and can change their shape easily, they
also can be very rough, making the problem of the proteins "sensing" the cell’s
shape even harder. This project is about understanding how shape sensing can
happen. Two broad possibilities for how proteins end up in these spots are
either: 1) each single protein can make incredibly precise measurements of the
local membrane, allowing it to find the right shape, or 2) many proteins can
work together cooperatively to measure the cell’s shape over a length scale of
many protein sizes. How precisely must single proteins measure the membrane’s
shape in order to locate where they go? Could proteins instead position
themselves based on something correlated with shape but easier to measure? If
proteins work together to sense the membrane’s shape, how much better will they
be at finding their locations? The PI will use computer models, mathematical
calculations, and experimental data shared from collaborators to address these
questions. This research will also provide a way to better understand how
patterning is coupled to surface shape in a broader context; similar problems
show up both in biology and in the formation of patterns on other rough
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes linking computational
research to an education plan including development of a new class focused on
the physics of cells, as well as mentoring and training students from high
school to graduate school. People supported by this grant will work in
collaboration with Baltimore City public high school students, with Baltimore
City students within the group as well as group members working with the public
high school. In particular, the PI and graduate student will work with local
high school teachers to develop computational “labs” to teach high school
students about the role of randomness in physics and biology and assist in
presenting these labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research, and associated education to investigate how nanometer-
scale proteins sense micron-scale curvature of the cell membrane. Curvature
sensing is a critical soft matter physics problem, but the guiding principles of
how it operates at the micron scale are still unclear. The PI aims to develop
useful predictive bounds showing the limiting factors in shape sensing. If
successful, this research will lead to a broad understanding of how biochemical
polarity and cell geometry are coupled by using both minimal phenomenological
models and detailed reaction-diffusion approaches. Interesting connections at
the interfaces of membrane dynamics, statistical sensing limits like the Berg-
Purcell limit, and biochemical models, will be developed with the aim to gain
new insight into of the organization and dynamics of cell membranes and related
biological systems. This insight will be used in building predictive models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be pursued along two primary
directions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Determining the accuracy with which single
proteins can sense membrane curvature. &lt;br/&gt;Even if a protein could
perfectly measure the local membrane shape, it could not precisely determine the
micron-scale membrane curvature, because thermal fluctuations create local
curvature. Distinguishing curved membrane regions from flat is harder at larger
radii of curvature – the signal-to-noise ratio decreases. Are proteins that
sense micron-scale curvature near this basic physical limit? To determine this,
the research group will apply estimation theory to continuum models of
fluctuating membranes in and out of confinement. Protein binding may depend on
proxies for membrane curvature, for example local defects in lipid packing.
These effects, as well as lipid tilt and non-thermal origins of membrane
fluctuations will also be studied. In combination, these models predict how
curvature-dependent binding depends on membrane tension, bending modulus, the
presence of a solid support, and lipid asymmetries between leaflets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Emergent shape sensing by pattern formation on a
fluctuating membrane. &lt;br/&gt;Initial simulations suggest simple bistable
reactions on a membrane surface can reproduce the shape sensing observed in C.
elegans embryos, where proteins localize to narrow ends of a cell. However, cell
membranes are highly dynamic – fluctuating and undergoing lipid flow. Will these
shape changes and flows prevent cells from sensing their own shape or help them?
The PI will begin by developing and testing an energy landscape model of shape
sensing, to describe how protein localization depends on membrane shape.
Simulations of reaction-diffusion dynamics on fluctuating membranes will be
carried out in order to determine when shape fluctuations can help or hinder
shape sensing. These models will predict the extent to which the cell's
patterning depends on membrane-cortex attachment, cytosol viscosity, and other
factors known to modulate active membrane fluctuations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes linking computational research to an
education plan including development of a new class focused on the physics of
cells, as well as mentoring and training students from high school to graduate
school. People supported by this grant will work in collaboration with Baltimore
City public high school students, with Baltimore City students within the group
as well as group members working with the public high school. In particular, the
PI and graduate student will work with local high school teachers to develop
computational “labs” to teach high school students about the role of randomness
in physics and biology and assist in presenting these
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.