* 1945036
* CAREER: Understanding the dynamics and predictability of land-to-aquatic nitrogen loading under climate extremes by combining deep learning with process-based modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Chaoqun Lu, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2025
* USD 541,560.00

Increases in global crop yield largely rely on nitrogen (N) fertilizer input.
However, excessive N applications on land have profoundly impacted aquatic
ecosystems, leading to eutrophication, hypoxia (dead zones), and harmful algal
blooms (HABs) in estuarine and near-shore seas. Despite great progress in
understanding N transport in hydrologic systems, challenges still exist in
effectively managing water quality under hydroclimate extremes (mainly drought
and floods). This project addresses a fundamental issue in hydrology and Earth
system science: How varied are river N loads in response to climate extremes,
and why? The project focuses on the Upper Mississippi-Ohio River Basin (UMORB),
a region contributing over 50% of the U.S. corn and soybean production, and 45%
of the N flux from the Mississippi-Atchafalaya River Basin to the Gulf of
Mexico. Research outcomes from this project will improve understanding of how
the fate of N is altered by natural perturbation and human management in
upstream land ecosystems and will bring new insights for reducing N loads from
land to rivers to coastal oceans under more frequent climate extremes in the
future. It will result in the development of novel Earth system models and lay a
solid foundation for “climate-smart” water management. The project will bridge a
gap between science and practice and disseminate the most current knowledge of
Earth system modeling to the public. The team will develop a Monitoring-to-
Modeling (M2M) learning platform, featuring an online watershed game of “choice
and chance,” to make the complex concept of watershed management more concrete
for the next-generation of scientists, land managers, policy makers, and
voters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the research is to
understand, quantify and predict how land-to-aquatic N loadings respond to
hydroclimate extremes. This project will blend data-driven deep learning
approaches with process-based Hydro-Ecological modeling to characterize and
represent cross- scale climate sensitivity of N loadings and predict the
mitigation range of hydrological N loss across the landscape. The investigators
will synthesize extensive high-frequency water quality monitoring data, remote
sensing images, as well as the time-series geospatial data of land use and
management history in the Midwestern U.S. to unravel the mechanisms underlying N
flow resilience to various extreme events. The hybrid deep learning-process
based modeling framework will build up our predictive capability for the
dynamics of hydrological N movement in a coupled human and natural system. The
hybrid model will then be applied to assess how effective watershed management
practices are, what is a reasonable N load reduction goal to be sought in the
field to reach the goal of reducing hypoxia extent in the Gulf with
consideration of extreme climate events, and where are holes in “the leaky
bucket.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Hydrologic
Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.