* 1945482
* CAREER: Dynamic Point Defect Architectonics - Uncovering Crystal Chemical Design Rules for Tailored Chemical Expansion
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Nicola Perry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 04/30/2025
* USD 613,475.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: A number of ceramic materials “breathe” – they can
exchange, e.g., oxygen or water, with the gas around them, causing a change in
their size. This stretching of the brittle ceramics can cause problems for their
durability when they are constrained in devices, such as sensors, reactors,
batteries, and fuel cells: it can cause cracks and fracture. On the other hand,
this “breathing” behavior raises the possibility to develop a new application:
actuators for use in extreme environments. Additionally, over the past 5-10
years, advanced materials characterization techniques that leverage this
behavior have emerged. Therefore, it is an excellent time to measure and
understand the breathing more completely and to investigate how to design
materials with controlled size changes. This project focuses on a
technologically important class of ceramics, called perovskites, and seeks to
understand how their structure at the level of local charge, atom, and bond
arrangements impacts how they change size during breathing. Experiments are
testing three specific ideas about how the local structure of these materials
can be tailored to control the amount of expansion. Students are being trained
to observe the stretching across many length scales, using precise expansion
measurements, advanced microscopy techniques, and the intense light sources
available at national laboratories. The expected outcome is knowledge of how to
design ceramics with better durability for energy conversion and storage
applications and tailored responses for novel actuators and optimized
measurements. These research efforts are integrated with educational approaches
including international exchange visits to Japan, which train students to be
clear communicators, cross-culturally sensitive, both computationally and
experimentally literate, and motivated toward deep learning. A new summer camp
module links to the research applications in sustainable energy. It aims to
encourage participation of under-represented groups in materials science at the
undergraduate level by intervening at the high school level to increase
students’ confidence, motivation, and self-
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The project seeks to establish
quantitative relationships between bond architecture, local point defect-induced
distortions, and macroscopic chemically-induced strain in mixed- and proton-
conducting perovskite oxides. Point defects govern the behavior of technical
ceramics, and this work’s insight into the structure of defects and their role
in chemo-mechanical coupling will add to the development of the “defect genome.”
Methods including dilatometry, in situ diffraction, thermogravimetric analysis,
advanced electron microscopy, and X-ray absorption and scattering, are being
used to quantify stoichiometry changes, defect-induced local distortions, and
macroscopic strain. The outcome will be the establishment of crystal chemical
design rules for tailored coefficients of chemical expansion. These rules can be
applied to improve durability and optimize responses of ceramics in energy
conversion, storage, sensing, and actuation applications. Additionally, students
will be trained in not only technical skills in university and national
laboratory settings, but also in a variety of broader professional skills in a
global context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.