* 1945633
* CAREER: Precise Ground-Based Spectrophotometry as a Lens for Planetary and Stellar Physics
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Zachory Berta-Thompson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 12/31/2024
* USD 542,804.00

When light passes through a planet’s atmosphere, it meets atoms and molecules
that can absorb or scatter it. Astronomers use this fact to learn about the
composition and structure of the atmospheres of extrasolar planets
(“exoplanets”). When an exoplanet passes in front of its star, as seen from the
Earth, a tiny (yet measurable) amount of light is absorbed. Different elements
absorb different colors (wavelengths) of light differently. The investigator
will use telescopes to study the way exoplanets’ atmospheres absorb or transmit
light at different wavelengths. He will then infer the composition and structure
of the planets’ atmospheres. This will expand our knowledge of planetary
atmospheres beyond those of the eight Solar System planets and give a better
idea of how atmospheres form and change with time. The understanding derived
will help us better understand how our own Solar System may have arrived at its
current state, and how planetary atmospheres, including Earth’s, may change in
the future. The investigator will involve a postdoc and undergraduate students
in his work. He will also develop a program integrating art and science in a
first-year seminar and in an upper-level class on advanced scientific
visualization. Finally, he will develop a K-12 program in collaboration with a
planetarium and the Colorado Studio for the Arts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator proposes to use his institutional access time to the 3.5-meter
telescope at the Apache Point Observatory, in addition to applying for time at
Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory and the Gemini Observatory. He will
address two primary questions: "How do planets accrete and retain their
volatiles?" and "How do aerosols form in planetary atmospheres?" He will create
an open-source Python package that will enable users to 1) extract time-series
spectra from raw data, 2) reduce differential spectrophotometry data, and 3)
visualize and fit data sets. The work will also account for noise introduced
into exoplanet transmission spectra by starspots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.