* 1945660
* CAREER: Controlling unconventional interactions between 2D excitons and novel quantum excitations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Chun Hung Lui, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 446,345.00

Nontechnical Abstract: When a semiconductor absorbs light, some electrons can be
freed, and the vacancies left behind behave like particles with positive charge
(called “holes”). In atomically thin semiconductors, the electrons and holes can
attract each other to form robust bound states (called excitons). As the
excitons govern properties of these materials, it is crucial to explore new
excitonic physics to develop the next-generation semiconductor technology. This
research explores novel phenomena induced by strong interactions between
excitons and other particles. The research team controls the interactions by
tuning the exciton properties. The research can reveal new types of complex
excitonic states and develop new techniques to transmit information with the
excitonic states. A comprehensive education and outreach plan is incorporated to
introduce high-school and undergraduate students to current scientific research
and help underrepresented students to pursue higher education in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Atomically thin two-
dimensional semiconductors are a new class of materials for fundamental
condensed matter research and novel applications. The optical properties of
these materials are dominated by tightly bound excitons with remarkable
properties. This research explores new quantum phenomena by controlling the
interactions between two-dimensional excitons and three types of quantum states,
including chiral phonons, Fermi-sea electron-hole excitations, and Landau
levels. Unlike some other research that studies excitons in relatively weak and
simple interaction conditions, this research focuses on excitons under strong
and complex interaction conditions, which are specifically realized by: (1)
coupling to chiral phonons, (2) using large excited-state excitons, and (3)
shaping excitons into Landau orbits under high magnetic field. Under these
interaction conditions, the research can bring forth a panoply of exotic quantum
phenomena, such as trion and phonon Hall effect, phonon-photon entanglement,
exciton-polaron formation, and fractional quantum Hall excitonic states. The
study of these phenomena can greatly uplift our understanding of complex
excitonic dynamics under strong, chiral, and quantum-entangled interaction
conditions. The research can also lead to new designs in novel excitonic and
phononic devices for excitonic transport, phonon transport, energy harvesting,
and valleytronic information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.