* 1945425
* CAREER: Ruthenium-Catalyzed Stereoselective and Site-selective Functionalization of Carbon-Hydrogen Bond
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Xin Cui, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 661,921.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) supports the research of Professor Xin Cui
at Mississippi State University. This project is jointly funded by Chemical
Catalysis Program of NSF's Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Professor Cui is developing new routes
to organic compounds that could be used in drugs and polymers. The specific goal
is the invention of ways to make organic compounds that are behave differently
from their mirror images. This type of structure requires methods that rely on
particularly subtle chemical structures. Professor Cui proposes to solve these
challenges using catalysts containing the element called ruthenium. Ruthenium
forms compounds with appropriately subtle structures, which facilitate the
formation of desired organic products . New insights will be obtained by
systematic changes in the ruthenium catalysts. The award also supports the
training of undergraduate and high school students through “student-to-student”
science education. Hands-on laboratory experience is provided to participating
undergraduates. The chemistry club organized by Professor Cui provide STEM
education to K-12 students. Overall, this research project helps to improve the
sustainability and innovation of the chemical industry while increasing the
technical workforce of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
Science Foundation (NSF) supports the research of Professor Xin Cui at
Mississippi State University. This project is jointly funded by Chemical
Catalysis Program of NSF's Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Stereoselective C–H functionalization
has attracted much attention because the opportunities are significant both
scientifically and economically, but still faces major challenges. This
challenge is being met by Professor Cui whose research shows that
ruthenium(II)-based catalysts are highly effective for functionalization of
aromatic C–H bonds. Of still greater interest, his research reveals new
stereoselective, particularly enantioselective, functionalization of various
organic substrates. These developments open access to new pharmaceuticals and
related bioactive compounds. Products targeted include alkaloids, chiral
polymers, and future chiral ligands. In one approach, chiral directing groups
are being developed for conferring stereocontrol. In another approach, a new
class of chiral umbrella-shaped ligands enable long-range stereocontrol of C‒H
functionalization reactions. Overall, the two themes are providing new
fundamental insights that will enhance synthetic methods as well as to
demonstrate the untapped potential of ruthenium(II)-catalysis. In parallel with
the laboratory research, Professor Cui leads an undergraduate team that aims to
familiarize young generations with modern organic chemistry. His team also aims
to encourage the participation of high school and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.