* 1945364
* CAREER: Deciphering 2-Dimensional, Crystal-Mediated, Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering for Quantitative Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Xi Ling, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2025
* USD 678,913.00

Molecules can be detected and identified by how they absorb or emit light of
different wavelengths. A technique called Raman spectroscopy reveals information
about molecular structure using the light scattered by molecules as they vibrate
at their unique frequencies. Over 40 years ago, it was discovered that the Raman
scattering signals could be increased dramatically (more than a million times)
when molecules were stuck to (adsorbed on) a roughened metal surface. That
discovery improved chemical detection and analysis, however the signal
improvements are not always reproducible from one surface to another and the
precise reason for the enhancement is still under vigorous debate. In this
project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Xi Ling of Boston University is
investigating signal enhancements in Raman spectroscopy on the surfaces of well-
defined, two-dimensional (2D) crystals (e.g., tin sulfide (SnS2) and tungsten
selenide (WSe2)). The structure and properties of these crystals are better
defined and understood than those of roughened metal surfaces and thus,
Professor Ling and her students may uncover how and why Raman signal are
enhanced on surfaces. New technologies are expected to emerge from this research
project, especially in the field of chemical analysis, where it may become
routine to detect just a few or even a single molecule of a substance. The
students engaged in this project are gaining advanced training in spectroscopy
(light-matter interactions) and molecular and materials design, both of which
are increasingly sought-after areas of expertise in the science and technology
sector. Professor Ling will develop and implement a laser spectroscopy
experience for students by collaborating with Boston University's Learning
Resource Network (LERNet) and its outreach programs. This outreach program
encourages young women and high schools students to enter science and
engineering fields. Dr. Lin will also enhance open source education resources
for high school teachers and students by developing interactive video lesson
modules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms of surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy (SERS) are not fully understood, especially the chemical mechanism
(CM), which remains relatively mysterious compared to the electromagnetic (EM)
mechanism. The scientific objectives of this project are to gain a deeper
understanding of chemical mechanism and explore the potential of 2D crystals to
overcoming the key problem of reproducibility of SERS in practical applications.
Quantitative SERS data from well-defined samples (both 2D substrate and adsorbed
analytes) serve to test the CM theory in the literature. The Ling group is
employing multiple analytical approaches, such as wavelength-scanned Raman
measurements, micro-absorption spectroscopy, as well as rigorous group theory
analysis to understand the origin of the chemical enhancement in a quantitative
manner. Furthermore, toward the development of revolutionary SERS-sensing
techniques, 2D crystal/metal systems are being investigated to understand how
the 2D crystals influence the plasmon frequency and electromagnetic field
distribution of metal nanostructures and demonstrate the high sensitivity,
selectivity and reproducibility of the system in micro-sensing. Collectively,
these investigations are providing a deeper understanding of the controversial
CM in SERS and guide an innovative design of a better SERS platform. The broader
technical impacts of this work include new knowledge of CM in SERS and the
seeding of development of new technique for chemical and bio-sensing. The
education plan improves the quality, retention, and diversity of STEM students
in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.