* 1945305
* RAPID: Short-period Seismic Study of Actively Serpentinizing Lithosphere in the Oman Ophiolite
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Robert Sohn, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2020
* USD 119,901.00

Interaction of fluids with magnesium-rich and silicon-poor rocks results in
chemical reactions that remove carbon dioxide from the fluids. This has been
proposed as a means of carbon sequestration. The world's largest body of such
rocks occurs in Oman, and NSF has funded a drilling program to assess the
mechanisms and chemistry of fluid-rock interaction. A hydrophone array was
deployed in two of the drill holes to measure cracking related to this
interaction. Preliminary data show an unanticipated high frequency of cracking,
which also produces standing waves with the drill hole, an organ-pipe effect.
This RAPID proposal is to now deploy a dense network of seismometers around the
holes, in order to locate the cracking, measure how the cracks open, and measure
the velocity structure around the holes. There is substantive collaboration with
scientists from Oman.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A network of short-period
seismometers will be deployed around a hydrophone-instrumented ICDP hole in the
Oman ophiolite. Data obtained during deployment of the hydrophones show
unexpectedly high amounts of seismicity and the production of acoustic standing
waves in the water column. This array will permit accurate location of the
events, which occur at a rate of about 10 per hour, and focal mechanisms.
Moreover, the standing waves can be used as a source to image the mantle
section. The motivation behind the Oman project is to test the feasibility of
carbon sequestration in ultramafic rocks. The project involves substantive
international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.