* 1945270
* CAREER: Unraveling the Multiscale Asymptotic Dynamics of Planetary Dynamos
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Michael Calkins, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 426,625.00

make revisions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnetic field of the Earth, or the
geomagnetic field, helps to shield Earth’s surface from solar radiation, and
serves as an important reference for navigation. The geomagnetic field is
dynamic: it shows a nearly steady westward movement; it can exhibit so-called
excursions in which the magnetic north and south poles move toward the equator;
and, on timescales ranging from hundreds of thousands of years to millions of
years, it can undergo polarity reversals in which the magnetic poles swap
positions entirely. Although these observations are well-known, the physics that
controls them remains poorly understood. Massive winds present in the molten
iron outer core of the Earth are responsible for the generation of the
geomagnetic field, yet direct observation of these fluid motions is not
possible. Instead, much of our understanding of the core and associated magnetic
field, known as the geodynamo, is derived from computer models. While these
models continue to provide valuable insight into the geodynamo, they cannot
accurately represent the extreme conditions that characterize it. This project
will address this limitation by using a combination of mathematical analysis and
high-performance computer simulations to examine how fluid in the Earth’s outer
core is pushed and pulled by different forces, and how these forces influence
the resulting dynamics. The outcome of this work will be an improved
understanding of the forces that control the evolution of the geomagnetic field,
and the potential for building better models of it in the future. Additionally,
most of the planets within the Solar System also have global-scale magnetic
fields that are created through the same mechanism that creates the geomagnetic
field; this work will also be of direct relevance for improving understanding of
these planetary magnetic fields. In conjunction with the proposed research, a
set of publicly available educational videos will be created with both
undergraduate students and graduate students that highlights the underlying
physics of planetary magnetics fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations suggest
that planetary and stellar dynamos are common throughout the universe. Progress
on understanding these systems is made difficult due to the intrinsic
nonlinearity and disparate spatiotemporal scales that characterize their
dynamics. Current models utilize dynamical parameters that are many orders of
magnitude different than those of planetary dynamos. However, the flows within
the electrically conducting interiors of planets are thought to be balanced in
the sense that two or more forces are dominant. The concept of balanced flows
has been exploited with great success to efficiently model fluid flow in the
Earth's atmosphere, oceans and sub-solidus mantle; such reduced models provide
simplified physical understanding and substantially reduced computational cost
in comparison to the un-approximated governing equations. No analogous model
currently exists for understanding the spherical dynamo regions of planets.
Moreover, the force balance that controls planetary dynamos is still debated.
This project outlines a detailed investigation using both numerical modeling and
perturbation theory that will systematically unravel the dynamical behavior of
planetary dynamos by examining balances on multiple length scales. The work is
based on the hypotheses that planetary dynamo physics is intrinsically
multiscale, that three dominant length scales control their dynamics, and that
distinct balances on these three scales exist. Preliminary results point to an
alternative theory of planetary dynamo physics that has the potential to
reconcile the current divergent viewpoints on planetary dynamo physics. To link
the education and research activities of the principal investigator in a
synergistic manner, a set of educational videos related to the proposed work
will be developed with a team of undergraduate research students and graduate
students and made available through the world wide
web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.