* 1945812
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Zoonotic Origins of Tuberculosis Infection in the Pre-contact Americas
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Anne Stone, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 31,398.00

Mycobacterium tuberculosis has a global distribution and infects over a million
new people each year. In the pre-contact Americas, tuberculosis (TB) infection
was caused by a strain that is found today in seals and sea lions. This doctoral
dissertation project investigates how a zoonotic strain of TB adapted to humans
as a primary host and spread across the Americas. Throughout the project,
undergraduate students at Arizona State University will be trained in genomic
lab work and analysis, and the resulting datasets will be used to create
undergraduate-level workshops. The research team will demonstrate an equitable
international collaboration by fostering mutual understanding and inclusivity
among affiliated parties, thereby facilitating long-term, innovative, and
productive relationships between institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) refers to a group of similar pathogens
that cause TB infection in humans and animals. Genomes extracted from
archaeological remains show that zoonotic lineages were responsible for human TB
infections in the past. Most TB infections in humans today, however, are caused
by M. tuberculosis, the human-adapted MTBC lineage. The evolutionary steps of an
animal-adapted pathogen becoming a human-adapted pathogen are not entirely
understood. The researchers will draw comparisons between modern and ancient
MTBC genomes to understand better how zoonotic lineages of TB adapt to humans as
primary hosts. Ancient MTBC genomes will be extracted from archaeological
skeletons. The research team focuses on a densely populated city and trade
epicenter to determine the breadth of genomic diversity of ancient circulating
MTBC strains, some of which were likely imported through long-distance trade. As
human populations expand and the interface between humans and wildlife narrows,
understanding the genomic underpinnings of zoonotic transmission dynamics will
inform public health surveillance measures. The results of these comparisons
will help frame future epidemiological, evolutionary biology, and infectious
disease research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.