* 1945736
* Collaborative Research: A Chronology and Ecological Context of Primate and Mammalian Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* RAJEEV PATNAIK, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 225,264.00

Primate fossils discovered over the past few hundred years have vastly improved
the understanding of primate evolution. However, major questions remain
regarding the relationship between local geology and the precise identification
of many fossil species. Recently, new fossil primates, including a new ape
species, were discovered in Middle Miocene deposits, demonstrating the potential
for significant additional finds. In this project, the investigators will
reanalyze local geology, search for additional fossils, and reassess previously
identified mammal species to develop more precise geological age estimates and
advance knowledge about primate and mammalian evolution and environments. The
project involves students from underrepresented groups from high school through
graduate school, providing them with STEM research opportunities in evolutionary
biology, geology, paleontology, and imaging. Furthermore, it will foster
research collaborations and training opportunities. Outreach will be provided
through various media formats and digitized fossils will be made available to
researchers and educators to promote scientific inquiry as part of a virtual
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines paleontological and
geological fieldwork with lab-based recovery efforts and isotopic analyses
focused on Middle Miocene deposits. The investigators will: (1) recover
additional fossils from newly discovered fossil localities; (2) establish a more
accurate biochronological and stratigraphic assessment of these localities; and
(3) reconstruct the paleoenvironment at these fossil localities to assess how
the fauna and paleoecology of the region relate to other well-studied
localities. Fossils will be collected through surface surveys and wet sieving of
sediments for micromammals in a laboratory setting. A joint faunal
identification effort with local faunal experts will allow for a revised,
standardized taxonomy and an updated biochronological correlation directly with
regional fauna for the first time. Geological survey efforts will concentrate on
reinterpretation of the major sandstone stratigraphy with an effort to place the
fossil-bearing localities in a firmer relative stratigraphic framework using
novel methods in GIS. Paleoenvironmental reconstructions will be conducted via
relative faunal abundances and stable isotope analyses on fossil mammal enamel.
Finally, regional fossil collections will be digitized using 3D surface scanning
and micro-CT imaging, and then made available online to facilitate faunal
identifications across researchers and for future scientific study. This project
is jointly supported by the Biological Anthropology and Sedimentary Geology
&amp; Paleobiology programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.