* 1945011
* CAREER: Microfossils as Drivers for Submarine Landslides?
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Julia Reece, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 409,670.00

Underwater landslides are natural hazards with potential societal and
socioeconomic consequences. Landslides occur globally, can cause tsunamis, and
pose threats to people and infrastructure, especially near coasts. To reduce
this impact on people and infrastructure, it is critical to advance our
understanding of slope stability in ocean sediments. This project focuses on
continental margins where earthquakes typically do not occur, and as such, do
not act as triggers for landslides. In these sites, it remains unclear how the
skeletal remains of microorganisms that live in the ocean and end up in ocean
sediments could potentially weaken and precondition those sediments for failure
and underwater landslides. The goal of the education activities is to provide
high impact learning experiences and research opportunities for high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students. This project is geared towards students
from underrepresented groups in a STEM field, namely geosciences, in Texas,
which lacks Earth science curriculum requirements. This will be achieved through
an annually recurring education program with the local Bryan High School
consisting of classroom visits, a one-day workshop, and two-week summer research
activity. An undergraduate and graduate student course will be developed, which
includes a domestic field trip to West Texas and New Mexico to study submarine
slope channels and landslide deposits. Through all components, this project will
foster next-generation researchers who can facilitate interdisciplinary science
and broad collaboration to advance knowledge and mitigate natural
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project integrates experimental and
numerical efforts and aims to characterize the role of microfossils in
generating weak layers, which could become large-scale glide planes for
submarine landslides. In this project, marine sediments will be systematically
mixed with diatomite in varying concentrations and under repeatable conditions.
The research goals are to determine key microfossil concentrations with
threshold behavior, exact location within the sediment package, and burial
conditions under which overpressure may be induced and wide-spread failure
initiated within or above a microfossil-rich weak layer. Therefore, this
proposed research will not only provide insights into slope failure mechanisms
for microfossil-rich sediments but will also help in identifying potential
future glide planes from cores and/or logging data from submarine and lacustrine
settings where landslides may occur without external triggers like earthquakes.
To document mechanical, hydraulic, and shear properties of microfossil-rich
marine sediments, uniaxial resedimentation and constant rate of strain
consolidation, as well as direct shear and triaxial shear experiments will be
conducted at effective stresses corresponding to common landslide initiation
depths. Microstructural changes, microfossil deformation, and development of
shear failure planes will be qualitatively and quantitatively characterized by
integrating analysis of hydromechanical data from deformation experiments with
microscale imaging observations. Numerical slope stability models will provide
insights into upscaling measured properties and introducing heterogeneous
layered systems that analyze the interaction between microfossil-rich weak
layers with over-and underlying non-biogenic
sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.