* 1945914
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social environment and gut microbiome plasticity in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Nelson Ting, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 74,653.00

The gut microbiome is the community of bacteria that resides in the
gastrointestinal tract, and past research has demonstrated that this community
is physiologically important to its host. However, researchers do not yet fully
understand why the gut microbiome varies so much from individual to individual.
This doctoral dissertation project will examine how social behaviors such as
physical proximity and infant care-giving affect gut microbiome transmission
among adult and infant individuals in a wild primate population. This research
will therefore advance fundamental knowledge about microbiome variation in a
non-human primate and may also inform microbiome research in humans. The project
will facilitate the completion of a doctoral degree by a woman in science,
contribute to the training of multiple undergraduate students in scientific
laboratory and field methods, and engage young women and other underrepresented
groups in STEM through public outreach. In addition, the work will provide
wildlife education to local school children, ecotourists, tour guides, and field
assistants near the research site through training and public outreach, which
will increase local human resource capacity and aid in the conservation of a
critically endangered primate species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mounting body of
evidence suggests that the gut microbiome is an important phenotypic trait in
understanding human biological variation and well-being. However, we still lack
a necessary understanding of the factors that shape phenotypic and developmental
plasticity in this trait. A primary factor affecting variation in the gut
microbiome that remains unclear is the longitudinal effect of social environment
on the composition of the gut microbiome. Further, we do not understand how
socially-mediated transmission affects the assembly of the gut microbiome during
development, which is a critical window thought to have long-reaching effects
later in life. The primate model system allows examination of how the gut
microbiome changes with shifting social dynamics because adult female social
bonds are known to fluctuate following infant births and infants receive
variable amounts of social contact via allomaternal care (caretaking behaviors
by individuals other than the mother). Using a combination of detailed
behavioral data and microbial DNA sequencing in longitudinally collected fecal
samples, this research will determine the effect size of social transmission of
gut microbes among socially interacting adult females and between allomothers
and infants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.