* 1945584
* CAREER: Identifiability and Inference for Phylogenetic Networks using Applied Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Elizabeth Gross, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 378,902.00

Phylogenetic tree and network reconstructions lead not only to a better
understanding of our natural world, but also have applications in other fields,
such as conservation and epidemiology. For example, taking into account
phylogenetic diversity in the restoration of natural vegetation can lead to
restorations that establish quicker and are heartier, while understanding the
phylogenetics of pathogens can aid in back-tracing the spread of a disease and
guiding epidemiological interventions. While trees are a natural choice for
representing evolution combinatorially, by restricting to the class of trees, it
is possible to miss more complicated events such as hybridization and horizontal
gene transfer. For more complete descriptions, phylogenetic networks, directed
acyclic graphs, are increasingly becoming more common in evolutionary biology.
This project focuses on phylogenetic networks and their parent models,
phylogenetic mixture models, and will use applied algebraic geometry, in
particular, algebraic statistics, to develop novel techniques for their
inference. The project also has research training of graduate students and
educational activities that introduce algebraic statistics and algebraic biology
to undergraduate and K-12 students. In addition to hosting and running a series
of one-week long graduate student research workshops in algebraic biology with
follow-up small group collaborations, the PI will design a data-centered
undergraduate mathematical biology course and organize annual collaborative and
problem-based mathematical events for 6th graders with island-focused
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since network-based Markov models and their
mixtures are specified with a polynomial parameterization, they are amenable to
analysis using algebraic and geometric methods. This project will utilize their
algebraic properties to establish identifiability, a property necessary for
meaningful statistical inference, and then utilize their geometric properties to
develop a procedure for network inference. Since the corresponding model
varieties are toric varieties, secant varieties, and determinental varieties,
this project will not only develop new inference methods for biologists, but
will also lay the foundation and motivation for a new class of problems for
those working algebraic geometry and non-linear algebra. This award is jointly
funded by the Mathematical Biology Program of DMS and the Cluster of Systematics
and Biodiversity Sciences at the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.