* 1945121
* Social monitoring in wild capuchins
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Marcela Benitez, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2023
* USD 328,681.00

Human cognitive abilities are certainly remarkable. Yet, studies on the
cognition of other large-brained animals demonstrate that the cognitive
abilities of humans are not exceptional. Rather, humans are just at the extreme
end of the cognitive spectrum. As such, research on cognitive evolution in other
large-brained primates can offer insight into the origin of human cognitive
abilities. In this project, researchers will probe the breadth and depth of
social cognition in arguably one of the “smartest” primates outside of apes and
humans – white-faced capuchin monkeys. This project supports a unique field
station where researchers have combined a diverse biological field site with an
on-site environmental endocrinology laboratory and training facility for
students. This combination of field site and laboratory offers a field school
each year. Therefore the project supports numerous student training
opportunities in STEM research and fosters an international network of
scientific researchers and collaborative relationships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the leading hypotheses for explaining advanced
primate intelligence is the "social complexity hypothesis." This is the idea
that the challenges of living in large, complex social groups will select for
animals with larger brains and greater cognition. However, current methods use
“group size” as a proxy for social complexity, a variable that does not capture
variation in social complexity for most primate species. By contrast, social
knowledge – knowledge about the identity and relationships of other individuals
– captures social complexity much better because it tracks the information
animals use in their everyday lives. Importantly, the origin of large brains in
capuchins is independent from that of apes, and thus capuchins offer a second
event for researchers to identify selective pressures that led to large brains
and sophisticated cognition. In this project, the researchers will examine what
social knowledge capuchins have and how they use it day to day. Specifically,
they will conduct playback experiments using vocal sequences to test whether
white-faced capuchins understand the relative dominance ranks and kin relations
of others in their group (“depth” of social knowledge) and whether they
recognize and know the ranging patterns of others from neighboring groups
(“breadth” of social knowledge). This program will provide data on one of the
most important taxa for comparative analyses of primate cognition. The project
is jointly supported by NSF's Biological Anthropology program and Behavioral
Systems Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.