* 1945909
* EAGER: Search for Optimal Packings
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Hernan Makse, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,996.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical, data-
intensive, and computational research and education in granular materials with
implications for nano-particle assemblies, glassy materials, biomaterials, and
liquid crystals. Guessing how many candies there are in a jar is an ancient
mathematical problem that occupied the minds of the greatest mathematicians,
from Gauss, Kepler and Hilbert, over centuries. Mathematically, this problem is
known as the "optimal packing problem" and asks to optimize the filling density
of objects of a particular shape occupying a given volume. For example: What is
the maximum number of candies of a given shape that can be packed in a jar?
Nowadays, interest in the general problem emanates from its practical importance
to industries involved in granular media processing and appear in a broad range
of science and engineering fields such as self-assembly of nano-particles,
liquid crystals, glassy and bio-materials. In fact, understanding the structural
and mechanical behavior of packings from the properties of its individual
constituents is a central problem in modern materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will develop theoretical
models supplemented with computational tests to design packing generation
protocols and algorithms which can explore the larger space of parameters in
search for the optimal packing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms and theories
developed by the PI would lead to a deeper understanding of the packing
optimization problem and benefit many industrial sectors, especially
pharmaceutical and chemical industries which rely on storage and transport of
large amounts of granular material, as well as in the oil industry. The PI will
address these problems in industry relevant scenarios and explore novel states
of matter due to particle shape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potentially
transformative aspect of this EAGER project is to go beyond the state-of-the-art
theory on granular matter by applying novel trends in artificial intelligence
through machine learning algorithms and network theory. This combination of
theoretical approaches is high risk-high payoff and brings together different
ideas into an interdisciplinary framework to make progress on the packing
problem in materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to recruit
minority students from CCNY to participate in the project. This project includes
international collaborations. The PI will disseminate data on all the packings
and software generated in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on granular and soft matter. The overall aim of this project is to
develop a unifying theoretical and numerical framework to predict the structural
and mechanical properties of random packings of particles of arbitrary shapes.
The goal of the project is two-fold: first, to investigate and discover
organizing principles of granular states of matter, and second, to design new
granular materials with optimized predefined properties. To do this, the PI will
first develop a theoretical framework to predict the packing fraction of
assemblies of non-spherical particles such as composite molecules of rigidly
bonded spheres, polymer-like chains, tetrahedra and irregular polyhedra in
general, and then test the space of parameters with computational tools based on
network theory and machine learning. These results will allow the PI to search
for optimal packings of predetermined characteristics, for example denser
packings with maximal rigidity by variation of the shape of the anisotropic
building blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potentially transformative aspect of
this Eager project is to go beyond the state-of-the-art theory on granular
matter by applying novel trends in artificial intelligence through machine
learning algorithms and network theory. This combination of theoretical
approaches is high risk-high payoff and brings together different ideas into an
interdisciplinary framework to make progress on the packing problem in materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.