* 1945008
* Dental Analysis for Dietary Reconstruction
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Scott McGraw, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 124,440.00

Paleoanthropologists who seek to understand dietary adaptations in human
ancestors study modern non-human primates to identify links between dental
structure and function. Enamel, the hard, outer covering of a tooth, is one of
the most scrutinized aspects of dental anatomy because it interacts with food
directly. This research explores how the thickness and structure of tooth
enamel, which appear to change over short evolutionary time periods, relate to
specific aspects of diet and tooth function in primates. To achieve this goal,
this research leverages a collection of primate skeletons housed at The Ohio
State University, consisting of Old World monkey skeletons from various field
sites. Data on diet and tooth use associated with these skeletal remains
provides opportunities to investigate how enamel variation in living primates
relates to critical features of their diets and oral processing behavior. As a
result of this work, a large collection of microCT scans (~ 400 teeth) and
histological slides (60-80 teeth) of primates will be made available, thus
enhancing infrastructure for both research and education. Involvement and
training of undergraduates in this project contributes to the development of a
STEM workforce. Communication of project findings via The Ohio State
University's Anthropology Public Outreach Program will increase public
engagement with science and technology. Finally, this research is associated
with a local project, which has environmental, health, and educational benefits
to community members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fills gaps in
paleoanthropologists’ understanding of how enamel evolves in response to
specific aspects of diet and oral processing behavior. Currently, thick enamel
in primates presents an ambiguous functional signal, suggesting adaptation to
hard and/or abrasive diets. This research investigates whether aspects of enamel
thickness distribution, and the angles that enamel prisms make with tooth wear
surfaces, are associated with hard-object feeding (i.e., durophagy), potentially
providing a basis for inferring adaptation to durophagy in fossil species.
Further confounding paleoanthropological interpretation of enamel thickness is
that thick enamel may signify adaptation to either habitual durophagy or to the
consumption of hard foods only during periods when softer foods are not
available, a so-called “fallback” feeding strategy. This work more fully
assesses enamel thickness in primates that are habitual vs. fallback hard-food
consumers, asking whether there are differences in enamel thickness distribution
and/or enamel prism orientation related to these two adaptations. Additionally,
investigating potential developmental differences in the thick enamel of species
that belong to different evolutionary lineages elucidates developmental pathways
underlying enamel's ability to evolve over short evolutionary time spans.
Finally, previous studies have suggested that in leaf-eating primates, selection
for thin enamel constrains the evolution of enamel; this project more fully
assesses this suggestion using a sample of leaf-eating primates with wide
dietary variation. Altogether, research into these related questions elucidates
selection pressures shaping overall enamel thickness, enamel thickness
distribution, and enamel structure, providing insight into evolvability and
constraint in these features. In turn, these insights will form a more robust
foundation for paleoanthropological inference about dietary adaptation gleaned
from tooth enamel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.