* 1945809
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Uncovering the regulatory landscape of myofiber type in the context of human evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Samantha Queeno, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 29,395.00

Humans are distinguished by their ability to walk upright on two legs and their
capacity for endurance running. This behavior is explained in part by the
endurance capabilities of human skeletal muscle, which, in comparison to
chimpanzees, are better suited for holding bodies upright and being active for
prolonged periods without fatiguing. However, it is unknown how this property of
human skeletal muscle evolved due to its absence from the fossil record and a
limited understanding of muscle fiber development at the genetic level. This
doctoral dissertation project will identify the genetic switches controlling
muscle fiber development using a suite of cutting-edge molecular methods. In
doing so, this research will add novel information about the complex genetic
landscape underlying muscle fiber development and illuminate the evolutionary
history of a unique human trait that may have played a key role in bipedal
evolution. This project will support graduate training in advanced molecular
methods and bioinformatics. Additionally, the researcher will share their
findings with the public by hosting a “science run” outreach event. Finally,
data generated from this research will help characterize muscle biology at the
genetic level and therefore has the potential to help target more efficient
treatments for a range of neuromuscular
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding when, why and how the transition to
bipedalism occurred over the course of human evolution is a fundamental question
in biological anthropology. As a species, humans are characterized by a suite of
well-described anatomical adaptations that support efficient, long-distance
bipedal locomotion. While many of these traits are observable in the fossil
record (e.g., bone morphology), others (e.g., properties of skeletal muscle) are
more difficult to detect. The high proportion of fatigue-resistant slow-twitch
muscle fibers in human hind limb muscles optimizes them to perform tonic,
endurance-based activities, and suggests that this trait helps enable long-
distance bipedal locomotion. Yet, the genetic mechanisms controlling this trait
are not well understood. To address this gap in knowledge, this project will
identify the genetic mechanisms underlying muscle fiber development and
reconstruct the evolutionary history of these mechanisms across primates. The
central hypothesis of this research is that natural selection has selected for
human-specific variation in regions of the genome that influence muscle fiber
type, increasing the amount of slow-twitch fibers in human hind limb skeletal
muscles and the efficiency of bipedal locomotion. To test this hypothesis, the
researcher will first use a tailored ATACseq approach to identify those parts of
the genome that are active in mammalian muscle tissues and associated with
muscle fiber type. Next, they will test the function of a subset of these
regions with human-specific variation. In doing so, this project will enrich
anthropological understandings of human evolution by identifying regions of the
human genome that have shaped the biology of a trait highly relevant to
bipedalism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.