* 1945380
* CAREER: First-principles Predictive Understanding of Chemical Order in Complex Concentrated Alloys: Structures, Dynamics, and Defect Characteristics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Wei Chen, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 04/30/2025
* USD 399,597.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and educational activities to develop quantum mechanical and machine learning
methods to understand and design complex multi-element alloys at the atomic
level. The project focuses on complex concentrated alloys (CCAs), a class of
novel alloys that mix atoms of different species at nearly equal ratios. The
scientific drive for studying CCAs is to understand and utilize the vast
chemical and structural design space associated with multiple elements in search
of new materials properties. Current understanding about the stability,
structures, and properties of alloys is limited to the corners and edges of the
multi-element space, such as binary or dilute alloys. The information for CCAs
close to the center of the composition space is virtually non-existent for
systems with four or more elements. The project intends to fill this knowledge
gap in alloy theory for these complex alloy systems by (i) establishing an
accurate predictive understanding of the atomic structures in CCAs through a
combination of quantum mechanical calculations and statistical mechanics
methods, and (ii) integrating quantum mechanical calculations, empirical models
and close-loop machine learning methods to predict the structural and defect
features in CCAs for accelerated design of CCAs for structural or functional
applications. The multidisciplinary nature of the project brings perspectives
from multiple academic fields into the forefront of materials research. The
focus of the technologically relevant CCAs will strengthen the U.S. leadership
in fundamental alloy research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach
activities of the project includes five integrated parts that address learning
tool innovation, broadening participation, youth material education, summer
research exposure, and research career development. The project brings together
national and local partners to create a multidisciplinary team with
complementary expertise to strengthen Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics education and raise the awareness of materials science. In
collaboration with Amazon, a cloud-based learning app will be developed to
transplant the PI’s research and introduce materials and data science to the
general public. The PI will collaborate with SMASH Illinois to offer academic
and social programs to underrepresented students to broaden participation in
materials education. In parallel, summer camps with North Central College and
Questek, as well as high school research programs with Adlai E. Stevenson High
School will be expanded to expose the younger generation to materials science.
The PI will also work closely with undergraduate and graduate students to foster
multidisciplinary career development via project-based research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports research and educational activities to develop first-
principles and data-driven methods to understand the atomic nature of short
range order (SRO) in complex concentrated alloys (CCAs) and how such chemical
order influences lattice distortion, dynamics, and defect structures, thus
creating opportunities for designing new advanced alloys. Severe lattice
distortion is an important phenomenon that is correlated to a variety of
physical and chemical properties in CCAs. However, the nature of severe lattice
distortions in CCAs is poorly understood, especially with the coupling of SRO.
The PI will study SRO and related lattice distortions in CCAs with a unique
synergy of mechanism investigation, predictive modeling, and methodology
development. The research will elucidate SRO on the structures of lattice
distortions in CCAs, which will be utilized to quantify the impact of the
distorted lattices on the phonon characteristics of CCAs. Results and
methodology from bulk CCAs will be applied to establish a predictive mapping
linking defect characteristics with local environments in CCAs, providing the
foundation for computational design of CCAs for superior mechanical properties.
The project will be driven by the parallel research on a hierarchical data-
driven computational framework that enables efficient predictions of structure-
property relationships for CCAs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and
outreach activities of the project includes five integrated parts that address
learning tool innovation, broadening participation, youth material education,
summer research exposure, and research career development. The project brings
together national and local partners to create a multidisciplinary team with
complementary expertise to strengthen Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics education and raise the awareness of materials science. In
collaboration with Amazon, a cloud-based learning app will be developed to
transplant the PI’s research and introduce materials and data science to the
general public. The PI will collaborate with SMASH Illinois to offer academic
and social programs to underrepresented students to broaden participation in
materials education. In parallel, summer camps with North Central College and
Questek, as well as high school research programs with Adlai E. Stevenson High
School will be expanded to expose the younger generation to materials science.
The PI will also work closely with undergraduate and graduate students to foster
multidisciplinary career development via project-based research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported by the Division
of Materials Research and the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.