* 1945763
* Acquisition of a Rock Deformation Apparatus to Study Rheology and Microstructure
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Philip Skemer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 152,520.00

This project will support the acquisition of a new apparatus to study the
properties of viscously deforming rocks at high pressure and temperature. The
viscous flow of rocks is an essential aspect of the growth of mountains, the
convection of the mantle, and the motion of tectonic plates. Moreover, the
deformation of rocks is elemental to numerous geologic hazards, such as
earthquakes, tsunami, and volcanic eruptions. By studying rock rheology in
controlled laboratory setting we can develop new insight into the materials
science of rocks, and provide tools for numerous geological or geophysical
investigations. Unlike many other disciplines, the primary instrumentation used
in rock deformation laboratories cannot be purchased commercially, but must be
built to specification. Nearly every apparatus used in a rock deformation lab
has special capabilities that enable specific types of investigations. The
apparatus that will be built for this project is particularly useful for the
study of rocks that experience extremely large magnitudes of deformation, such
as those that might be sheared along the boundaries between tectonic plates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to construct a second
Large Volume Torsion (LVT) apparatus, building upon an existing successful
design. The LVT has several key characteristics that render it unique among rock
deformation apparatuses. It is able to generate high pressures and temperatures,
as well as large shear strains, on samples that are large enough to provide
statistically meaningful information about deformation microstructures.
Pressure, up to several GPA, is generated using tapered Drickamer-style anvils
and a solid ceramic confining medium. Resistance heaters generate temperatures
up to 1600 K. Large shear strains (&gt; 10) can be generated by rotating one
anvil with respect to the other. There are a number of projects underway that
use data from the LVT apparatus, as well as several targets for future efforts.
Experiments on the deformation and mixing of two-phase composites are used to
understand the origins of mylonites and the rheology of plate boundary shear
zones. Experiments on grain-size evolution over a large range of shear strains
help clarify strain-weakening processes. Experiments to investigate the
development of crystallographic preferred orientation are used to better
interpret seismic anisotropy in the mantle. Experiments at low strain-rates will
be used to elucidate the rate dependence of microstructural evolution. The
acquisition of a second apparatus will effectively double the capacity of the
rock deformation lab at Washington University in St. Louis, allowing the PIs to
train more students, host visitors, develop new techniques, and explore new
parameter space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.