* 1945597
* CAREER: Reconstructing ancient ocean ecosystems: ecological consequences of ammonoid shell shape.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Kathleen Ritterbush, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 511,156.00

This project applies new technologies to discover how a critical group of
ancient animals moved through water. During the age of dinosaurs, squid-like
animals called ammonites filled the seas, aided – or hindered – by buoyant
shells. Project results will show which shell shape attributes increased the
speed, maneuverability, and stability of underwater propulsion. This new
knowledge will transform reconstructions of ancient ocean ecosystems, and lead
to greater understanding of life’s responses to global mass extinctions. Early-
career and student researchers at the University of Utah and Salt Lake Community
College will gain vital skills for wide-ranging career fields in growing
economic sectors, including through development of augmented-reality experiences
for the public. Beyond paleo-sciences, results will provide critical data on
shape, size, and speed for the design of autonomous and propelled instruments
ranging in size from a pea to a tractor tire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will weigh the ecological consequences of ammonoid shell shape by measuring
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic physics that act on model shells. Models will treat
both generalized shell shapes representative of worldwide ammonoid populations
through time, and a targeted group of fossil species that proliferated after
global mass extinctions. Shell models rely on algorithms for idealized shell
shapes, and scanning techniques to replicate and alter real fossil specimens.
Each shell will enter computer simulations to measure hydrodynamics – drag,
lift, turbidity, etc. – and will be 3D printed for water tank experiments that
measure hydrostatics – buoyancy, stability, gas exchange, etc. Taken together,
the results will offer the most comprehensive picture to date of the
capabilities, limitations, and advantages that likely shaped ammonoid ecological
dynamics during their 300-million-year reign at sea. Reconstructions of their
ecosystems, both in general and from specific post-extinction recovery phases,
will provide an unprecedented look at life’s response to environmental change,
and a critical baseline for evaluation of today’s extinction-fueled rise of
their living relatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.