* 1945500
* CAREER: Fundamentals of Conformational and Surface Water Dynamics in Supramolecular Nanofibers
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Julia Ortony, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 12/31/2024
* USD 616,608.00

With this CAREER Award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Julia Ortony at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology is studying self-assembly of amphiphilic
molecules in water. Amphiphilic molecules possess both water-loving and fat-
loving properties. They are typically found in soaps and detergents, and are the
main component of cell membranes, where individual molecules are free to move
within and between cellular components. In this research, new amphiphiles are
used to create self-assembled nanostructures, however, in these nanostructure
the individual molecules are fixed in place. The molecular motion of these
systems is then carefully studied using sophisticated techniques that provide
information about the motions of molecules and surface water in a well known
material, Kevlar (used for bullet-proof vests). Research associated with this
award has the potential to advance fundamental understanding of chemical
reactions at surfaces, and binding and folding events in biological molecules.
This work provides training and education to a diverse group of students in
supramolecular chemistry and materials science. Educational activities focus on
the modernization of the materials chemistry undergraduate core curriculum, the
design of a new advanced molecular materials course for undergraduates, and
teaching of a molecular materials characterization course for graduate students.
Professor Ortony also plans to continue her participation in several mentorship
activities such as MIT's Women of MatSci group, MIT-DOW ACCESS program,
undergraduate advising for women in engineering, and the MIT Graduate Materials
Council. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on the design and
synthesis of a new platform of amphiphilic molecules that spontaneously self-
assemble into nanofibers in water. This self-assembly platform exhibits
extraordinary mechanical properties that results from strong and collective
intermolecular hydrogen bonding programmed into the initial molecular design. In
the first objective, amphiphiles are synthesized with varying surface charge and
molecular flexibility. The second objective focuses on quantifying nanofiber
internal conformational dynamics by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and
nanofiber flexibility and strength by statistical topographical analyses. The
last objective concentrates on understanding the relationship between molecular
features, water dynamics, and surface recognition events from tethered
functional groups. The fundamental knowledge generated by this research has the
potential to significantly contribute to the general understanding of
supramolecular assembly, the dynamics of nanostructures in water, and
recognition events at interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.