* 1945764
* EAGER: An Open Data Sharing Platform for Substance Use Disorders
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Huzefa Rangwala, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,962.00

This project promotes the progress of data science to address the opioid
overdose crisis currently ravaging communities across the nation, as well as to
address substance use disorders more broadly. Numerous local, state, and federal
efforts are underway to collect data relevant to substance use epidemiology, the
availability of services, and response strategies. The challenge is that though
there is a large volume of diverse and increasingly public data sources (e.g.,
national epidemiology surveys, mortality records, prescription drug monitoring,
housing, health claims), these data sources are often fragmented, siloed in
isolated portals, restricted by data-sharing agreements, and are difficult to
use as there are no uniform standards for data collection or dissemination. The
strategies necessary for linking these data to generate meaningful, actionable
knowledge that is easily accessible for different stakeholder communities have
not been developed. This project will develop and disseminate an open platform
that will extract and integrate relevant data and provide toolkits that will
enable stakeholder groups to take timely, appropriate action to manage substance
use and other health and social challenges in their communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this objective, the project brings together an
interdisciplinary team from academia, industry, and government, with expertise
in engineering, physical and social science disciplines to accomplish three
tasks: 1) The team will create an open data sharing environment based at George
Mason University. 2) The team will develop and test a data extraction and
integration layer that will aggregate data appropriately to comply with
confidentiality constraints from data stewards of proprietary data sets. The
data integration will enable multiple disparate datasets to be linked at
multiple geographical scales using de-identified profiles. 3) The team will work
with domain experts and community stakeholders to develop, deploy, and refine
data-driven analytics methods and toolkits for use cases to answer pressing
community needs. The project will result in an open data framework with the
potential to transform the current status quo of a crisis-driven acute system of
care for substance abuse to data-driven pre-emptive, precision-targeted system
of care. The open data framework has the potential to enable communities and
government agencies to improve policies and practices through improved
identification of relevant factors, prediction, targeting and coordination of
resources, interventions and evaluation for managing substance use
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.