* 1945578
* CAREER: Using Astronomy to Improve Tests of Quantum Mechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Jason Gallicchio, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2025
* USD 418,208.00

Quantum Mechanics is the theory that governs the very small, including
individual particles of light called photons. A pair of photons can coordinate
in certain ways, such that measuring each of them tends to give the same result
under some conditions and opposite results under others. This high level of
coordination that photons can exhibit, which cannot be simulated by classical
(non-quantum) means, is called entanglement. In addition to being of great
fundamental importance, this coordination forms the basis for the emerging
technologies of quantum cryptography and quantum computing, so it is important
to probe for any limits of this coordination in the most extreme conditions over
(literally) astronomical distances. This project will use the hardware developed
by the principal investigator for earlier quantum tests to record the time of
arrival of individual photons from pulsars, which are fast-spinning neutron
stars with extremely strong magnetic fields that produce beams of radiation
across the electromagnetic spectrum. Careful measurements will shed light on
various models behind pulsar emission and provide measurements of certain
aspects of Einstein’s General relativity. All of these experiments involve
building custom electronics with undergraduates, and as part of this project,
the principal investigator will modernize the way the electronics lab course is
taught to the college’s science majors. Rather than passively analyzing,
building, debugging, and recording results from standard circuits, students will
take an active role in design each week. This role will start with small, well-
defined design tasks, but will deliberately scale up to an open-ended final
project. Many research groups would benefit from new or improved
instrumentation, and small instrumentation projects solicited from researchers
across the science departments will form the core of the list of suggested final
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is very important in performing tests of
Bell’s Inequality on quantum-mechanically entangled particles to choose the
measurement basis for each particle in a way that cannot be predicted or
influenced by the source of entangled particles or by the other particle. The
principal investigator’s unique contribution to the field has been to improve
tests of Bell’s Inequality using astronomical sources: both stars in our own
galaxy and quasars at the heart of distant galaxies that emitted their light
when the universe was only a tenth as old as it is today. This project continues
to use quasars as a source of measurement settings whose sequence cannot be
predicted without having access to the past lightcones of those quasars. This
will improve delayed-choice experiments and tests of quantum erasure, reducing
the plausibility that locally-causal schemes can explain the observed phenomena.
This project involves building a Sagnac interferometer as a bright and pure
source of entangled photons. The quality of the resulting entanglement will be
measured and optimized in real time with a novel dual rotating waveplate
technique. This entanglement source will be brought to an astronomical
observatory and used to perform a version of Wheeler’s delayed-choice experiment
where information coming from a distant quasar effectively inserts or removes a
beam splitter. It will also be used as part of a test of quantum erasure, where
the decision to erase or not erase which-path information will be determined not
locally, but by light from a distant quasar. Both of these experiments would put
constraints on locally-causal explanations for the observed quantum phenomena.
The same quasar-recording hardware will be used to do time-resolved polarimetry
and coarse spectral binning with sub-nanosecond precision. Similar to the
principal investigator’s work on the Crab pulsar, this improved device will set
limits on Einstein’s Weak Equivalence Principle by constraining the difference
in arrival times between photons of different energies and
polarizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.