* 1945841
* Process Intensification via Bijels for Simultaneous and Continuous Catalytic Reaction and Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Daeyeon Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 417,005.00

Chemical process intensification, driven by societal needs for sustainable
manufacturing, exploits processes designed to reduce energy demand and minimize
environmental impact. Membrane reactors that continuously perform simultaneous
catalytic reaction and separation are an important example of this technology.
When fluid phases separated by the membrane are of differing polarity (e.g., oil
and water), oil-soluble reagents can be reacted and separated from aqueous-
soluble products (and vice versa), further adding to the flexibility of these
systems. Membrane reactors have had significant impact in the pharmaceutical
industry because of the ability to immobilize enzymes as catalysts to drive
biochemical reactions at oil/water interfaces within the membrane. Because
enzyme-catalyzed reactions operate under mild conditions and pH, they are
considered a green processing approach to the continuous reactive separation of
pharmaceuticals. Membrane reactors could also reduce the environmental impact of
agricultural fertilizers and herbicides by removing inactive or detrimental
chemical species. Such processes could also impact the processing of vegetable
oils to form specialty products for consumer products ranging from dietary
supplements, infant formulas, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, food, and beverages.
In these systems, however, interfacial area, which determines the rate of
reaction, is limited to the oil-water interfaces in the membrane reactor pores.
The objective of this research program is to transform the field of membrane-
based reactive separations by introducing novel high-interfacial area structures
with catalyst-laden interface areas (called bijels) as membrane elements. This
material allows multiple key functionalities to occur in a thin layer, with
remarkably high oil-water interfacial area estimated to be 100 times larger than
conventional membranes. In this project, hydrolysis reactions of triglycerides
to produce raw materials such as fatty acids and glycerol will be carried out in
a bijel membrane reactor; this is an industrially significant process with an
annual U.S. market in excess of $25B.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bijels (bicontinuous
interfacially jammed emulsion gels) are formed by quenching a miscible system
through a critical point to induce phase separation. This quench occurs in the
presence of nanoparticles, which form jammed layers trapped at the interface.
High interfacial area is achieved because of the special, bicontinuous
arrangement of oil and water in bijel membranes that allows interfacial area to
increase with bijel membrane thickness. Furthermore, bijels have a sinuous
continuous oil domain adjacent and intertwined with a sinuous, continuous water
domain. The interface is stabilized and decorated with nanoparticles that can
also support immobilized enzymes. The research team will build on their prior
success in fabricating bijels and controlling their internal microstructure via
a scalable method termed solvent transfer-induced phase separation (STRIPS). The
researchers also will build on their collaboration with Pohang University of
Science and Technology in South Korea in which batch mode reactive separation
using an enzymatic catalysis was demonstrated. Based on these advances, the
project objective is to develop bijel-based membrane reactors to facilitate
heterogeneous enzyme-catalyzed reactions of reagents and products of differing
polarity for continuous reaction and separation. Membrane reactor performance
will be assessed using the lipase-catalyzed reaction of triglycerides with water
to form glycerol and fatty acids. Specific aims of the research program include
(1) studying the effects of STRIPS processing conditions on bijels; (2)
demonstrating the continuous hydrolysis of esters through mathematical modeling
and experiments; and (3) reduction of membrane transport limitations to create
reaction-rate limited performance. The successful completion of this project
will enable process intensification through the use of the novel nanostructured
liquid films. The research team will learn how to optimally employ the bijel
technology in processes of societal importance, including selective enantiomer
production, production of specialty chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and fat
splitting. Continuous enzymatic reactive separation in nanostructured bijels
could have transformative impact on enantiomeric pharmaceutical production, a
class of reactions with significant economic
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.