* 1945195
* CAREER: The Role of Groundwater Storage in Earth System Dynamics; Research to Improve Understanding of Current Hydrologic Regimes and Future Climate Response
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Laura Condon, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2025
* USD 390,658.00

Groundwater is a critical water resource across the US and world-wide. Its
natural interactions with surface water help stabilize our rivers and
ecosystems. Despite its central role in the water balance, groundwater is hard
to see, leading to much uncertainty on its availability. As a result, it is
simply characterized in global models, and often misunderstood outside the
hydrologic community. Though the need for better accounting of groundwater
storage in global models has been widely acknowledged, there are still critical
gaps in our understanding of how groundwater storage functions across large
spatial scales and over long time periods. This uncertainty must be addressed to
rigorously evaluate new modeling approaches and improve the hydrologic
projections we make with global models. This project explores the role of
groundwater storage in large scale models and develops tools to validate
groundwater behavior in large coupled systems. The project will further develop
ways to improve effective communication about groundwater to the public. We will
use our modeling platforms as a resource to engage K-12 students in computer
science with locally relevant water issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will quantify the role of large-scale storage dynamics in water and
carbon cycles, which is an identified weakness of our current earth systems
projections. More specifically, this project seeks to understand how storage
dynamics control hydrologic regimes, and what role storage changes could play in
future hydrologic regime shifts. Research will leverage the first fully
integrated groundwater surface water model of the Continental US to develop
direct comparisons with other large-scale modeling approaches and simplified
groundwater representations over large spatial extents at varying spatial
resolutions. This will provide unique insights on the impact of process
representation and spatial resolution on global water and carbon projections not
possible with previous approaches. The key outcomes of this research will (1)
characterize the most sensitive hydrogeologic settings for simplification of
groundwater approximations and spatial resolution, (2) map spatiotemporal
‘groundwater regimes’ across the US and analyze spatial controls, (3) analyze
existing global model storage benchmarks, (4) quantify relationship between
groundwater configuration and response to climate change, and (5) identify
regions that are the most vulnerable to groundwater storage changes. In parallel
with these technical outcomes this project will improve public understanding and
engagement around groundwater sustainability. Broadcast meteorologists already
regularly communicate hydrologic information with the general public. This
project will provide training and broadcast resources on groundwater systems to
this group, reaching a much larger and more diverse audience than would be
possible through direct public outreach. Undergraduates at the UA will help
develop broadcast materials through existing science communication courses, thus
also providing exposure to hydrology for students outside of hydrology. Finally,
the simulation platforms used here will be leveraged as a tool to engage high
school students in local watershed issues while learning computer science and
coding skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.