* 1945218
* CAREER: Conductive Framework Materials for Ultrasensitive, Low Power Detection of Gases
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Katherine Mirica, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2025
* USD 625,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research, Professor Katherine Mirica and her group at Dartmouth
College are developing materials and devices to enable portable, low-power
detection of industrially and biologically important gases - "wearable sensors."
Conceptual and technological advances emerging from this work may be applicable
to designs of smart bandages, smart sutures, and stimuli-responsive personal
protective equipment. In parallel with these efforts, Professor Mirica is also
working to build public awareness of chemical sensing and to improve
recruitment, education, and retention of high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students in analytical and materials chemistry. Workforce development
efforts include a hands-on "Research Scientist for a Day Workshop" for high-
school students and provision of research internships for students
underrepresented in chemistry, including economically disadvantaged students.
The biotechnologies that result from this research will have impact on the
bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mirica group is working to transform
modular conductive framework materials into versatile and integral components of
mobile gas sensing devices. The experimental approach relies on principles of
computational molecular design, chemical synthesis, spectroscopic
characterization, and electroanalysis. The research centers on molecular
engineering of host-guest interactions in porous framework materials through
chemical synthesis and morphological control and the identification of host-
guest interactions of bulk materials using targeted spectroscopic probes.
Finally, the team seeks to establish structure-property relationships that
govern the electroanalytical performance of conductive framework materials in
solid state devices. This research is poised to enable development of a core
technological advance in materials and device design with broad potential
utility in mobile chemical sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.