* 1945852
* International Conference: Developments in Language Theory 2020
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Natasa Jonoska, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports student travel to the International Conference on
Developments in Language Theory (May 11-15, 2020) which is held in conjunction
with a workshop on Discrete and Topological Models in Molecular Biology during
the same period at the University of South Florida, Tampa FL. The project funds
travel of graduate students and junior researchers. The conference is organized
in the USA for the first time since 2006. These meetings bring together a wide
range of speakers from all around the world, from leading theoretical computer
scientists through theoreticians who actively collaborate with experimentalists.
A significant component of the two events is aimed toward young researchers and
graduate students through tutorials, poster sessions, and panel discussions. One
of the goals of the conference is to promote interaction among graduate students
and junior PhDs from around the world and from different disciplines, as these
interactions often result in long-lasting research collaborations and are
consequently highly beneficial for the development of the field. The PI had
significant success in attracting women and students from underrepresented
groups in the past organized conferences and plans to follow similar strategies
to increase participation from diverse backgrounds, specifically minorities and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The conference covers the field
of theoretical computer science focused on combinatorial and algebraic
properties of words and languages including topics on string patterns in
biomolecules; bio-inspired computing; quantum computing; symbolic descriptions
of pictures and their analysis; acceptors and transducers for strings, trees,
graphs, arrays; theory of codes; efficient text algorithms; symbolic dynamics
and cellular automata; decision problems; relationships to complexity theory and
logic; polyominoes and bi-dimensional patterns; cryptography and
concurrency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.