* 1945108
* CAREER: Study of Redundant Deliberation in High-Stakes, High-Uncertainty Decision Making Using the Least-Worst Uncertainty Choice Inventory for Emergency Responses
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Neil Shortland, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 02/28/2025
* USD 294,079.00

Recent research in the field of decision-making has identified that, when faced
with high-risk, high-uncertainty decisions, individuals can suffer from
redundant deliberation and fail to commit to the right (or wrong) action in the
required amount of time. Redundant deliberation is a unique psychological
process within decision-making under uncertainty, that has received less
theoretical attention because it pertains to the absence, or delay, or a
decision being made. To date a wealth or naturalistic research (i.e., research
in the field) has observed the presence of redundant deliberation in emergency
service responses, and real-life cases of decision-making under pressure have
shown the presence, and indeed damage, of redundant deliberation (e.g., Grenfell
Fire, intervention in the Syrian civil war). Despite this, no scientific
research has been able to explore the psychological process that underpins the
causes of, and individual differences in redundant deliberation. &lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of the proposed research is to develop a new measure of decision-
making in high-stakes, high-uncertainty situations that is designed for members
of the emergency services and police force in order to develop scientific theory
on the underlying psychological process of redundant deliberation. The main
feature of this proposal is the validation and implementation of a newly
designed research methodology; the Least-Worst Uncertain Choice Inventory for
Emergency Responses. To date, this Inventory has been piloted on over 350
practitioners including members of the United States Armed Forces, members of
the United Kingdom Police Force, senior members of the Singapore Crises Response
team, and even members of the High Value Detainee Interrogation group. The
results of these studies have shown that the Inventory can be used to explore
the effect of individual differences (such as need for closure, self-reported
maximization, goal orientation) on decision-making tendencies and redundant
deliberation; that it can be used to model the neurological processes of
redundant deliberation and that it can even be used to test emerging theories of
redundant deliberation (e.g., the “theory of colliding sacred values”). Thus, by
furthering our understanding of the psychological process of redundant
deliberation through the continued and expanded use of the Least-Worst Uncertain
Choice Inventory for Emergency Responses, this CAREER grant can have a
significant positive impact on the ability of people to respond to time-critical
situations and avoid delaying important actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.