* 1945015
* CAREER: CAS: Understanding the Coordination Chemistry of Lanthanide-binding Proteins for Rare Earth Element Sensing, Capture, and Recycling
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Joseph Cotruvo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 01/31/2025
* USD 810,000.00

The seventeen rare earth elements, which include the lanthanides, play critical
and often irreplaceable roles in a broad range of devices ranging from cell
phones to fighter jets. However, the production of rare earth-containing
starting materials is currently an inefficient and environmentally unfriendly
process. The recent discovery of organisms that utilize certain lanthanides for
specific cellular functions suggests that learning how these organisms
selectively take up and use lanthanides could lead to the development of new
methods for the efficient detection, capture, and recycling of these important
elements. This project of Professor Cotruvo from the Pennsylvania State
University and funded by the Chemistry Of Life Processes Program seeks to
characterize metal binding to natural lanthanide-binding proteins, a first step
in setting the groundwork for potential applications of these proteins in rare
earth harvesting and recycling. The outreach efforts of this program focus on
the education of the next generation of scientists. A primary objective is the
implementation of a professional development program that includes lab rotations
for freshmen and sophomores at Penn State. The goal of the program is to help
the undergraduate students discover chemistry research questions about which
they are passionate and to lower the barriers to pursuing undergraduate research
for these students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The over-arching goal of this research
project is to gain a fundamental understanding of how biological systems
selectively recognize lanthanides over other, more abundant metal ions. Recent
studies have shown that lanthanides are specifically utilized by certain
bacteria. This research follows from the recent discovery and preliminary
characterization of the first lanthanide-binding proteins that are not enzymes.
These novel proteins may be used in the future to address the challenging
chemical problem of harvesting lanthanides and other rare earth elements because
they bind lanthanides reversibly and selectively. The project aims to use a
variety of structural and spectroscopic methods to elucidate the lanthanide
coordination by Methylorubrum extorquens lanmodulin, a recently discovered
protein that binds lanthanides with picomolar affinity and million-fold
selectivity over many other common elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.