* 1945776
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Antimicrobial resistance as a form of anthropogenic disturbance to primate gut microbiomes
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Sarah Bornbusch, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2022
* USD 32,195.00

Antimicrobial resistance, now considered a pressing public health concern, has
propagated into the microbial communities of urban and natural environments
around the world. Only recently has antimicrobial resistance been identified as
an environmental contaminant and ecological concern; its impacts on wildlife and
their environments remain relatively unknown. This doctoral dissertation project
will characterize and quantify antimicrobial resistance in a primate species and
its habitats, across different environmental conditions. Beyond contextualizing
antimicrobial resistance in an endangered species and vulnerable landscape, this
research will highlight the potential for transmission of resistant bacteria
between hosts, including humans, and their environments. With far-reaching value
for nonhuman primate conservation and husbandry, the results of this study will
be shared with the scientific community (via collaborations, presentations,
attendance of domestic and international conferences, and publications) and with
the public (via science education and outreach).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
revolutionary for modern society, the ubiquitous use of antibiotics has resulted
in the rapid development of antimicrobial resistance genes that persist in
bacterial genomes, can be transferred to other microbes, and may be
proliferating environmental reservoirs of resistance. Animals can acquire
resistant bacteria either through exposure to direct antibiotic administration
(e.g., through veterinary care) or to environments contaminated with antibiotics
or resistance bacteria. Once incorporated into host-associated communities,
known as microbiomes, resistant bacteria disrupt the symbiotic roles of
commensal microbes and diminish the host’s immune function. Current
understanding about the transmission and impacts of resistance derives primarily
from studies of humans and clinically prominent animal models (i.e., laboratory
rodents). To better understand and combat the ubiquitous ‘resistance crisis’ on
a more comprehensive scale, a broader, ecological framework is necessary. The
Co-PI’s dissertation research is focused on assessing antimicrobial resistance
as a novel facet of anthropogenic disturbance that differentially impacts lemurs
living along a gradient of disturbance (i.e., ranging from minimally to greatly
disturbed natural habitats and captive settings). Using next-generation
sequencing techniques, this project has three specific aims: to determine the
abundance of antimicrobial resistance in (1) the gut microbiome of lemurs, (2)
representative environmental microbiomes (from soil and water) across the
lemurs’ habitats, and (3) the gut microbiome of lemurs directly experiencing
acute and cumulative antibiotic exposure. By studying varying disturbances in
lemurs and their environments, we will determine specific sources of
antimicrobial resistance and highlight the resistance crisis as an ecological
and conservation concern with the potential to impact wildlife
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.