* 1945287
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Relationships Between Magmatic 'Flare-Ups', Crustal Rheology, and Arc Collapse
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Stacia Gordon, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 260,880.00

Subduction zones, or areas where oceanic tectonic plates are pulled into the
deep Earth, are one of the most dynamic locations on our planet. Importantly,
they facilitate the transfer of magma from the Earth’s interior mantle layer to
its surface. This magmatism is most clearly expressed as volcanic eruptions, and
several lines of evidence suggest that this process is how continental crust has
been made throughout Earth’s history. Nevertheless, the rate of magma transfer
is not constant. There are well-documented periods of intense magmatism within
subduction zones that are known as magmatic ‘flare-ups’. These punctuated events
represent a large transfer of material and thermal energy into the Earth’s
crust, and delineating their causes and consequences is important for
understanding the long-term evolution of these dynamic tectonic settings. This
study is focused on the relationship between magmatic flare-ups and deformation
of the crust by comparing two periods of intense magmatism within the North
Cascade Range, Washington, that occurred 78–60 and 50–45 million years ago. This
area is ideal for the study because subsequent tectonic events, combined with
erosion, have juxtaposed rocks that represent a variety of crustal depths during
both flare-up events and have exposed these rocks at the Earth’s surface. The
researchers will use this natural laboratory to create a detailed timeline of
magmatic input compared to regional evidence for thickening and subsequent
thinning of the Earth’s crust, faulting, and flow of ductile, weak crust. As
part of this project the researchers will produce a scientific podcast that will
communicate the results of this study to the general public. The podcast will
highlight the role of women geoscientists in the project, with the goal of
increasing recruitment to and retention of women in STEM-related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research will document
the rheological evolution of continental arc crust during and between magmatic
flare-up events. The researchers propose to exploit a well-exposed and
relatively well-studied crustal section in the North Cascades, Washington, which
preserves a record of magmatism, metamorphism, and deformation in the deep to
upper crust during and between two flare-up events in the latest Cretaceous and
Paleogene. Underthrusting and incorporation of sediment into the deep levels of
the arc occurred during part of the older flare-up, and the end stage of the
younger flare-up is coeval with exhumation of the deep arc crust. The
researchers will utilize cutting-edge geochemical, geochronologic,
thermobarometric, and field techniques on a combination of igneous intrusions
and metasedimentary rocks within the arc, including those exposed within major
fault systems. A key component of this study will be to create a high temporal
resolution record of magma addition during the two flare-up events using
uranium-lead zircon geo-/thermochronology that can be directly compared to a
similar record of metamorphism, ductile deformation, and faulting determined by
a combination of uranium-lead zircon, monazite, and titanite
geo-/thermochronology, application of the new quartz in garnet geobarometer, and
traditional field and microstructural study. This approach will provide a
holistic understanding of magmatic flare-ups and how they affect the rheology of
subduction zone crust on a &lt;1-million-year-scale. In particular, the
principal investigators will address: the temporal relationship between a
weakened deep crust and flare-up magmatism; when the arc-bounding fault systems
became active relative to flare-ups; how deformation was partitioned across
different lithologies and structures; if and when crustal melting occurred
during a flare-up; and if crustal thickness stayed constant during and between
flare-ups. The broader impacts will include training of graduate students and
creating a long-lasting program for public outreach through the development and
advertisement of a podcast series tied to the roadside geology of the proposed
research area, which is in the Ross Lake National Recreation
Area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.