* 1945832
* Quantum-Enhanced Optomechanical Accelerometers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Dalziel Wilson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The use of light to measure and manipulate mechanical objects has recently seen
dramatic advances in the field of quantum optomechanics. It is now possible to
cool a macroscopic mechanical resonator to near absolute zero using radiation
pressure inside an optical cavity. Conversely, by reflecting a laser field off a
low-loss mechanical resonator, it is possible to “squeeze” its statistical
fluctuations beyond classical limits, providing a resource for quantum-enhanced
interferometric measurements. This project will combine both techniques to
develop next-generation optomechanical inertial sensors, in which light is used
to probe the displacement of a mechanical resonator in response to accelerating
reference frame. In addition to precision applications such as space-based
gravimetry and inertial navigation, the project will open the door to
fundamental experiments such as accelerometry below the standard quantum limit
and calibration of acceleration to fundamental constants. The long-term vision
is a new class of field-deployable, miniaturized quantum
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals of the project are (1)
demonstrate the first chip-scale optomechanical accelerometer with nano-g
sensitivity (enabling precision applications such as inertial navigation and
gravimetry in a compact form factor), (2) demonstrate a squeezing-enhanced
optomechanical accelerometer by realizing ponderomotive light squeezing in an
acoustic frequency cavity optomechanical system; (3) use radiation pressure shot
noise to calibrate an optomechanical accelerometer to fundamental constants; and
(4) use radiation pressure to stabilize an optomechanical accelerometer, by
harnessing high fidelity coherent and measurement-based feedback cooling
techniques. To accomplish these goals, the researchers will refine two advanced
sensor designs representing complementary expertise of the PI and co-PI: (1) a
centimeter-scale high stress silicon nitride membrane integrated in a Fabry-
Perot cavity and (2) a bulk fused-silica optomechanical resonator integrated
with a fiber cavity. As an enabling tool, the PI/CoPI will also develop a
compact laser source capable of shot-noise-limited operation at acoustic
frequencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.