* 1945771
* Collaborative Research: Feeding Ontogeny at the Interface of Behavior and Morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Janine Chalk-Wilayto, Mercer University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 128,709.00

This research will integrate research on the physical properties of food, the
behaviors individuals use while opening and eating foods, and jaw muscle
mechanics across a range of ages in two primate species, shedding light on how
anatomy and behavior interact to influence feeding performance during important
developmental milestones. Results of this research will improve our
understanding of how selection for particular feeding behavior strategies during
development shapes adult feeding behavior and related musculoskeletal anatomy.
Additionally, the findings may inform models for understanding and
reconstructing behavior from fossil primates and hominins. The project will
foster international research collaborations, provide STEM training
opportunities for a female postdoctoral scientist and multiple undergraduate and
graduate students, and support four early-career female scientists. Results will
be used to develop primate behavior and anatomy exercises for K-12 students and
provide training for K-12 teachers to effectively deliver those exercises.
Furthermore, findings from this research will be relevant to conservation and
community outreach efforts at the field sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will integrate diverse datasets to test primate feeding system form-function
hypotheses. The central goal of the proposed research is to examine how immature
primates cope with feeding performance constraints, such as maximum jaw gape and
bite force, during ontogeny. To address this goal, this study will compare
feeding system development in two related primate species, one that exploits
hard, tough and relatively large foods, and one that eats smaller, less
mechanically-challenging foods. Specifically this project will: 1) integrate
experimental and ecological data addressing developmental shifts in food
properties, feeding behavior, and feeding system function and morphology in
closely related primate species; 2) establish functional relationships between
diet and morphology in immature primates to examine how selection for particular
feeding behaviors during development relates to adult morphologies and maintains
feeding performance throughout ontogeny; and 3) integrate data on feeding system
skeletal morphology with data on critical determinants of feeding system
performance, including food properties, bite force, and gape. These results
contribute to our understanding of extant primate ecomorphology and also provide
an integrated model for the appearance and differentiation of diet-driven
morphology in fossil taxa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.