* 1945659
* CAREER: From Desert to Coastal Rainforest Soils- How do fungi transform minerals deployed across natural weathering gradients?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Rebecca Lybrand, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2021
* USD 187,241.00

Mineral weathering replenishes the supply of inorganic nutrients that sustains
terrestrial life on Earth. The soil microbiome, including fungal communities,
contributes to weathering by disrupting, dissolving, and extracting nutrients
from mineral grains. Fungi seek out nutrients and water sources by spreading
networks of exploratory hyphae across a soil landscape. However, identifying the
mechanisms used by fungi to transform minerals to extract rock-derived nutrients
remains challenging, especially in natural soils that span different climates,
rock types, and ecosystems. The goal of the research is to understand how fungi
interact with abiotic environments to initiate mineral weathering and form soil
in Earthâ€™s critical zone. This project will utilize recent advances in high
resolution microscopy and mass spectrometry to examine fungi interacting with
mineral surfaces at micro-to nano-scale resolutions. The results will
demonstrate how new technologies can promote the progress of the earth and
environmental sciences in combination with an Integrated Critical Zone Model.
The project findings will bring economic and societal benefits with respect to
soil preservation, agricultural activity, and bio-engineering given the
ubiquitous nature of soil fungi in the environment. This research will be
integrated with the educational goal to diversify, recruit, and retain community
college students in the (geo)sciences academic pipeline by implementing: Soils
&amp; Outreach for Integrated Learning &amp; Self-Efficacy (SOILS) Bridge. The
bridge program will enhance academic and social resources for incoming college
students through tiered mentoring, training in the field and lab, and K-12
outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will probe into fungal-mineral
interactions across spatial scales to answer unresolved questions related to
fungal impact on mineral transformations and contributions to nutrient cycling.
The research objectives are to: 1) Assess weathering of natural soils and
incipient transformation of mineral substrates buried in mesh bags across
landscapes that span bioclimatic (desert to coastal rainforest) and topographic
(summit to drainage) gradients, 2) Differentiate weathering agents and the
initial stages of fungal-driven weathering in field systems using microscopy,
mass spectrometry, and elemental analyses of deployed minerals, and 3) Quantify
mass transfer rates of mineral elements normalized to mineral-fungi contact
areas determined from field-deployed mineral samples and subsequently upscaled
using soil process models. The study will provide unprecedented insight into how
fungi respond to climate, topography, and nutrient availability and will offer
mechanistic insights into processes that upregulate weathering in natural
soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.