* 1946919
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Authentication on the Web: Provable Security for Emerging Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Alexandra Boldyreva, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 03/31/2024
* USD 480,929.00

Some important communication and authentication protocols on the Web still lack
the provable-security treatment and hence lack the security guarantees as well.
The project's impact is in bridging this gap. The project’s novelty is coupling
the provable-security approach of modern cryptography with protocol design to
yield novel security frameworks and analyses of the following protocols of
emerging importance:(1) single sign-on (SSO) services, such as OpenID Connect,
that allow service providers to delegate authentication of clients to designated
identity providers,(2) FIDO2, a very ambitious project of the FIDO Alliance that
helps the world to move away from bothersome use of passwords for
authentication, relying instead on second-factor devices or biometrics, as well
as secure PINs, (3) HTTPS protocol over TLS or QUIC, which encrypts and
authenticates nearly half of Internet traffic nowadays. However, its security is
not clear when used in combination with active proxies, middleboxes, or edge
servers, all of which inspect, cache, or transform traffic in order to apply
security rules, improve performance, etc. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For each part
of the project, the investigators design formal security definitions that take
into account practical adversarial capabilities and various security threats.
They then attempt to prove that the cryptographic cores of the aforementioned
protocols satisfy the definitions under some reasonable computational
assumptions on the protocol's components. When weaknesses are found and such
proofs are not possible, then the investigators propose fixes. The novelty in
applying such an approach is in modeling parties of more than two types, which
may include a human party. The investigators put a serious effort to make the
results accessible to a wide audience, including
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.