* 1946329
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I:  Workshop: Scalable Quantum Computing Laboratory
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Christopher Monroe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 49,999.00

This workshop will be organized in Fall 2019 and will bring together key
stakeholders from academia and industry. The participants will discuss current
challenges in Quantum Computing, opportunities to overcome those challenges, and
will map out a path forward to enable near-term progress. The specific aim of
the workshop is to identify realistic deliverables in the area of Quantum
Computing, including: i) Prototypes that could be developed in the next 2-5
years, and ii) Testbeds needed to evaluate them in the following 5
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With quantum information science now pervading all
corners of academic and government science and engineering programs, there is
great interest in pursuing the scientific limits of quantum computer
capabilities. The control and use of ever larger entangled superpositions in
quantum computers may even confront the fundamental conundrum of quantum
mechanics: how to reconcile quantum and classical worlds? Apart from such
intellectual directions, the continual use and building of generations of
quantum computer devices is expected to impact a new discipline that will help
change the culture of our scientists and engineers to embrace the laws of
quantum physics and create new scientific and technological
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the workshop, the aim is to gather input
from the broad community in quantum information science and quantum computing,
with representatives from physics (atomic/molecular/optical and condensed
matter), chemistry, mathematics, information theory, computer science, and
engineering disciplines. We expect attendees from academia, government
laboratories and industry in order to determine needs that are specific to the
science goals of quantum computing. The resulting white paper produced by the
workshop will help motivate the allocation of resources to these areas and will
have a positive impact on the entire quantum information science
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.