* 1946607
* SFS: A Cybersecurity Educational Partnership for the Government Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Douglas Reeves, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,309,089.00

The computing and communications infrastructure upon which the United States
relies has been shown again and again to be vulnerable to attack, disruption,
infiltration, and subversion. The result is a very rapid growth in the need for
trained cybersecurity professionals, particularly in government. To address this
need, this project will provide two years of scholarship support to students
pursuing a specialization in cybersecurity. Specific attention will be given to
the recruitment of females, veterans, minorities, and first-generation college
students. North Carolina State University plans to partner with community
colleges in North Carolina to aid in the recruitment of a diverse group of
students. A recruiting pipeline will be developed and include community colleges
and K-12 outreach. Students will receive a technically deep education that will
be well-grounded in the context of government functions, priorities, and
resources. In addition, the impact of the project will extend beyond the
scholarship recipients with the establishment of a new undergraduate
Cybersecurity Concentration and enhancement of the existing graduate
Cybersecurity Track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina State University is
designated as a Department of Homeland Security and National Security Agency
Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Research. Each year four
undergraduate students and one master’s degree student will be selected for
support. Significant efforts will be made to recruit outstanding students and to
ensure diversity in the recruited class. A partnership with one or more
community colleges will be established to expand the pool of potential students.
New courses will be added to the curriculum, including a capstone Cybersecurity
Project course and a course on Recent Topics in Cybersecurity. The project will
also support the development of a new concentration in cybersecurity for
undergraduate students that will graduate at least 25 students per year. The
project will benefit from exceptionally strong ties with industry and government
employers. Cybersecurity professionals will be recruited as adjunct instructors,
which will bring an important industry perspective to the coursework. Students
will engage in an internship with a government employer during their training
and will participate in a variety of related supplemental experiences, including
professional certifications, research projects, national cybersecurity
competitions, a guest speaker series, travel to national meetings, and K-12
outreach. The Department of Computer Science will support the placement of
graduates in government positions and will host an annual job fair with
government employers. The Cybersecurity Education Director will coordinate the
project and an external team will continually assess the effectiveness of the
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.