* 1946216
* I-Corps: Soft Robotic Arms as Human-Compatible Machines
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Yang Zhang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
soft robotic arms as human-compatible machines for harvesting applications in
the agriculture industry. Currently, many fruits and vegetables are harvested by
hand, representing un-automated area in an industry that has readily embraced
technical advancements. By using soft robotic arms, farmers will be able to
automate the processes of harvesting delicate fruits and vegetables without
bruising. The implementation of these technologies can potentially ensure the
entire crop is reliably and safely harvested in a timely manner. The soft
robotics technology, being able to grip and transfer fruits and vegetables
without bruising, can potentially significantly impact several agricultural
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will further develop a
technology platform of soft robotic arms. By adding soft components in
traditional robots or radically designing robots with mostly soft materials,
soft robotic devices have demonstrated promising capabilities which have enabled
many unique applications not possible with traditional robots. Inspired by
nature, this project further develops a vasoconstriction-like micro pinch valve
which enables localized flow control. Using this valve, it has been possible to
build pneumatically-powered tetherless soft actuator prototypes, including soft
arms and soft grippers, and demonstrate their advantages, such as flexibility
and safety, over traditional robots. Such a soft robotic arm system is capable
of navigating around complex obstacles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.