* 1946671
* Policies and Perceptions of Sexual Consent and Assault
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Laura Beth Nielsen, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 01/31/2024
* USD 117,308.00

The incidence and impact of sexual assault on college students produce profound
effects, resulting in lower grades, higher dropout rates, higher rates of
depression, drug use, and suicide attempts. Colleges and universities that
receive federal funding are required to ensure equal educational opportunities,
which include preventing and addressing sexual assault, harassment, and
discrimination. To enforce this mandate, some states have passed laws that
detail how their colleges define sexual consent. They are manifest in policies,
rules, and training sessions for those on campus. This project will analyze the
laws, policies, and practices that concern sexual behavior on college campuses
as well as perceptions and understanding of sexual consent and
assault.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine how laws and policies
affect college students’ understanding of sexual consent and related behaviors,
as well as their reporting decisions for sexual assault. It will employ
qualitative interviews of a large sample of undergraduate students, as well as
archival research of primary source documents, in a matched campus design across
several colleges and states. The project will ascertain students’ understanding
of issues related to sexual consent, how consent was or was not achieved in
their own sexual encounters, and how they understand campus processes designed
to investigate and punish those who do not comply with campus rules about sexual
assault. The research products will contribute to a variety of disciplines
concerning the study of law and organizations, will examine how uniform law is
enacted and enforced at different organizations in the field of higher education
across different states, and will inform policy debates about sexual assault,
training, and responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.