* 1946564
* Convergence Accelerator Phase I:  Project Scoping Workshop (PSW) on Quantum Interconnects (QuIC)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Marko Loncar, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 02/29/2020
* USD 85,200.00

This workshop will be organized in Fall 2019 and will bring together key
stakeholders from academia and industry. The participants will discuss current
challenges in Quantum Interconnects (QuIC), opportunities to overcome those
challenges, and will map out a path forward to enable near-term progress. The
specific aim of the workshop is to identify realistic deliverables in the area
of Quantum Interconnects, including: i) Prototypes that could be developed in
the next 2-5 years, and ii) Testbeds needed to evaluate them in the following 5
years.

We propose to organize the workshop that will bring together key stakeholders
from academia, industry and government with the charge to answer the following
questions: What is the societal impact offered by QuIC technology? Who will
benefit from our work? What are the most promising QuIC platforms and how soon
can they to be translated from lab to "real world" environments? What are the
main experimental and theoretical challenges of these QuIC platforms, and how we
can address them? Do they pose interesting scientific or engineering questions
that require convergent research and partnership between academia, industry and
government? Are there needs for platform specific or generalized algorithm and
software development? What are the needs of QuIC community in terms of sustained
financial support, additional technical expertise required, workforce/ student
training, etc? To answer these questions and evaluate the potential of QuIC, the
workshop will draw participation from different scientific and engineering
disciplines including material scientists, physicists, electronic and photonic
circuit designers, control and information theory experts, computer scientists,
software engineers, and so on.

The workshop will involve key players from both industry and academia involved
in the development of classical interconnects (largely optical) crucial to the
development high performance computing (HPC) systems and modern data centers.
Importantly, this project advances the objectives of two of Ten Big Ideas for
Future NSF Investments: "Quantum Leap" (QL) and "Growing Convergent Research"
(GCR). This activity also advances objectives of the National Quantum Initiative
(NQI), a coordinated multiagency program to support research and training in
Quantum Information Science (QIS). The outcome of the workshop will be a white
paper co-authored by all workshop participants and made available to the public.
The white paper will outline the Workshop's position regarding community
priorities relative to QuIC.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.