* 1946668
* Standard Research Grant: Beautiful Code: Aesthetic Discourse and Aesthetic Practice in a Software Organization
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Paul Dourish, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 02/29/2024
* USD 350,925.00

The actions of hundreds of software developers must be precisely coordinated if
the software systems and web technologies that people use every day are to work
effectively. Ensuring common orientations towards the development process is
therefore crucial for developing and deploying new software applications. This
project examines how multidisciplinary teams collaborate and coordinate around
software systems to effectively develop new software. In addition to using the
instrumental language of function and effectiveness to coordinate their work,
software developers also discuss software, algorithms, and solutions as being
“beautiful” or “ugly” to help them coordinate their design methods and problem-
solving strategies. This project examines aesthetics as a mechanism of social
control, organizational alignment, and professional signaling among software
development teams in video game development where issues of aesthetics are
paramount and where groups graphic artists, designers, computer programmers, and
other professions must collaborate to craft a common sense of aesthetic practice
within engineering production work. Broader impacts include graduate student
training, using research materials to develop new university courses, and
engaging in public conversations about values and design considerations of
automated systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how technical
and nontechnical factors shape the outcomes of software engineering
collaborations in a digital game studio in which software engineers and
programmers work with artists and marketers in developing their products. The
main goals are to understand how aesthetics emerge within the daily work
practices of collaborative teams, how aesthetic evaluations act as mechanisms of
social control and practices of categorization, and how different aesthetic
schemas are brought into alignment across the various components of video game
design work. Adopting an ethnographic approach, the investigators will engage in
participant observation for eight months, four days a week, including formal
meetings and informal interactions. Observations will be supplemented with
informal conversations and ethnographic interviews focusing on career
trajectory, aesthetics, and socializing practices among software developers.
Overall, this project will contribute to basic social scientific understanding
of engineering work and collaboration at the human-technology
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.