* 1946150
* Understanding and Enhancing Self Regulated Learning in Introductory Computer Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Eric Fouh Mbindi, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 11/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest in high-quality computer science education. Given the dramatic
growth in computing-related educational programs, it is important to improve
student learning outcomes in introductory computer science courses. Self-
regulated learning may be a key to achieving this goal. Self-regulated learning
includes the abilities of learners to set their own goals, monitor the own
learning, and adjust learning strategies as needed. Research studies show that
many computer science students have poor self-regulated learning abilities. As a
result, they engage in behaviors that interfere with learning, such as
procrastination and skipping content. This project seeks to help computer
science educators and researchers understand and enhance students' self-
regulated learning abilities. The project will examine the relationship between
students' increased use of self-regulated learning strategies and their
performance in introductory computer science courses. It is expected that
students who develop skills in self-regulated learning will be more successful
in introductory computer science courses and persist into computer science
majors and careers. The project thus has the potential to broader participation
within computer science fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
the self-regulated learning that emerges at the intersection of two types of
activities: reviewing conceptual materials during programming and trying out
ideas through writing programs. The conceptual materials, online textbook, and
programming Integrated Development Environment from an introductory computer
science course will be instrumented to record all student interactions. For
example, it will record when a student completes interactive exercises or how a
student refers to the text when completing a programming problem. The collected
data will be used to better understand self-regulated learning by modeling
patterns of use of individual materials and patterns of use across the different
materials. The project will also examine how these behaviors map to students'
development of self-regulated learning, as well as self-efficacy and confidence,
and how each of these constructs predicts the development of computer science
knowledge and skills across the course. It will also study how the developments
in self-regulated learning, confidence, metacognition, programming skills, and
computer science conceptual knowledge are associated with students' longer-term
interest in computer science. In doing so, the project will attempt both to
understand the factors that lead to greater success in computer science and
retention in the computer science pipeline, and to develop theoretical knowledge
about the development of self-regulated learning. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.