* 1946093
* RII Track-1: Socially Sustainable Solutions for Water, Carbon, and Infrastructure Resilience in Oklahoma
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Kevin Wagner, Oklahoma State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 16,659,914.00

This RII Track-1 project will enable the design and development of acceptable
solutions to pressing societal problems. The working hypothesis of this project
is that socially sustainable solutions to complex societal problems will be
found at the intersections of related but distinct problem areas, where diverse
stakeholders can find agreement because the array of issues cuts across the
usual narratives that frame social conflict. Oklahoma EPSCoR will employ a
social science framework that heavily incorporates social dynamics theory and is
informed by theories of public policy learning to invest in science at the
intersections of four key focus areas: changing seasonal to sub-seasonal weather
patterns, variable and marginal quality water supplies, shifting terrestrial
water and carbon dynamics, and sustainable water and energy infrastructure. A
social science framework will provide for systematic and iterative engagement
between key stakeholders, the public, and technical focus area teams to identify
convergent solutions. This project will be administered by Oklahoma State
University in collaboration with five other Oklahoma academic institutions,
which include two Minority Serving Institutions: University of Oklahoma,
University of Tulsa, Southwestern Oklahoma State University, Langston University
(a Historically Black College or University (HBCU)), and the College of the
Muscogee (Creek) Nation (a Tribal College). Additional project partners include
regional universities and community colleges, the Noble Research Institute, an
agriculture-focused non-profit organization, and the Oklahoma Museum Network.
The use of social science to generate solutions within a polarized environment
has high potential for broader impacts, because it addresses needs that are
relevant to Oklahoma’s citizens. The resulting solutions developed will benefit
the quality of life for Oklahomans associated and unassociated with the project.
In addition, the project will promote STEM education across the jurisdiction and
broaden the participation of underrepresented populations in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RII Track-1 Oklahoma EPSCoR project will develop and
test socially sustainable, science-based solutions for wicked (complex) problems
at the intersection of land use, water availability, and infrastructure. The
unifying research question is whether science-based assessment, coupled with the
engagement of Oklahoma opinion leaders and citizens, can result in development
of socially sustainable solutions. Oklahoma EPSCoR will identify how both
problems and potential solutions for water use, landscape-carbon cycle, and
energy and water infrastructure are interlinked in complex ways by focusing on
four challenges addressed by the focus areas: 1) improving the knowledge of
atmospheric and land processes that lead to seasonal to sub-seasonal events and
increasing understanding of predictive skillsets to enable the creation of
outlook forecasts; 2) understanding terrestrial carbon and water dynamics across
Oklahoma to identify potential options for increasing carbon uptake and storage
while sustaining water supply by using an Earth Systems Science approach to
quantify water and carbon dynamics at a statewide scale; 3) developing new
engineering technologies and modeling schemes for the reuse and improved
understanding of water treatment efficiencies; and 4) developing an aggregated
resilience model for interdependent infrastructure systems that includes the
effects of uncertainties in severe weather, weather extremes, wildfires, and
induced seismicity on networks, and network-to-network interdependencies.
Technical focus area teams will engage in a systemic, iterative process of
conducting science with added direction from social narratives that citizens,
opinion leaders, and scientists use to comprehend and evaluate potential
research impacts. The project will also conduct education, outreach and
broadening participation activities that include: 1) STEM curriculum and
training for K-12 teachers; 2) non-traditional STEM educator training; 3) K-12
student STEM education, and 4) growing of Oklahoma’s citizen science network.
These activities will address the state’s STEM needs and reach thousands of
Oklahoma trainees, teachers and citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.