* 1946079
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Analyzing the morphophonology and morphosemantics of an endangered language
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Lyle Campbell, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2022
* USD 18,001.00

This doctoral dissertation project focuses on creating language infrastructure
that documents an endangered and under-studied language. This documentation will
enable the doctoral student to develop a wide-ranging grammatical description of
the language, and to conduct analysis of the phonology and semantics of the
language. Accessible, data-driven descriptions of the grammar of world languages
allows linguists to make and evaluate theories and claims regarding the
variation in form of human language, how languages change over time, and the
historical relationships between different speech communities. The documentation
of endangered languages which belong to small, isolated language families such
as this language is a critical endeavor in linguistics as such languages contain
many unique and undescribed grammatical features which can expand our
understanding of the nature of human language. Language documentation also
permits minority and indigenous communities to create long-lasting
representations of community knowledge and life ways, and to build a language
infrastructure on which to base language revitalization and maintenance work.
This project works closely with local teachers and language workers, building
academic and technical capacity which will aid in the maintenance and
institutionalization of the language which until now has suffered
marginalization in society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral student will
conduct fieldwork with native speakers working to improve the quality of
translation and annotation of existing texts and recordings of the language, as
well as creating new video recordings with a wide range of participants. This
improved and expanded documentary corpus will inform the student's dissertation,
which consists of a reference grammar of the language in typological
perspective, employing best practices in documentation-based language
description. This language belongs to a language family which exhibits unique
variations on a number of common traits of indigenous languages: highly
synthetic and phonologically fusional verb morphology, extensive directional and
associated motion systems, nominalization as the primary means of verbal
subordination, and semantically complex means of indicating epistemic mood,
evidentiality, and stance through grammaticalized systems. The doctoral
student's dissertation will contribute to the regional typology of these
languages, and will be sensitive to major topics of ongoing discussion in the
regional linguistics literature, while also aiming to create a grammatical
description that is of the broadest possible use and accessibility to language
typologists and theorists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.