* 1946450
* I-Corps: Artificial Cornea of Microtextured Hydrogel
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Chang-Hwan Choi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to lower the
risk of infection and inflammation post-operation in the application of
artificial cornea by obtaining full proliferation of corneal epithelial cells
and enhancing the corneal fibroblast adhesion, to achieve a faster recovery and
lower cost overall. As stated by World Health Organization, over 10 million
people suffer from corneal blindness globally; only 1/50 of the patients
obtained corneal transplants each year worldwide due to lack of donors' tissue.
Current average cost for an artificial cornea itself is from $2K to $5K. Thus, a
significant marker exists for Keratoprosthesis (KPro). Aging populations coupled
with increasing incidence of eye diseases are expected to be the prime factors
driving the growth of the global KPro market. However, severe complications,
such as infection and inflammation can occur when using existing KPro methods.
The novel artificial cornea of microtextured pHEMA (poly(2-hydroxyethyl
methacrylate) hydrogel will potentially save millions of people from corneal
blindness; and will provide comfortable wearing experience for patients with
less tissue rejection risk after the surgery due to the similar mechanical
properties of the KPro to human soft tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project further develops a novel artificial cornea made of microtextured pHEMA
(poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) hydrogel. Studies have shown that well-
regulated micropore or microline patterns, depending on cell types, are
effective in enhancing cell proliferation and improving cell adhesion, mainly
due to the increased contact area between the cells and surfaces. pHEMA
hydrogel, the most commonly-used biomaterial in ophthalmology, has similar
mechanical properties to human tissues and provides good biocompatibility to the
human body as implants. The micropore textures on pHEMA hydrogel will allow
corneal epithelium to proliferate well and fast for forming a layer of
protection to prevent the eyes from bacterial infection and inflammation;
meanwhile the microline textures will allow fast and strong adhesion of
keratocytes (corneal fibroblasts) to hydrogel, leading to the stable formation
of stroma underneath the artificial cornea for speedy recovery after the
implant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.