* 1946445
* NSFDEB-BSF: Evolution of truffles, morels, and relatives (Pezizales) and their interactions with animals, plants, and bacteria
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Rosaria Healy, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 01/31/2024
* USD 610,781.00

Pezizales are a diverse group of fungi that includes highly prized morel and
truffle species, as well as many species of cup fungi. Pezizales are diverse in
form and function, and this group includes species that grow in partnership with
plants roots, saprotrophs that decay dead organic matter, and pathogens that
cause plant diseases. These fungi are also an important seasonal food for forest
animals, and some species contribute to both subsistence and commercial
economies. However, Pezizales are understudied, and their genealogical
relationships remain unresolved. The objective of this research is to use DNA
sequence and morphological evidence to construct a genealogy for these fungi.
This genealogy will then be used to better understand how fungal genomes
influence fruiting body form (cup fungi versus morels versus truffles); how
different nutritional strategies evolved within fungal groups; and to understand
how these fungi intimately interact with bacteria, plants, and animals in their
environment. This research will foster new international collaborations between
Israeli and US fungal biologists, and field collection trips and scientific
workshops will facilitate collaboration and outreach with citizen scientists to
develop community resources and obtain fresh specimens of rare or regionally
distributed species. This project will lead to many new species being described,
will provide a better understanding of morel and truffle biology, and will
generate new resources for cultivation and breeding of economically important
species of fungi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will produce the first
robust and comprehensive genome-based phylogeny for Pezizales. This will be
accomplished by generating a combination of high-quality reference genomes and
low coverage genomes from a representative subset of the cup and truffle forms
across the Pezizales. Together with isotopic, genomic and microbiome data
generated from Pezizales, this research will (1) leverage broad sampling efforts
and citizen science to reconstruct a genome-based phylogeny of the Pezizales;
(2) generate DNA barcodes from type specimens and other authentic materials to
document diversity and stabilize taxonomy; and (3) improve understanding of the
microbiome contribution to Pezizales trophic ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.