* 1946743
* Collaborative Research: Modulating Powder Bed Cohesion to Reduce Defects in Binder Jetting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Wenda Tan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 04/30/2022
* USD 213,642.00

Binder jetting is a 3D printing method that is increasingly important due to its
versatile material options (virtually any powdered material), high production
rates, and modest equipment cost. It is arguably the only mainstream 3D printing
technique that works for both metals and ceramics. It has found growing
applications in energy, aerospace, chemical, and other industries. In the binder
jetting process, the 3D parts are printed layer by layer. On each layer, the
powder bed is spread and microscopic droplets are deposited on selected
locations on the powder bed. These droplets penetrate into the bed and bind the
particles together. Since the impacting speed of the droplet is rather high, it
can significantly disturb the powder bed and cause pores in the 3D-printed
parts. These pores can drastically reduce the strength and other mechanical
properties of the products. This award supports fundamental research to
understand the binder-powder interaction in binder jetting and identify
technical solutions to eliminate the formation of large pores in the binder
jetting products. This will significantly improve performance of parts
fabricated with the binder jetting process and expand its applications in
various industries. This will strengthen the manufacturing capability and
competitiveness of U.S. industry by allowing for rapid fabrication of low-cost
custom components for many different industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will investigate the binder-powder interaction in the binder jetting
process. The research objective is to test the hypothesis that partially
saturating (pre-wetting) the powder will suppress powder spattering and reduce
pore formation by (i) accelerating binder absorption and (ii) increasing the
cohesion of the powder bed. A synergistic experimental and numerical
investigation will be performed to achieve the research objectives. On the
experimental side, a customized binder jetting system will be established to
enable controlled pre-wetting of the powder bed as well as the flexible
adjustment of binder jetting parameters (e.g., droplet size, impact velocity,
etc.). Parametric studies will be performed to identify the effects of binder
jetting parameters and binder/powder material properties on the spatter/pore
formation. In-situ high-speed X-ray imaging and ex-situ characterization will be
used to observe the dynamic binder-powder interaction. On the modeling side, a
multi-physics model that integrates the computational fluid dynamics and
discrete element method will be used to simulate the binder-powder and powder-
powder interactions during the binder jetting process. The combination of
experimental and numerical results will be used to test the research
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.