* 1946326
* EAGER: Refining glacial lake history in Taylor Valley, East Antarctica with alternative geochronometers
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Peter Doran, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 45,349.00

Correlating ecosystem responses to past climate forcing is highly dependent on
the use of reliable techniques for establishing the age of events (dating
techniques). In Antarctic dry regions (land areas without glaciers), carbon-14
dating has been used to assess the ages of organic deposits left behind by
ancient lakes. However, the reliability of the ages is debatable because of
possible contamination with "old carbon" from the surrounding landscape. The
proposed research will attempt to establish two alternate dating techniques, in
situ carbon-14 cosmogenic radionuclide exposure dating and optically stimulated
luminescence (OSL), as reliable alternate dating methods for lake history in
Antarctic dry areas that are not contaminated by the old carbon. The end goal
will be to increase scientific understanding of lake level fluctuation in the
lakes of Taylor Valley, Antarctica so that inference about past climate,
glacier, and ecosystem response can be inferred. The results of this study will
provide a coarse-scale absolute chronology for lake level history in Taylor
Valley, demonstrate that exposure dating and OSL are effective means to
understand the physical dynamics of ancient water bodies, and increase the
current understanding of polar lacustrine and ice sheet responses to past and
present climatic changes. These chronologies will allow polar lake level
fluctuations to be correlated with past changes in global and regional climate,
providing information critical for understanding and modeling the physical
responses of these environments to modern change. This research supports a PhD
student; the student will highlight this work with grade school classes in the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to establish in situ
carbon-14 exposure dating and OSL as reliable alternate (to carbon-14 of organic
lake deposits) geochronometers that can be used to settle the long-disputed
lacustrine history and chronology of Taylor Valley, Antarctica and elsewhere.
Improved lake level history will have significant impacts for the McMurdo Dry
Valleys Long Term Ecological Research (MCM LTER) site as the legacy of
fluctuating lake levels of the past affects the distribution of organic matter
and nutrients, and impacts biological connectivity valley-wide. This work will
provide insight into the carbon reservoir of large glacial lakes in the late
Holocene and have implications for previously reported radiocarbon chronologies.
OSL samples will be analyzed in the Desert Research Institute Luminescence
Laboratory in Reno, NV. For the in situ carbon-14 work, rock samples extracted
from boulders and bedrock surfaces will be prepared at Tulane University. The
prepared in situ carbon-14 samples will be analyzed at the National Ocean
Sciences Accelerator Mass Spectrometry laboratory in Woods Hole, MA. The two
datasets will be combined to produce a reliable, coarse scale chronology for
late Quaternary lake level fluctuations in Taylor
Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.