* 1946236
* The Legal, Political, and Social Filtering of Expert Witnesses into Court
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Timothy O'Brien, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 106,007.00

Expert witnesses appear frequently in courts and their impact on judges and
jurors has been studied extensively. However, before experts testify they first
must be admitted into court by trial judges. Given experts’ potential to
influence court cases and judicial precedent, judges’ decisions about which
experts to admit and which to exclude are vitally important. The legal framework
for these decisions focuses on the scientific qualities of expert evidence, such
as its reliability. However, the scientific qualities of specialized expert
evidence are difficult for non-experts to judge. This study investigates the
social and political factors related to the admissibility of expert evidence in
court. Specifically, it examines how social cues such as experts’ sex, age, and
discipline relate to perceptions of their credibility and the admissibility of
their evidence. The findings can inform courts’ use of expert evidence by
revealing social biases that may interfere with expert admissibility. This
research therefore has the potential to improve legal decision making by
identifying the social and political factors involved with the entry of expert
evidence into court.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and a team of graduate
assistants will content-code a large probability sample of written judicial
opinions on expert admissibility from federal district courts. Data from
judicial opinions will be combined with socio-demographic information about
judges and experts not contained in judicial opinions. Statistical analyses of
the resulting dataset will provide a comprehensive survey of overall rates and
distributions of admissibility challenges and decisions in federal courts. These
data will also advance our understanding of how social characteristics of judges
and experts relate to the admissibility of expert evidence. Existing theories of
expert admissibility prioritize the scientific merit of expert evidence. This
project widens the analytic lens to capture the social and political forces that
filter perceptions of experts and make some experts seem more credible than
others. Understanding the attributes of judges and expert witnesses associated
with expert admissibility will help future litigants deploy—and contest—expert
evidence more effectively. Better knowledge of these processes will also assist
judges in their evaluations of expert evidence when they determine its
admissibility, thereby improving the quality of expert evidence allowed into
courts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.