* 1946068
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Automated Detection and Repair of Error Handling Bugs in SSL/TLS Implementations
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Baishakhi Ray, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 10/31/2019
* USD 43,077.00

Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)/Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocols are critical
to internet security. However, the software that implements SSL/TLS protocols is
especially vulnerable to security flaws and the consequences can be disastrous.
A large number of security flaws in SSL/TLS implementations (such as man-in-the-
middle attacks, denial-of-service attacks, and buffer overflow attacks) result
from incorrect error handling. These errors are often hard to detect and
localize using existing techniques because many of them do not display any
obvious erroneous behaviors (e.g., crash, assertion failure, etc.) but they
cause subtle inaccuracies that completely violate the security and privacy
guarantees of SSL/TLS. This project aims to improve error handling mechanisms in
SSL/TLS implementations by building novel tools that reduce developer effort in
writing and maintaining correct error handling code while making SSL/TLS
implementations more secure and robust.

This project develops a framework for improving the robustness of error handling
code in SSL/TLS implementations. The framework has three main objectives. First,
error specifications for different SSL/TLS functions are automatically inferred
to learn how they communicate the failures. Next, the inferred specifications
are used to build a tool for automatically detecting error handling bugs.
Finally, the framework also provides new program repair tools that can
automatically fix the detected bugs. Therefore, the framework provides end-to-
end assistance in maintaining error-handling code in SSL/TLS implementations and
thus significantly improves internet security.