* 1946762
* Collaborative research: Controls of climate and dust on soil chemical erosion and nutrient supply
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Ken Ferrier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 01/31/2024
* USD 354,803.00

Soils are a critical component of Earth’s surface environment. They are
storehouses of nutrients that sustain life, they provide habitats for plants and
animals, and they influence Earth’s climate through their role in the global
carbon cycle. This project’s main goal is to quantify how climate and dust
affect soil chemical erosion rates and soil’s nutrient content. This is of
interest because chemical erosion accelerates landscape evolution and modulates
Earth’s climate, and because dust is a key source of nutrients to soils. To
investigate these linked phenomena, this project will establish a series of
study sites along two altitudinal transects at San Jacinto Peak, California,
where nearly 3 km of relief creates a striking climate gradient with a range in
mean annual temperature of 18 degrees C. This work will support a team of two
early career faculty (one female, both pre-tenure), and will promote diversity
initiatives through the support of the PI team, one whom is a member of an
underrepresented group (Alaska Native), as well as through the recruitment of
students via on-campus programs for students from underrepresented groups.
Outreach and education activities will focus on developing resources for middle
school teachers in collaboration with experts at the San Diego County Office of
Education and the University of Wisconsin Geology
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite longstanding expectations that climate
should strongly affect chemical erosion rate, quantifying these effects in
nature has proven difficult, partly because these rates are difficult to
measure, and partly because other factors like lithology and dust can obscure
climatic effects. Dust’s impact on soil nutrient supply is likewise an ongoing
topic of contention, partly because it depends on rates of soil production and
chemical erosion, which are rarely measured in the same places that dust
deposition rates are. The proposed work will avoid these issues by combining
measurements of chemical erosion rates, climate, and dust deposition rates and
provenance at SJP, which spans the largest range in temperature within a single
unglaciated lithology in the United States. This will build on previous work by
applying novel radiogenic isotope measurements in bedrock, soil, dust and
vegetation. These data will quantify the sensitivity of chemical erosion rates
to climate and provide new insights into spatial and temporal variations in
dust’s impact on soil nutrient supply, which is not well constrained at the
seasonal time scales that will be targeted in this work. More broadly, this work
has the potential to remove a barrier to understanding how Earth’s topography,
surface chemistry, and the dust cycle evolve under spatially variable climates—a
common feature of Earth’s mountain ranges. Ultimately, these measurements across
one of the most striking climate gradients in the United States should guide
future efforts to include climate and dust explicitly in models of the
topographic and chemical evolution of the Earth’s
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.