* 1946852
* Building the capacity of Historically Black Colleges and Universities to increase competitiveness in DRL programs
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Erin Lynch, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,620.00

This broadening participation project will focus on a regional workshop aimed at
increasing Historically Black Colleges and Universities' (HBCUs) capacity to
develop high quality proposals for future competitions of various programs in
the Division of Research on Learning. The proposed effort will occur through
three specific steps involving a: (1) pre-workshop webinar to introduce and lay
the foundation for the opportunity; (2) full two-day workshop to engage
participants in a rigorous grant-writing exercise; and (3) post workshop follow-
up to provide ongoing support and proposal development guidance. Through a
theory-driven process, the goal is to establish some degree of conformity for
maximizing grant productivity around strategies and ideas shown to be effective
in retaining students in the STEM pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multi-
tiered workshop will establish a launching pad for increasing attendees'
capacity to build on prior knowledge and use best practices to improve future
grant writing efforts. Specialized activities will help prepare HBCUs to
increase their contributions to diversifying the future STEM workforce, support
innovation and creativity in STEM fields, expand networking strategies, and
promote opportunities to learn. Central to this capacity-building effort will be
a focus on understanding the current research context and expectations for
competitive participation in funding opportunities offered by NSF. This, in
turn, will align with the Foundation's strategic direction for broadening
participation in STEM through meaningful cutting-edge STEM education research.
Resources from the workshop will be made available online to facilitate broader
dissemination of information beneficial to HBCUs and other education
institutions engaging in broadening participation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.