* 1946998
* Mid-scale RI-2: A first-of-its-kind X-ray facility for new science at the high magnetic field frontier
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Eric Palm, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Guebre Tessema
* 12/31/2025
* USD 23,899,174.00

High-energy X-rays are an indispensable tool for research into materials,
molecules, organisms, and devices. They resolve physical, chemical, and
structural properties across a wide range of length- and time-scales. X-rays
probe directly the very important degrees of freedom of electrons in a material.
High magnetic fields are broadly used across science and industry. They resolve
the electronic properties of quantum materials, induce new phases of matter, and
enable nuclear magnetic resonance. They are critical for medical imaging and
particle acceleration. Applied magnetic fields couple directly to the same
electronic degrees of freedom that are probed by X-rays. Rich science
opportunities exist for researchers to manipulate electrons using magnetic
fields and monitor their response using X-rays. This award supports the
realization of a mid-scale infrastructure project that exploits cutting edge
synchrotron X-ray tools to enable new science at the high magnetic field
frontier by building a dedicated High Magnetic Field (HMF) X-ray facility at the
Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). This proposal is a partnership
between CHESS, the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (MagLab), and the
University of Puerto Rico (UPR). The proposed research infrastructure will serve
convergence research between the large, multidisciplinary user communities of
two forefront National Science Foundation (NSF) funded facilities – CHESS and
the MagLab. The project will engage early career researchers from
underrepresented groups in design and implementation of cutting-edge X-ray and
magnet technology, with particular focus on training students from UPR to become
future technology leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The High Magnetic
Field Beamline (HMF) at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS)
realized by this project, will combine the best possible X-ray beamline with the
highest possible DC magnetic fields, drawing on the talents of leading experts
in the distinct disciplines of X-ray science and high magnetic field science to
deliver research capabilities that are unique in the world. &lt;br/&gt;The X-ray
beamline design is based on 3 priorities: delivering high photon flux, allowing
precise control of X-ray polarization and beam size over a wide range of X-ray
energies, and exploiting sophisticated analyzer and detector systems to enable
multimodal X-ray measurements. Evaluated solely on the characteristics of the
X-ray beams and detection, HMF will rival the capabilities of any magnetic
scattering or spectroscopy beamline in the world. HMF will feature a custom low-
temperature superconducting magnet generating continuous fields as high as 20
Tesla. The beamline will be designed to accommodate even higher field magnets in
the future which will become feasible through the development of high
temperature superconducting magnet technology at the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory (MagLab). With this combination of high DC magnetic fields
available at a highly optimized X-ray beamline, the facility becomes truly
world-leading. This project embraces goals of student training, increased
participation of underrepresented groups, and extension of tangible benefits to
the wider US research community. This award will integrate graduate students
from the University of Puerto Rico (UPR) at Rio Piedras into the development,
construction, and commissioning of the new beamline.&lt;br/&gt;A main science
driver for the HMF facility is quantum materials science, with significant
broader societal impacts: The "quantum leap that promises to develop radical new
sensing, computing, and communications technologies. Another key to enable the
"quantum leap" is to train a new quantum workforce for the nation. Seizing
international leadership in high magnetic field x-ray science, this project will
help ensure that top talent is trained and retained in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.