* 1946715
* I-Corps: Hydrogel Micro Encapsulation of Therapeutic Cells for Tissue Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2021
* John Oakey, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project centers on the
growing market of cellular regenerative medicine and the unmet need for simple
methods to increase its reliability. Therapeutic cells have the potential to
treat an array of diseases-from musculoskeletal degeneration to cancer- many of
which lack current treatment options. Despite this promise, cellular therapies
exhibit unreliable efficacy and highly variable patient outcomes. With over 1000
clinical trials in 18 areas of medicine currently in progress, and a market
worth $13 billion annually, it is both clinically and commercially important to
provide a solution to this problem. In addition to human regenerative medicine,
improvements in therapeutic cell reliability have applications across a spectrum
of applied cell biology markets including veterinary medicine, pharmaceutical
screening, drug development, and research science.

This I-Corps project further develops a simple, easily implemented, cell
delivery system that significantly extends cell viability by immobilizing them
in inert, injectable microparticles using a microfluidic droplet encapsulation
device. The viability and gene expression in response to encapsulation in a
variety of hydrogel microparticles has been analyzed across a range of mammalian
cell types and comprehensive cell viability and retention analyses was conducted
using an in vitro platform that enabled examination of material composition,
elasticity, and cell-cell interactions in a simulated biological environment. A
small animal model was then used to examine the healing potential of
encapsulated T-cells on nerve allographs. The results of these studies yielded
the selection of a hydrogel encapsulation material that did not adversely impact
cell viability and demonstrated a significant increase in the viability and
localization of hydrogel encapsulated cells over unencapsulated cells within the
simulated biological environment. Encapsulated T- cells showed significantly
increased nerve regeneration over their unencapsulated counterparts in the small
animal model. These results strongly suggest that hydrogel encapsulation in
microparticles improves viability and localizes cells to improve therapeutic
outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.