* 1946841
* The 2020 Advanced Biomanufacturing Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Kaiming Ye, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This grant provides partial funding for the Biomedical Engineering Society
(BMES) Advanced Biomanufacturing (ABioM) Special Interest Group to convene the
2020 Advanced Biomanufacturing Meeting in Washington DC, April 3-4, 2020. The
theme of the 2020 ABioM conference will be “Accelerating Advanced
Biomanufacturing through Discovery to Implementation.” This meeting is built
upon the ABioM SIG’s success in launching its inaugural annual meeting in 2017
and its second meeting in 2018. Both meetings attracted wide participation from
industry and academia. The overarching goal of 2020 ABioM is to celebrate the
success of the field, to stimulate collaborations, and to promote R&amp;D and
education programs in advanced biomanufacturing. The conference is uniquely
positioned to highlight the integration of academic forces with industry niches
to accelerate the translation of lab discoveries into industry scale production
of biomaterials, cell and tissue products. The development of enabling
technologies and new methods for material and cell sourcing, product validation,
regulation, and QA/QC as well as workforce training are essential to foster
growth and sustain the field. Unlike other conferences, this meeting brings
together policy makers, scientists, engineers, entrepreneurs, and educators to
map the field and to identify opportunities for growth. It will offer a platform
allowing junior investigators and students to interact with leaders in the field
to evoke productive collaborations and partnerships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will serve as an open forum for researchers, engineers, and scholars
to interact with each other and exchange ideas leading to the advancement of the
field and establishing new directions in research and scholarship. The two-day
meeting will consist of plenary and keynote speeches, oral and poster
presentations, panel discussions including a policy and workforce training panel
discussion, and a biotech showcase exhibition as well as a celebration to the
success of junior investigators and graduate students in advance
biomanufacturing. The sessions include “Cell and Biomolecule Biomanufacturing,
Tissue and Organ Biomanufacturing, Biomanufacturing Process Monitoring, In-line
Sensing, Integration and Scale-up/out, Microphysiological Systems Manufacturing,
Additive Manufacturing, Multiscale Computational Modeling, and Machine Learning,
Cell Culture Medium Formation, Cell Banking, and Regulatory Science Sessions”
and panel discussion sessions as well as poster sessions. The junior
investigator awards will recognize the rising stars in the field, and the
graduate student awards will encourage and attract young investigators to the
field. The conference is open to the public and will be widely advertised in
several ways, including advertisement in BMES websites, posters at pertinent
meetings and emails to individuals who have been identified as interested in
advanced biomanufacturing. Meeting flyers will be prepared and distributed in
the general session of the 2019 BMES annual meeting. NSF support will be used to
ensure that woman and minorities will have opportunities to present and attend
the meeting. This event represents a major mechanism by which the ABioM SIG will
expedite the establishment of collaborations between academia and industry
necessary for this rapidly evolving field. Efforts will be made to attract more
broad participation from industry and national labs. The conference abstracts
will be archived and accessible from the conference
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.