* 1946253
* NSF-BSF: Collaborative research: The Processes and feedbacks that induce multi-scale interactions between local divide migration, drainage reversal and escarpment evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* eitan shelef, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2023
* USD 348,281.00

The structure of river networks impacts the spatial distribution of elevation,
water, and life across Earth’s surface. Interestingly, this structure changes
through time by movement of the water divides that separate river basins. The
divide migration process occurs at the local hillslope scale but the driving
forces for it are rooted in large scale tectonic and climatic changes.
Furthermore, local processes of divide migration influence the broader
geomorphic, hydrologic, and ecologic functionality of the Earth’s surface. The
proposed research explores the mechanisms through which these multi-scale
processes occur. More specifically, how local topographic, hydrologic, and
lithologic conditions lead to a cascade of feedbacks that can ultimately have a
large scale impact on the Earth system. This binational project compares and
contrasts arid and humid research sites in Israel and the USA, respectively, and
will thus strengthen research collaboration between the two countries. The
research team will also develop and lead an enhanced science education program
for K6-8 students in schools in Pennsylvania and Colorado, including schools
with high attendance of underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water
divides play a critical role in controlling the form of landscapes and shaping
hydrologic and geomorphic functionality. The mobility of water divides is
inherently related to the local hillslope and fluvial processes that control the
adjacent relief. At the same time, divide mobility leads to reorganization of
the drainage network, which significantly influence large-scale topographic,
isostatic, and stratigraphic patterns. At present, the processes and feedbacks
by which local hillslope and fluvial regimes interact with basin-scale drainage
reorganization and with large scale topographic and isostatic changes remain
generally unexplored. To address these knowledge gaps, this research focuses on
the juxtaposition of topographic escarpments and reversed channels (an end-
member of reorganization), where the initial conditions for divide migration are
relatively well constrained. In this setting, the topology and sediments of the
reversed channels record the history of divide migration. These channels
preserve evidence for how local lithologic and hydrologic conditions act as a
tipping point that drives the system into a cascading response that results in
drainage reorganization, topographic changes and potentially isostatic
adjustments. To explore the generality of these processes, the investigators
will compare and contrast the emerging landscape dynamics in both arid and humid
field sites in Israel and the USA, respectively, across different lithologic and
tectonic settings. They will use field mapping and topographic analyses, in
conjunction with landscape evolution models and geochronological analyses to
constrain the controlling parameters and the rates associated with different
processes of divide migration, flow reversals, and the evolution of
escarpments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.