* 1946342
* Formation, morphology, and retreat of autogenic waterfalls
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Scott McCoy, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2024
* USD 365,149.00

Earth’s topography is sculpted by both the movement of tectonic plates (which
build topography) and climate (which erodes topography). As such, changes in
climate or tectonics can be recorded in subtle topographic variations. For
example, where tectonic faults cross rivers, changes in fault movement can lead
to waterfall formation. These waterfalls can remain in landscapes for thousands
to millions of years, allowing geologists to use the presence and position of
waterfalls to infer past changes in Earth history. However, recent work has
suggested that waterfalls may also spontaneously self-form, even when climate
and tectonic forcing remains constant. Therefore, using waterfalls to ‘read’
Earth history from landscapes requires distinguishing self-formed waterfalls
from those that form following changes in climate or tectonics. This project
seeks to distinguish such waterfalls, thereby fundamentally improving our
ability to decipher past changes in Earth history. Beyond this scientific
advance, the project will promote public interest in the Earth sciences via
harnessing the awe of waterfalls to engage in community outreach through the
creation of online videos and K12 classroom visits focused on mountain stream
hazards and waterfall formation. The project will also support the PhD and
masters project of two female early-career scientists, as well as provide
training for undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to investigate the mechanisms by which waterfalls can self-form (or
form autogenically), as well as the morphology and erosion rates of self-formed
waterfalls. This will be accomplished through a mix of laboratory experiments,
field work, and modeling. Laboratory flume experiments will test the conditions
under which autogenic waterfalls form, and these results will be compared to
existing theory for the development of bedrock steps as well as a large database
of putative autogenic waterfalls that will be collected as part of the project.
The lab and field work will allow development of quantitative, non-dimensional
metrics to identify autogenic waterfalls in the field, and will allow assessment
of the ubiquity of autogenic waterfalls in nature. Finally, these results will
be applied to develop a river long profile evolution model that accounts for
autogenic waterfall formation and retreat, and can be used to predict the
coupled response of landscapes to autogenic dynamics and external perturbations.
This project thus fills a fundamental knowledge gap on how autogenic processes
modify bedrock landscapes, thereby enhancing our ability to ‘read’ the record of
Earth history recorded in topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.