* 1946912
* Microwave-enabled Manufacturing of Single-phase, Multi-principal Element Alloy Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Yugang Sun, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 01/31/2023
* USD 335,079.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge in the processing of
single-phase, multi-principal element alloy (MPEA) nanoparticles. Multi-
principal element alloys such as high entropy alloys are technologically
important because of their extraordinary properties. Mixing different principal
elements uniformly results in new properties that do not exist in nanoparticles
made of pure elements. Most principal elements are immiscible at ambient
temperatures, which results in the segregation of different elements in the
nanoparticles when they are manufactured using conventional heating and cooling
methods that are usually slow. This award supports fundamental research to
develop a microwave-enabled flash or rapid heating and cooling method for the
manufacture of multi-principal element alloy nanoparticles. Flash heating
enables uniform mixing of the different elements at high temperatures. Flash
cooling rapidly freezes the uniformly mixed elements to form single-phase multi-
principal element alloy nanoparticles. Successfully manufacturing multi-
principal element alloy nanoparticles opens an entirely new opportunity to
explore novel properties and applications of these nanoparticles for high-
performance catalysis, structural engineering, and additive manufacturing.
Therefore, the results of this research benefits the U.S. economy and society.
This research involves the use of large-scale facilities at national
laboratories that train students to become specialists in advanced materials
manufacturing and characterization. More broadly, performing this research
educates students, especially, those from underrepresented groups, with
multidisciplinary knowledge and prepares a technically trained workforce for a
wide-range industries including advanced manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microwave-enabled flash heating and cooling of
nanometer-sized alloys can overcome the limitations of conventional heating and
cooling methods. However, scientific and technical barriers of creating high
temperature gradients around nanometer-sized alloys are yet to be overcome to
realize the manufacturing of single-phase multi-principal element (MPEA)
nanoparticles of different compositions. The technique involves exposing a
reaction system to a high-power microwave pulse that selectively heats metal
alloy nanoparticles confined in micelle vesicles (metal salts) to generate an
extremely high temperature gradient across the thin walls of the micelle
vesicles dispersed in a microwave transparent solvent. The ensuing rapid melting
and solidification results in single-phase super-saturated nanoparticles. In
situ, high-energy synchrotron small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) and wide-angle
x-ray scattering (WAXS) are used to study the complex microstructure evolution
kinetics in the MPEA nanoparticles under the radiation of a microwave pulse. The
research team fabricates MPEA nanoparticles of catalytic and refractory metals,
and explores their applications in catalysis, e.g., selective electrochemical
reduction of CO2 to ethanol and ammonia synthesis, and additive manufacturing,
focusing on 3D printing of refractory metal
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.