* 1946316
* EAGER: A novel, non- invasive approach to reliably alter cortical excitability using high frequency (kHz) transcranial magnetic perturbation.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Richard Ivry, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,998.00

The past two decades have witnessed an exponential increase in the use of non-
invasive brain stimulation (NIBS) methods. The two most commonly used methods,
transcranial electrical stimulation (tES) and transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS), provide tools to manipulate activity in targeted brain regions, and this
give cognitive neuroscientists a method to test functional hypotheses. Despite
this potential, there are substantial concerns about the reliability and
robustness of the physiological and behavioral changes resulting from these NIBS
methods, especially when used to induce modulatory perturbations in the state of
neural excitability. The purpose of this project is to create a new and more
robust method for modulatory NIBS in human participants. The method, referred to
as kilohertz transcranial magnetic perturbation (kTMP), will open a new
experimental electromagnetic subspace for perturbing brain function. This method
will open several new opportunities for cortical stimulation: larger electrical
fields, more precise timing, better spatial control, and both a greater range
and a more precise delivery of stimulation frequency.

This novel magnetic stimulation holds promise to produce meaningful focal
physiological changes, for several reasons. First, subthreshold kilohertz (kHz)
electrical stimulation has been shown to alter motor-evoked responses with an
effect size similar to that of direct current electric fields. Second,
suprathreshold kHz frequency electric fields robustly block nerve conduction in
a reversible manner. Third, suprathreshold experiments have shown that kHz tES
can mimic low frequency electric fields in the motor cortex of the mouse,
presumably due to frequency intermodulation. This project will employ
subthreshold electric fields, albeit at much higher amplitude than those
presently available with tES and with the frequency specificity not possible
with extant TMS methods. kTMP offers a hybrid subthreshold approach that will
exploit strong midrange electric field amplitudes with frequency specificity,
including frequency intermodulation effects, offering a new approach to perturb
brain function. The initial empirical evaluation of kTMP will focus on
modulating human motor cortex excitability, the "gold standard" approach for
evaluating NIBS methods. Importantly, by substantially expanding the range of
electric field induction, it should be possible to obtain dose-dependent
functions, something that has proven elusive with other subthreshold NIBS
methods. Once these benchmark tests are met, kTMP should be readily adopted for
basic cognitive neuroscience research, providing a robust tool to perturb and
modulate targeted cortical regions as a means to test functional hypotheses in
physiological and behavioral studies. In the long term, kTMP has promise to be
employed in the treatment of psychiatric and neurological disorders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.