* 1946505
* Females of Vision, et al (FoVea): Enhancing the Success, Visibility, and Impact of Women in Vision Science
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Mary Peterson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 49,953.00

Females of Vision et al (FoVea) is a group established to enhance the success,
visibility, and impact of women in vision science. The aim is to give women at
early and mid-career levels tools for success by offering workshops on
professional development annually at the Vision Sciences Society (VSS) meeting.
The award provides travel and networking support for young women vision
scientists to attend the workshop and the meeting. It also maintains and curates
FoVeaList, an online searchable speaker database of women vision scientists. The
potential broader impact of the award is both far-reaching and deep. Future
generations of women will be more likely to consider a career path in vision
science if they have interactions with successful women role models and the
field of vision science will benefit from the resulting increase in diversity of
ideas and approaches. The goal is to change the culture. Therefore,
advertisements will clearly indicate that FoVea activities are not limited to
women; all VSS attendees are welcome. These efforts complement NSFâ€™s goal of
increasing participation of women, persons with disabilities, and
underrepresented minorities in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.