* 1946516
* Nitrite Oxidation in Oxygen Minimum Zones
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Bess Ward, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2024
* USD 752,520.00

This research is grounded in the fundamental role of nitrogen in limiting
production in the ocean. Nitrite is a pivotal compound in the nitrogen cycle: it
can be oxidized to nitrate, and thus retained as an available nutrient, or it
can be reduced to dinitrogen gas, and thus lost from the bioavailable nitrogen
pool. Oxidation of nitrite by nitrite oxidizing bacteria (NOB) is the only
biological pathway by which nitrate is produced, and all known NOB require
oxygen for life. The reduction pathway is also carried out by microbes, in this
case, bacteria that thrive only in the absence of oxygen. In previous
experiments, however, both oxidation and reduction of nitrite were detected in
the same samples from ocean waters in the absence of oxygen. We will investigate
three explanations for the apparent oxidation of nitrite in the absence of
oxygen on a research cruise to the low oxygen waters off the coast of Peru: 1)
The presence of unknown kinds of NOB that do not require oxygen; 2) a new
reaction called dismutation, which is possible but never detected in nature; 3)
an artifact associated with oxygen stress in NOB. This research could lead to
discovery of novel mechanisms and or novel organisms that determine the fate of
nitrite and the availability of nitrogen to support primary production in the
long run. This project will advance discovery and understanding while promoting
teaching, training and learning by providing opportunities for Princeton
students to get involved in and have hands on experience in research in the lab
and potentially at sea. Both undergraduate and graduate students will
participate in the research through internships and field experiences. We will
also integrate our work at sea into teaching in the classroom via videos and
assignments based on data collected during the
cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrite oxidation is the only known biological
process that produces nitrate, which comprises the largest fixed nitrogen
reservoir in the ocean. Nitrite oxidation is carried out by nitrite oxidizing
bacteria (NOB), and all known species are obligate aerobes. Nitrite reduction to
N2 occurs in multiple microbial pathways, generally under anoxic conditions.
Despite their apparent incompatibility regarding oxygen, both processes are
detected in the low oxygen or anoxic waters of oxygen minimum zones (OMZs).
Thus, the fate of nitrite in OMZs has implications for the global fixed N
budget. Nitrite oxidation is detected at high rates in essentially zero oxygen
water in the most oxygen depleted depth intervals in OMZ regions, which suggests
that some nitrite oxidizers might possess anaerobic metabolic capabilities.
Nitrite disproportionation (or dismutation), in which nitrite is simultaneously
oxidized to nitrate and reduced to N2, is a thermodynamically favorable
reaction, which would link the two processes in one organism – but it has never
been observed in nature. The research proposed here will address two big
questions about nitrite in the ocean: 1) How does anaerobic nitrite oxidation
work? 2) What determines the fate of nitrite? The experimental approach will
investigate three possible explanations for anaerobic nitrite oxidation: 1)
Nitrite is oxidized to nitrate by different clades of NOB, which exhibit
different tolerances/requirements for oxygen; 2) Nitrite dismutation, also
performed by NOB, partially explains the cooccurrence of oxidation and reduction
of nitrite; 3) Apparently anaerobic nitrite oxidation is indeed biologically
mediated but does not always represent net production of nitrate from nitrite;
rather it results from isotopic equilibration during enzyme-catalyzed
interconversion of nitrite and nitrate. These questions will be addressed by
performing a suite of 15N-tracer incubations at stations located within and
outside of one of the major OMZs in the ocean, the Eastern Tropical South
Pacific. The dependence of the rate processes on oxygen concentrations will be
determined, and the composition of the microbial assemblages will be assessed in
order to determine whether different microbial components are involved under
different environmental conditions. The expression of genes involved in
oxidation/reduction/ respiratory metabolisms at low oxygen concentrations will
be measured across oxygen gradients and in oxygen manipulations to identify
their potential role in supporting “anaerobic” nitrite oxidation. The
possibility that the apparently anaerobic nitrite oxidation is due to an enzyme
level interconversion between nitrite and nitrate, which does not lead to net
nitrate production and is not linked to growth of nitrite oxidizing bacteria,
will also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.