* 1946928
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Staying Cool: Heat, Air-Conditioning, and Everyday Comfort
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2021
* Margaret Wiener, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2021
* USD 8,419.00

Air conditioning has become the primary technological solution for keeping
humans cool. In a remarkably short period of time, this energy-intensive machine
has spread to many places where it previously did not exist. Adoption of this
device, however, involves more than coping with heat. In places where it has
become commonplace, it not only produces expectations of comfort, but shapes
everyday routines. Furthermore, technologies are not simply adopted; they also
are adapted and re-designed when manufactured in different places. This project
investigates how air-conditioning affects and becomes integrated into new places
and cultures and is also altered by them. This research thus contributes to
efforts to regulate air-conditioning use by offering a better understanding of
its social and cultural dimensions. In doing so, it contributes to understanding
of how key technologies are made operational in new contexts, and of the
practical and conceptual labor by which technologies are re-designed for new
social and environmental contexts. Findings will be disseminated at academic
conferences and in scholarly journals, and the projectâ€™s broader outcomes
include delivering lectures and holding workshops with grassroots organizations
interested in urban environmental issues, and graduate student mentorship and
training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past few years, air-conditioning use
and load have increased dramatically in arid environments. These regions are not
only consumers of air-conditioning, but also producers who manufacture machines
for local and international markets. The local reliance on air-conditioning in
these environments, coupled with their hot climate and active manufacturing of
air conditioners, make them an ideal context to investigate the reciprocal
processes by which technology transforms places and people, and is in turn
transformed by them. This project will examine three processes through
historical research and field methods: (1) The introduction of air-conditioning
and its effect on architecture and daily routines, (2) The manufacture of air-
conditioning and the management of the electric grid that sustains its
operation, and (3) Everyday experiences of cooling and heat exposure among low,
middle, and high-income families. This study will also contribute to academic
and policy discussions on the growing consumption of air-conditioning by
demonstrating how not only affordability and discomfort shape its use; it is
also intertwined with the development of specific cultural values. This brings
the project into dialogue with broader concerns related to energy sustainability
and the future of thermal comfort in urban centers
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.