* 1946651
* Constraining the release of oxidizing fluids from the mafic slab during subduction
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Ethan Baxter, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 11/30/2023
* USD 322,957.00

Subduction zones are key areas of geologic activity in which two plates collide
and one plate is forced beneath the other and subducted deep into the Earth’s
mantle. Subduction zones are responsible for some of the most important global
geologic events and significantly impact humans and populated areas by causing
earthquakes and creating large volcanic arcs such as the Pacific ‘Ring of Fire’.
Uncertainty exists in the degree to which subduction zone volcanism is
controlled by the exchange of material and fluids between the subducting plate
and the overlying mantle rocks. One way to study such processes, is to analyze
rocks that were previously subducted to great depths but have since been exhumed
and returned to the Earth’s surface. The aim of this project is to investigate
the record of the release and characteristics of fluids produced during
subduction contained within individual garnet crystals in exhumed subduction
zone rocks from the Western Alps (Italy/Switzerland). This study will further
our understanding into the importance of subduction-derived fluids in
controlling whether rocks within the subducting plate and the overlying mantle
are more chemically oxidized or reduced, which will provide insights into their
role in controlling volcanic arc magmatism. This project will support a post-
doctoral researcher at Boston College, who will work with undergraduate
students, providing them with training in analytical techniques and research
experience. The research team from Boston College will work with a large network
of collaborators from Europe and the US. An important component of this project
will include undergraduate students travelling to Europe to conduct their own
research with the help of European collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much
debate exists around the role of metamorphic fluids, released during dehydration
of the subducting slab, in controlling the redox conditions of the overlying
sub-arc mantle and in explaining the oxidized and volatile-enriched geochemical
signatures of volcanic arc magmas. The transfer of multi-valent, redox-sensitive
elements such as S, C, and Fe from the subducting slab, represents a potential
mechanism to produce oxidation of the sub-arc mantle. The proposed research will
test the hypothesis that oxidizing species are released within fluids during
dehydration of the mafic component of the slab during subduction. This study
involves creating a field-based record of the release of fluids during
subduction of the mafic crust, examining whether these fluids contain oxidizing
species, and assessing the implications for changing redox conditions within the
subducting mafic slab and overlying sub-arc mantle. To achieve this, the project
will utilize the first coupled Fe and Zn isotopic analyses of growth zones
within individual garnet crystals from exhumed high-pressure metamorphic rocks
from the Western Alps. This will be combined with precise Sm/Nd zoned garnet
geochronology to provide insights into the rates and timescales of redox-
controlling metamorphic reactions. With the help of an international network of
collaborators, this project aims to provide a uniquely high-resolution
geochemical and geochronological dataset to assess processes occurring at the
subduction zone interface and their relationship to oxidation of the sub-arc
mantle and volcanic arc magmatism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.