* 1946866
* RAPID: Immediate and Subsequent Effects of Coral Bleaching on Fore Reef Community Metabolism
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Robert Carpenter, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2022
* USD 176,065.00

Coral reefs are among the most productive marine ecosystems that provide
important ecosystem services such as food resources and coastal protection.
Coral reefs are constructed primarily by calcified invertebrates (corals), and
they create habitat for a large diversity of associated organisms, including
many fish species. Corals have a narrow range of temperature tolerance and when
temperature exceeds a threshold, they "bleach" releasing their primary producing
symbiotic algae. Corals can recover from bleaching but a more frequent outcome
is mortality. This has the potential to drastically change of the cycle of
organic and inorganic carbon on the reef, however we know little about how these
processes are affected. Beginning in April 2019, there was a moderately severe
bleaching event on the coral reefs of Moorea, French Polynesia, the site of the
only NSF-funded LTER program focused on coral reefs. This project leverages
knowledge from the MCR-LTER program and measures how the recent coral bleaching
affects both reef primary production and calcification both immediately (after 1
month) and over a year- long period at two depths on the fore reef. These are
the first measurements of how coral bleaching affects coral fore reef function.
The project trains personnel (postdoc, technician), involve graduate students,
and results are disseminated to several educational levels (in both the US and
French Polynesia) and to island resource managers in
Moorea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses how a recent coral bleaching
event in Moorea, French Polynesia affects coral fore reef function (primary
production [NEP], respiration [R], calcification [NEC]) over time at two depths.
We know that coral reef composition can be affected greatly by coral bleaching.
However, we know little about how coral reef function is affected. This project
measures coral reef function at 3 time points following the bleaching at 6 sites
around the island and at both 10 and 17-m depths. The investigators use a
gradient flux approach that quantifies vertical gradients in scalar quantities
combined with measures of vertical diffusivity to calculate rates of flux to and
from the benthos. They measure NEP/R from oxygen flux and NEC from pH and total
alkalinity (DIC flux). All rates are normalized to photosynthetically active
radiation to account for temporal variation in light. The investigators predict
that NEP/R will not change or might even increase post-bleaching but that NEC
decreases in proportion to coral mortality. Coral reef community structure for
the metabolic "footprint" at each site/depth combination is quantified using
photo-mosaics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.