* 1946376
* Collaborative Research: Pan American Nanotechnology Conference 2: Growing Convergence in Nanotechnology: Brazil - March 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Debora Rodrigues, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2021
* USD 34,180.00

Over the past 20 years, there has been a high level of activity and innovation
in nanotechnology with growing understanding at how molecular scale phenomena
manifests at the nano scale and eventually the system scale. Additionally,
critical societal needs in the areas of energy, water, bioprocessing, and the
environment are providing exciting new opportunities for nanotechnology. This
project provides support for travel and registration expenses for graduate
student, postdoctoral research fellow and faculty attendees of the second Pan
American Nanotechnology Conference. The conference will be held from March 4th
through 7th of 2020 at the Majestic Hotel, in Aguas de Lindoia, Sao Paulo,
Brazil. The conference focus is on nanotechnology broadly and the attendant
applications for a wide range of industrial and environmental processes of
critical importance to U.S. technology competitiveness. The conference will also
provide valuable educational, career development, and networking opportunities
for students and early-career researchers. The conference theme of Growing
Convergence in Nanotechnology will provide a venue for research convergence in
different fields of nanomaterials and nanotechnology, such as social, legal,
medical, agricultural, material design and synthesis, and modeling. This will
enhance collaborative and impactful research at the nanoscale throughout the Pan
American region. The conference will also foster informal discussions and
networking that will occur outside of the formal lecture sessions among its
participants from North, South and Central America. Such interactions aim to
promote the generation of new ideas and new collaborations that assist in moving
forward the field of nanotechnology. The organizers have also made special
efforts to include women and underrepresented minorities in the conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pan American Nanotechnology Conference will have
specific sessions on the applications and impacts of nanotechnology on water
quality and treatment, agricultural systems, devices such as sensors, medicine,
nanomanufacturing and process intensification. The conference will be held from
March 4th through 7th of 2020 at the Majestic Hotel, in Aguas de Lindoia, Sao
Paulo, Brazil. The discussions between the speakers and audience will provide
valuable feedback on current research efforts and will enable the participants
to further develop and refine new ideas for their own research and/or to
initiate new collaborative nanotechnology projects. The Pan American
Nanotechnology Conference aims to provide a setting where researchers can
present their most recent results. The conference will also foster informal
discussions and networking that will occur outside of the formal lecture
sessions among its participants from North, South and Central America. Such
interactions aim to promote the generation of new ideas and new collaborations
that assist in moving forward the field of nanotechnology. The organizers have
also made special efforts to include women and underrepresented minorities in
the conference. Notably the conference will include a modified and expanded
Gordon Research Conferences "Power Hour" informal gathering for all meeting
participants to discuss the challenges that women, ethnic and gender minorities,
persons with disabilities and people with non-traditional background/experience
face in science. This event helps to create an awareness of these important
issues among the broader community such that the whole community can act to
support the professional growth of women and underrepresented groups in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.