* 1946678
* Dissertation Grant: Critical Algorithmic Literacy: World-Building Around and with Algorithms
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Alexander Halavais, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 15,567.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation research project on the societal
impacts of algorithms that focuses on algorithmic literacy, meaning the ability
to better understand how, why, and with what effect algorithms function.
Critical among such effects are the ways in which algorithms mediate various
social practices and processes, and shape the ways we understand ourselves and
our lived realities; the researcher refers to the capacity of algorithms to
bring about such effects as algorithmic power. More specifically, the research
project will explore critical algorithmic literacy, defined as the social
practices and processes of "reading" and "writing" what algorithms say and mean,
and it will investigate the possibility of knowledge-building and meaning-making
processes as a bottom-up tool of governance that can be used to confront
algorithmic power. Better understanding algorithmic literacy, particularly as it
intersects with algorithmic power, can assist us in optimally managing the
societal impacts of algorithms. The project is fundamentally concerned with
ensuring algorithms work fairly and justly for all. Specifically, the insights
produced from this research can inform how policymakers approach governing
algorithms, how activist and advocacy organizations engage and educate their
(potential) supporters, how educational institutions help students learn about
algorithms, and how technology developers design their
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project on algorithmic literacy has
three key goals. First, it strives to broaden visions of knowledge-building and
meaning-making processes around algorithms will open up new avenues of inquiry
on algorithmic knowledge and literacy. By rejecting normative hierarchies of
knowledge, algorithm designers and users can begin to consider a wider range of
knowledge practices. Second, the project attempts to move beyond narratives of
knowledge and literacy that imply certain "ignorant" individuals, whose
knowledge must be corrected in order for them to succeed in the world. In doing
so, the research challenges existing approaches to consider what it might mean
to view algorithmic literacy as transformative of both the individual and the
world. Finally, the project adopts a novel approach to algorithmic power,
premised on individual and collective confrontations with it. This approach will
improve our understanding of the experience of algorithmic power and of the
factors that stifle or facilitate repertoires of action in response. The results
of the project promise to advance the fields of Science and Technology Studies,
Ethics and Values in Science and Technology, and Information and Communication
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.