* 1946340
* EAGER: Exploring the Ground-Level and Elevated Sources of New Particle Formation Using Aerosol Size- and Hygroscopicity-Resolved Turbulent Flux Measurement Technique
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Nicholas Meskhidze, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This EAGER project is a "proof of concept" effort to evaluate a new method for
assessing new particle formation events in the atmosphere. A method has been
developed to distinguish between ground-based and elevated sources of ultrafine
particles by measuring the vertical fluxes of size-resolved particles and their
ability to absorb water. Understanding new particle formation is critical to
estimating ground level particle concentrations and designing effective air
quality control strategies in urban areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of the study are to evaluate if: (1) measurements of eddy covariance and size-
selected and hygroscopicity-resolved relaxed eddy accumulation (Hy-RES REA)
vertical fluxes of particles can be used to separate ground-level and elevated
sources of new particle formation; and (2) residual layer new particle formation
events can be unambiguously linked to observed Class B nucleation events (during
Class B events the smallest detected particle diameters are larger than about 10
nm in size) detected at the surface. During May of 2020, measurements will be
made of size- and hygroscopicity-resolved vertical turbulent aerosol fluxes
during 4 different time periods over the day at the Department of Energy's
Southern Great Plains (SGP) site in Oklahoma, where a wealth of ancillary data
are available, including long-term statistics of the diurnal boundary layer
dynamics and diurnal profiles of aerosol number and
hygroscopicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.