* 1946412
* RII Track-1: Ridge to Reef Processes and Interdependent Drivers of Small Island Resilience
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Richard Nemeth, University of The Virgin Islands
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 13,460,981.00

As the environment continues to change both through natural and human influenced
means, catastrophic events such as hurricanes are projected to have much larger
devastating effects on small island territories such as the U.S. Virgin Islands.
This is easily seen in the increased destruction and lack of recovery of coral
reefs that surround the islands that are a major tourism draw and key part of
the island economy. For example, due to building of new and replacement island
infrastructure that causes runoff into the ocean, and increasing ocean
temperatures due to climate change, hurricane effects have been particularly
devastating to coral reefs. To better understand the effects of this interlinked
island and reef system, this project will use multiple scientific methods and
state-of-the-art techniques to understand how coral reefs and the plants and
animals that live in them recovered from the 2017 hurricanes, while also
investigating how the island can put in place natural systems such as mangroves
and seagrass that can act to stabilize their environment, for example, by acting
as natural water filters. The project will also address the need to build an
educated work force and will help local communities play an active role in the
stewardship of their islands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This scientific
infrastructure improvement project based in the U.S. Virgin Islands (USVI)
addresses the territory's nearshore marine ecosystems with their associated
coral reefs, which are key to the economic viability and food security of the
islands. However, coral reefs and associated habitats are especially vulnerable
to stressors such as oceanographic-climatic perturbations, and to land- and
water-based human activities, which often magnify the negative effects of
natural disturbances, such as the 2017 Category 5 hurricanes Irma and Maria.
Within this small island territory, what will ultimately determine the future of
its social-ecological systems, is the ability and capacity of its citizens to
protect and to actively participate in the stewardship of these environments.
Using an interdisciplinary state-of-the-art approach, this project will analyze
both the impacts of interventions on flux of terrestrial pollutants on coral
reef ecosystems, and the impact of biodiversity on ecological restoration in
coral reef and mangrove and seagrass habitats. Additionally, this project will
focus on improving the quantitative, scientific, and educational levels of the
USVI workforce by improving STEM education, which will be the key to
sustainability for the territory. This will be accomplished through a wide
variety of high impact strategies that include formal and informal STEM
education and by increasing the level of environmental stewardship that will
lead to better informed decision making in the management of marine and other
natural resources. A more aware and highly educated citizenry will lead to more
diversified and sustainable economic development options for the
territory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.