* 1946840
* A Workshop to Broaden Participation in Engineering by Creating Cultures of Inclusion
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Elizabeth Holloway, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 12/31/2020
* USD 0.00

This project will bring together researchers and practitioners in engineering
education and other relevant fields for a workshop that is intended to a) set a
future research agenda around creating cultures of inclusion in engineering
classrooms, departments, centers, schools, and colleges, and b) create a roadmap
of evidence-based promising practices, connected to the research agenda, that
promote inclusivity. The future research agenda will highlight the knowledge
gaps that exist with regard to cultures of inclusion and can function as a guide
for researchers in shaping their future research plans. In turn, the roadmap of
promising practices that promote inclusivity will guide practitioners and
administrators in making research-informed decisions to create cultures of
inclusion in engineering education settings. Longer term, as additional studies
from the research agenda are completed, the set of promising practices can be
expanded. As promising practices are implemented in various contexts and
settings, feedback can be used to inform new/future questions and gaps in the
research agenda. In this way, engineering colleges and schools can deliberately
create cultures of inclusion, which will promote the inclusion, success, and
graduation of more students from diverse backgrounds. Additionally, majority
students will gain a better understanding of inclusive environments, and their
beneficial nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to diversify engineering have
been ongoing for decades, and yet, the engineering profession remains
predominately white and male. There is an opportunity cost associated with this
- only with the full participation of a full set of diverse individuals can the
profession solve the complex and challenging societal problems of today and of
the future (Wulf, 2001). Few efforts have focused on changing the culture of
classrooms, departments, schools, and colleges such that all people are included
and can thrive in the environment. The development of a culture of inclusion is
critically important for the success of diverse groups, such as underrepresented
minorities (African Americans/Blacks, Hispanic Americans, American Indians,
Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders), women, non-
gender binary persons, people with disabilities, members of the LGBTQ+
community, first generation college students, and low socio-economic status
students. Efforts to create an inclusive culture result in an organization where
everyone is valued for the entirety of what they bring. To make progress on
creating inclusive cultures in engineering, where everyone, regardless of their
identities, their differences in experiences, and their differences in beliefs,
can be successful and thrive, there is a need to transform culture to make
diversity, equity, and inclusion a priority in engineering education. A
facilitated workshop that brings together practitioners of inclusive
environments, researchers in engineering education, social sciences, inclusion,
culture, and change theory will be a focused effort in the engineering community
that will create a research agenda for cultures of inclusion that can be used to
guide future research in this area and will produce a set of research-based
promising practices that promote inclusivity that can be used
immediately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.