* 1946493
* CyberCorps SFS Renewal: Accelerated Undergraduate/Graduate CyberScholars Program
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Ingrid Burbey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,636,461.00

There is a national security need for engineers and computer scientists with a
strong background in conceptualizing, designing, building and operating secure
cyber systems. Providing a comprehensive education in cybersecurity is
challenging as the hardware, software, and network systems are always changing
in response to the evolving strategies of adversaries. With this CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) project, Virginia Tech proposes to support
undergraduates working towards a combined bachelor’s and master’s (BS/MS) degree
program. The educational program will address the major and specialty areas
established in the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)
Cybersecurity Workforce Framework, with a focus on the Securely Provision,
Analyze, and Investigate categories. Expansion of this project is expected to
further its broader impacts by increasing participation of underrepresented
minorities and women. Participation will be open to current Virginia Tech
students as well as students transferring in from two-year programs within
community college systems. The overall goal of this project is to produce
scholars who will be prepared to satisfy the need for well-trained cybersecurity
professionals working in federal, state, local, and tribal government
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Virginia Tech CyberScholars project focuses
on third year undergraduate students intending to complete a combined BS/MS
degree program in Electrical and Computer Engineering or Computer Science.
Scholars will receive three years of funding, which will encompass the final two
years of undergraduate work plus the additional year required to earn a master’s
degree. The Electrical Engineering, Computer Engineering and Computer Science
degree programs are highly technical and delve into the security of software,
hardware, and networking of computing systems. The project will also address the
cybersecurity of the Internet of Things (IoT). IoT cybersecurity is an
increasingly important area as the use of smart cars, smart houses, autonomous
devices, and a range of self-securing services expands. Scholars will be
required to complete an undergraduate Cyber Security minor, a Graduate
Cybersecurity Certificate, and a federal internship. In addition, the scholars
will be expected to conduct research in a cyber-related lab and participate in
extracurricular activities. Extracurricular opportunities include the Virginia
Tech Cyber Club and the development of tutorial materials and lessons for the
Virginia Cyber Range. These activities will also contribute to disseminating
cybersecurity knowledge and have potential to extend the project’s impact beyond
the pool of selected scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals
establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with
the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce.
Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.