* 1946976
* EAGER:Scalable Photonic AI Accelerators Based on Photoelectric Multiplication
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Dirk Englund, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

One of the deepest questions in science is how biological cognition works.
Traditionally the purview of neuroscience and psychology, in recent years
computer science have shed light on it through the field of 'deep learning'.
Deep learning uses computer algorithms called neural networks to perform various
tasks-e.g. face recognition, medical diagnosis, automobile driving--that have
long been considered difficult for computers, and is transforming many
industries including logistics, manufacturing, healthcare, and finance. However,
neural networks are very costly to run even on modern computers. To unlock deep
learning's full potential, this research will investigate a new concept: Optical
Neural Networks. By running neural networks on dedicated optical hardware, there
is a potential to increase speed and reduce energy consumption by at least
1000x. This program will study the feasibility of this concept to pave the way
for more extensive technology development in the future. If realized, Optical
Neural Networks will allow researchers to develop significantly larger, more
complex deep learning models that may open up entirely new deep learning
applications that are beyond the capabilities of present-day computers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial intelligence (AI) based on deep neural networks
(DNNs) has revolutionized a wide range of fields, but at a cost: DNNs are very
compute- and power-intensive. Driving the AI revolution has been an exponential
growth in the available compute performance, which has enabled the application
of DNNs to increasingly complex tasks. However, as Moore's Law runs out of
steam, this trend cannot continue for long; therefore, the development of
alternative platforms for AI hardware has become especially urgent. This EAGER
will study a class of optical neural networks (ONNs) that harness the unique
advantages of photonics and promise orders-of-magnitude throughput- and energy-
consumption improvements over conventional electronics. Three key tasks are: (i)
a system-level architecture study to predict the ONN's performance gains on
realistic workloads, (ii) a hardware analysis and feasibility study, and (iii)
an investigation into the fundamental limits of ONNs. Research activities
include modeling, numerical analysis, and
benchmarking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.