* 1946312
* Investigating the Determinants of Polymerase Specificity by Droplet Microfluidics
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* John Chaput, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 11/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Every living organism on our planet requires a DNA polymerase to faithfully and
efficiently copy its genetic information (DNA) during cell division. The ability
to harness DNA synthesis in applications such as the polymerase chain reaction
has revolutionized medical diagnostics, forensics and molecular biology. Future
technological advances will require the customization of DNA polymerases for
particular properties and particular applications. The goal of this project is
to determine how DNA polymerases recognize their DNA targets and to use this
information to customize a polymerase for recognition and copying of novel
targets. This project also contains a significant educational component that is
designed to attract and maintain student interest in the biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering DNA polymerases to synthesize any
type of unnatural nucleic acid polymer with the same catalytic efficiency as
their natural counterparts will require a better understanding of how a
polymerase sequence relates to its biochemical function. In this proposal, we
will address this problem by applying a convergent science approach that
combines high-throughput microfluidic screening with next-generation sequencing
to assess the functional activity of all possible single-point mutations found
in the catalytic domain of a replicative DNA polymerase. The large-scale
sequencing data that results will be organized into protein fitness maps that
reveal the functional consequences of each mutation (beneficial, neutral, or
negative) against a defined set of synthetic analogs. Mutations that promote
strong synthesis activity will be recombined and taken through stringent screens
to create new polymerases with superior catalytic activity. The best enzymes
will be characterized using kinetic, biochemical, and structural methods that
define the rate, fidelity, and mechanism of synthesis. Successful completion of
this study will provide new fundamental knowledge about the limits of polymerase
engineering using cutting-edge microfluidic techniques that allow for massively
parallel screening of novel polymerase activities inside water-in-oil
microdroplets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.