* 1946391
* RII Track-1: Data Analytics that are Robust and Trusted (DART): From Smart Curation to Socially Aware Decision Making
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Jennifer Fowler, Arkansas Science & Technology Authority
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 16,291,191.00

The DART research program will create a consortium of Arkansas researchers with
a synergistic, integrated focus on excellence in data analytics research. The
vision of the education and workforce development program is to create a
statewide Data Science and Analytics educational ecosystem, where learners
receive a designed, consistent, sequenced, and modular education in data science
with job or further educational opportunities available at appropriate points in
their academic path. These efforts, combined with intensive industry
collaboration, will provide the pillars of support needed to improve research
capability and competitiveness in Arkansas. DART will develop: 1) the means to
increase the speed and efficiency of data curation and labeling; 2) techniques
to protect privacy and identify impartial content; 3) methods for harnessing the
predictive power of machine learning while increasing the interpretability of
the processes behind the predictions; and 4) data science curricula that are
more inclusive and better prepare students for a data-centric future. These
advances will be made possible by bringing together in one research project a
large group of talented scientists from diverse, but complementary, research
areas. The project will support basic research in math, statistics, data
science, and computer science that will enable data-driven discovery through
visualization, better data mining, privacy and security protections, machine
learning and more. The project will build an open computational infrastructure
for researchers and students and develop innovative educational pathways to
train the next generation of data scientists. DART will include a data science
summer institute for undergraduates and extensive curriculum support for middle-
school teachers. A key opportunity in the design and development of the Data
Science and Analytics degree program will be to leverage DART research areas and
topics as real-life examples for the courses and to integrate these into the
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DART will bring together data science
researchers with diverse, but complementary, research interests, backgrounds,
and skills to stimulate innovation. DART scientific objectives contribute to the
National Science Foundation's (NSF) Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big
Idea in foundations, algorithms, and systems in data science and further develop
a coordinated state-wide data cyberinfrastructure. The project will study key
barriers to better big data analytics and develop improved algorithms and
methods to provide: 1) the means to more automatically curate heterogeneous,
unstructured, and poorly-structured data; 2) faster and more robust model
training by augmenting manual methods; 3) more secure data by protecting the
privacy of contributors; 4) improvements in metrics of data quality; 5) novel
unbiased model predictions and decision support systems; and 6) a better balance
between the predictive power of complex machine learning models and the
interpretability provided by statistical models. Each of these research outcomes
will create a better framework for balancing the risks and benefits of new data
analytics technologies. As the state better aligns its investments with industry
strengths, more opportunities to improve the quality of life in Arkansas and to
steadily increase educational attainment and wages will develop. DART will
include a data science summer institute for undergraduates, summer internships
and research experiences, increased data science educational opportunities,
integrated support for middle school teachers across the state, and revamped
curricula to include relevant data science topics and capstone projects.
Developments in data cyberinfrastructure will increase sharing of information
among educational institutions, research institutions, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.