* 1946046
* RoL: Leveraging wild yeast to identify genetic mechanisms of climate adaptation in natural populations
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Audrey Gasch, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 980,977.00

Will natural populations adapt in the face of climate change? In a rapidly
changing world, there is an urgent need to know the conditions necessary for
adaptation. In the past, unrelated populations or species independently adapted
in similar ways to increased temperatures. The goal of this research is to use
such natural experimental replicates to identify ecological, physiological and
genetic predictors of adaptation. For animals or plants, it is technically
difficult to discover the precise genetic mechanism encoding new traits. This
research focuses instead on many wild populations of yeast and includes the
model organism for genetics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which humans also use to
ferment food and beverages. Yeast are exceptionally tractable in the laboratory,
and there are wild forest populations of even domesticated species with
population biology that is surprisingly similar to that of animals. Work on this
project will provide an interdisciplinary training that is in high demand by
integrating field, laboratory and bioinformatic approaches. It will train
undergraduate and graduate students, including students from underrepresented
groups in science. Researchers will also test whether the same principles of
natural yeast thermal adaptation also governed adaptation of wild yeast to local
human-associated environments. Families, elementary school children and others
in the community will learn about the concepts and findings of the research
through local events and school visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Populations that
show convergent evolution provide natural replicates for understanding the
ecological, phenotypic and molecular basis of adaptation. The research team's
overall objective is to identify the mutations and evolutionary processes that
characterize convergent evolution in the wild, using thermal adaptation in yeast
as the study system. The research will test for convergent thermal evolution
within species and across phylogenetic scales by sampling many yeast populations
from four woodland species, including Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Population
genomic analyses will distinguish new adaptive mutations from standing genetic
variation or gene flow. The power of wild yeast genetics can show the underlying
mechanisms of adaptation to an extent that would be almost impossible in any
other system. The experiments involve analyses to infer phylogenetic
relationships for detecting convergence and evolutionary context; field sampling
and physiological screens identifying thermal adaptation in natural yeast
populations; the identification of mutations underlying convergent thermal
adaptation, their verification using transgenic allele swaps; and integrated
analyses predicting species ranges and climate change response by generating
correlative and mechanistic models that include mutation availability,
phenotypic plasticity, population size and growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant was cofunded by the Integrative Ecological Physiology Program in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, the Evolutionary Processes Cluster
in the Division of Environmental Biology, and The Rules of Life in the Division
of Emerging Frontiers in Directorate for Biological
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.