* 1946735
* U.S. CMS Upgrades for the High-Luminosity Large Hadron Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2026
* Anders Ryd, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Coles
* 12/31/2026
* USD 40,416,942.00

Through decades of prior research, scientists have developed the Standard Model
of Particle Physics, a theoretical framework that quantitatively describes
physical phenomena such as radioactivity, the interaction of light with matter,
and the structure of nuclei. The last piece of the Standard Model to fall into
place was the Higgs boson, the particle whose interaction with other components
of the Standard Model gives rise to their various masses. It was discovered at
CERN in 2012, resulting in the award of the 2013 Nobel Prize in Physics to Peter
Higgs and Francois Englert. The Standard Model is incomplete, as it does not
explain, for example, phenomena such as the astrophysical observations of Dark
Matter and Dark Energy, or why anti-matter is so rare. Researchers want to
investigate whether there are additional particles with exotic properties,
unlike any forms of matter observed so far, whose existence is predicted by some
theories that extend the Standard Model. Further study of the properties of the
Higgs boson may shed light on these questions, but this will require a far
greater data sample than that produced so far. CERN is upgrading the LHC to
produce a much larger number of proton-proton collisions. After upgrading is
complete in 2027, when it will be known as the High Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC), the
rate of interaction will be about ten times greater than when the Higgs boson
was discovered. Concurrently, the CMS (Compact Muon Solenoid) detector will be
upgraded to operate in the much-higher-intensity HL-LHC environment, and it will
incorporate critical Higgs boson detection sensitivity enhancements. The upgrade
activities are an internationally coordinated effort, managed by CERN and
involving the participation and individual contributions of more than 40 funding
agencies globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF will award $77.225 million to
Cornell University as the lead institution in a consortium of 31 US universities
that will fabricate and deliver key elements of the CMS detector upgrade:
additional silicon detectors that will detect charge particles travelling very
close to the direction of the incident proton beams, additional electronic
readout systems that will improve angular measurements of the energies and
directions of particles produced in collisions, and more sophisticated
electronics and software to select data for recording from among the torrent
that will be produced. NSF is coordinating its participation with the US
Department of Energy, who is also funding elements of the CMS upgrade. This
continues a highly successful inter-agency partnership that has jointly enabled
US scientists to participate in cutting edge research at the LHC for more than
two decades. Cornell University and its 30 subrecipients will leverage the NSF
award to increase the diversity of participation in physics research by hundreds
of undergraduate and high school students. Hands-on involvement in detector
fabrication and testing will enable a broad range of unique education and
outreach activities that are coupled to institutional undergraduate and graduate
programs. These will advance NSF goals promoting STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, Mathematics) workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.