* 1946065
* Collaborative Research: Empowering Open Law and Science
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Nicholas Weber, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 40,282.00

Research transparency provides immense value across all areas of scholarly
inquiry by helping to reveal the rigor, reliability, and relevance of, and to
make more evaluable, all types of research. Scholars who engage in qualitative
inquiry sometimes find it difficult to make their work transparent, i.e. to
clearly communicate the meticulous and systematic research procedures and
practices that they employ to generate and analyze qualitative data, and to
clearly portray the evidentiary value of those data. Annotation for Transparent
Inquiry (ATI), an emerging approach to increasing the transparency of published
qualitative and multi-method social science, helps to address those challenges.
This project aims to develop and test a new software tool that will empower
scholars to use ATI to reveal the procedures they followed to generate data,
explicate the logic of their analysis, and directly link to underlying data such
as interviews or archival documents. The tool will thus help researchers and the
public to better understand and evaluate qualitative research and provide easier
access to the rich data underlying such work. The partnership between
researchers, academic data repositories, and creators of open-source software
that the project represents should make a significant contribution to
infrastructure for research and education. The project also encourages
intellectual democratization, enhancing access to transparency practices, to key
insights and findings in social science and legal scholarship, and to research
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ATI empowers authors to annotate their publications
using interoperable web-based annotations that add valuable details about their
work’s evidentiary basis and analysis, excerpts from data sources that underlie
claims, and potentially links to the data sources themselves. The prototype for
a new open-source tool that the project will develop will allow scholars to
Restructure, Edit and Package Annotations (Anno-REP). Anno-REP will empower
scholars to create and curate web-based annotations at any point in the writing
process; signal their motivation; and publish those annotations on a web page in
tandem with the scholarly work that they accompany. These innovations will
significantly ease the use of ATI and facilitate and encourage its seamless
integration into the writing and publishing processes, promoting scientific
progress through qualitative inquiry. The project will solicit feedback for
Anno-REP’s continued development from ten scholars with familiarity with ATI,
and will also evaluate the tool through a workshop including 20 legal scholars
(faculty and graduate students). In order to promote the use and hasten the
scholarly adoption of both ATI and Anno-REP, the project will encourage and help
scholars to propose work that has been annotated using ATI and Anno-REP for
presentation at disciplinary conferences. In addition, it will organize a
symposium of articles that use, and analyze the use of, ATI for submission to,
review by, and publication in a top legal journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.