* 1946418
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Early Cenozoic basin development in the southwestern US: a record of extensional collapse following subduction of an oceanic plateau?
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Richard Heermance, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 04/30/2024
* USD 278,858.00

Subduction zones represent some of the most tectonically active regions on
earth. Changes in the angle of the downgoing plate can control volcanism,
faulting, and basin development in the overlying continental crust. The Maniobra
and Goler Formations, exposed in the Mojave Desert in southern California,
provide evidence for the development of extensional basins on the overriding
continental plate related to low-angle subduction in Late Cretaceous to Eocene
time (~80-50 million years ago). This research will test the hypothesis that
Late Cretaceous extension resulted in the development of the Maniobra and Goler
Basins, while simultaneously introducing more than 50 undergraduate and 2
Masters students to the techniques of basin analysis. The field sites in the
Mojave Desert, located within 3 hours of Los Angeles, provide a natural
laboratory to train the next generation of geoscientists. Students from a
Hispanic-serving institution will learn modern geologic techniques, such as
geologic mapping, geochronology, paleomagnetism, and thermochronology, that can
be applied to their graduate and post-graduate careers. Analytical data from
this research will be made available on community databases, and results of the
proposed research will be used to construct a publicly-available online learning
module.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent tectonic models of the southwestern US
Cordillera have invoked the subduction of an oceanic plateau, the conjugate
Shatsky Rise, as a driver of slab flattening, subduction erosion and arc
cessation in Late Cretaceous to Eocene time. Subduction, and subsequent passage
of the plateau, likely promoted extension and associated regional
paleogeographic changes, such as basin development and block rotations. This
study targets the Goler and Maniobra Formations, which are the only Late
Cretaceous to Eocene basinal strata located along the interpreted subduction
pathway. This research will test the hypothesis that gravitational collapse in
the wake of plateau subduction was widespread across the Mojave region in the
Late Cretaceous to early Cenozoic and led to the development of supra-detachment
basins and the exhumation of relict subduction complexes. This research will
incorporate new mapping of stratigraphic and structural relationships, combined
with magnetostratigraphy, detrital zircon provenance analysis, and basement and
detrital thermochronology. This data will constrain the timing and duration of
basin formation and enable the evaluation of different tectonic models of basin
development. New basin analysis results from the Late Cretaceous to Eocene Goler
and Maniobra Formations will provide a crucial link between plateau subduction
processes and related surface deformation and will highlight the complexity of
tectonic evolution along a highly segmented margin over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.