* 1946936
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Social Functions of Monumentality
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Timothy Everhart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 25,200.00

Monuments have played an important role in human societies for at least the last
ten millennia by structuring relationships between people, histories, and
landscapes. Archaeologists explore these relationships through the framework of
"monumentality." Historically, monuments were associated a priori with complex
societies following a notion that the necessary labor for their construction
must inherently be organized by hierarchically-empowered leaders and supported
by agricultural surplus. This project adds to an emerging global record of
contrary examples by exploring the role of monuments in small-scale societies.
The near absence of ethnographic or ethnohistoric records of monument
construction among small-scale societies leaves archaeology as the sole domain
for inquiry. The Eastern Woodlands of North America have recently assumed a
prominent place in this discussion, but the region's most enigmatic monuments
"the large geometric earthworks of the Scioto Hopewell" have yet to enter this
consideration in a meaningful way. This research centers Scioto Hopewell
monumentality and provides a comparative framework through which to understand
monumentality in other small-scale societies. That monuments still play a large
and active role in society has been made apparent as Civil War monuments have
dominated recent headlines. This project will bring attention to Native American
monuments, which have been destroyed at an alarming rate over the last two
centuries, in an effort to facilitate appreciation, knowledge, and conservation
of these places. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan doctoral candidate
Timothy Everhart will investigate Middle Woodland (AD 1-400) monumentality in
the Central Scioto River Valley. Scioto Hopewell societies of this period
constructed monuments of a greater density and of a greater diversity than any
other known monuments of small-scale societies. By conducting new excavations at
the Steel Group site (33Ro62) - a site with at least 13 earthen monuments of
many designs - in Ross County, Ohio, and subjecting recovered materials to a
host of laboratory-based analyses, this research will investigate the unique
processes and practices of monumentality that led to the construction of
different monument forms at the same location. Specifically, it will document
the historical trajectory of monument construction, the use of monuments, and
the composition of laboring parties at this site. This project will seek to
address the range of variation among Hopewell earthworks in the Central Scioto
River Valley of southern Ohio, and thus to offer insight into the various roles
monuments played in small-scale societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.