* 1946258
* Modeling Pastoral Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Mark Moritz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 12/31/2022
* USD 73,993.00

Pastoralism refers to economic systems that depend on raising livestock.
Anthropologists have long explained that pastoralism is a good strategy for
people who live in environments inhospitable to agriculture. However, even
pastoralists have to be concerned about balancing the number of animals they
keep with the pasture available to feed them and the labor available to care for
them. Indeed, population models show that livestock populations have the
potential to grow exponentially and outstrip the carrying capacity of their
environments. But empirical evidence indicates otherwise: in the real world,
pastoral livestock populations are relatively stable. The question then is how
is this balance achieved. Until now the most popular explanation has been that
droughts, diseases, and other disasters keep livestock populations in check. But
the research supported by this award will test an alternative explanation:
demographic dynamics -- the natural expansion and contraction of family sizes
over time -- operating at the livestock herd and household level may constrain
the growth of livestock populations regionally. If this is indeed the case, as
this interdisciplinary research team proposes, then it has implications for
development interventions in livestock-dependent economic systems. Results will
be disseminated to organizations invested in improving veterinary health and
reducing drought vulnerability to improve livelihoods in livestock-dependent
economies. In addition, the project trains students in sophisticated
computational methods and analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
develop an agent-based model to examine the impact of the domestic cycle of
households on the demography of family herds and ultimately on regional
livestock populations. Data from previous studies will be used to parameterize
the agent-based model. The model will be used to simulate the domestic cycle of
the household and the demographic processes of their family herds under
different experimental conditions in which the size and composition of herds and
households is modified and running the simulations for one or ten generations
(25 or 250 years). The simulations will allow the researchers to examine how the
domestic cycle affects herd demography by examining the impact of changes in age
of first marriage, increasing in the number of sons, or increasing polygyny
rates. In addition, the simulations will be used to examine how sensitive the
growth of regional livestock populations is to changes in the herd-size
threshold, i.e., whether a lower threshold leads to stronger growth of livestock
populations at the regional level. Findings from this research will provide
insight into livestock population dynamics in pastoral societies, in particular
the question of why these populations do not seem to increase in the absence of
major disasters like droughts and diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.