* 1946882
* Key factors in the emergence of combinatorial structure: An experimental and computational approach
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Robin Clark, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2024
* USD 102,648.00

Speech sounds are fundamental building blocks of spoken languages, but languages
differ greatly in both the identity and number of speech sounds they include.
For example, although languages with five vowels are particularly common, some
languages have as few as two vowels and others have over ten. The sound
characteristics of the vowels of a language can be compared, as can aspects of
how they are produced (e.g., the position of the tongue and lips needed to
produce the vowel). It turns out that for both the resulting sound space and
production space, there is a strong tendency for the vowels to be much more
dispersed and symmetrically arranged than would be expected by chance. That is,
they do not tend to cluster together, but are spread out relatively evenly. This
pattern occurs regardless of the number of vowels in the language. How is it
that the sound systems of different languages can be so varied, yet pattern
themselves in similar ways? The answer may lie in the needs of human
communication. When people listen to others speak, they need to be able to
distinguish one word from another, often in noisy environments. The speakers, in
turn, need to be able to produce sounds without too much effort that listeners
can distinguish reliably. It may be that dispersion and symmetry emerge
naturally as a by-product of human attempts to meet these communicative needs.
In testing this hypothesis, the investigators may shed light on how languages
can be so varied while remaining fundamentally similar in other ways. The
project will also offer research opportunities to university and high school
students who will be directly involved in the research, broadening their
understanding of how language works and how to study it.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work tests the hypothesis that the dispersion and
symmetry observed in vowel systems are due to the needs of communication in
general, rather than anything specific to language as such. To this end, the
investigators explore whether similar effects occur when people communicate
through a medium other than language. The project involves an innovative
experimental approach in which pairs of people communicate using specially
designed software that allows them to send each other series of colors by moving
their fingers around on a trackpad. While this medium is clearly very different
from ordinary linguistic communication, it is designed to mimic speech in key
ways: It involves sending observable signals by performing a physical action in
a constrained space (comparable with making different speech sounds by varying
the position and shape of the tongue and lips). If the same kind of
organizational properties (i.e., dispersion and symmetry) arise in this color
communication medium in response to the kind of communicative pressures
described above, then this will strongly suggest that those pressures help shape
the organization of speech sounds in language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.