* 1946951
* Workshop: Philosophy of Science and Public Engagement; May 2020, Cincinnati, OH
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Melissa Jacquart, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 34,522.00

This award supports a three-day workshop to be held in May 2020. The workshop
will bring together philosophers of science and other academics and
practitioners who participate in research on public outreach and public
engagement as it relates to science. Workshop participants will focus on four
key areas: Science communication (including public-facing events, writing, and
social media), science education (including engaging with students and with
educators about science), informal science education and outreach (such as
through museums and libraries), and scientific work with communities (such as
citizen science and community-based research). Workshop participants will
identify and promote more meaningful broader impacts for philosophical research
that includes public outreach and science education. The workshop will also
serve to meet institutional goals for the University of Cincinnati's newly
founded Center for Public Engagement with Science to strengthen connections with
its community partners. The primary concrete deliverables from this workshop are
four white papers, one on each of the indicated areas of public engagement; they
will be submitted for presentation at pertinent conferences and professional
society meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will serve to enhance the
capacity for socially engaged philosophy of science. That capacity includes
conducting philosophical research with broader social relevance, developing the
practical implications of philosophical research (such as advancing public
policy), and involving philosophy of science in public engagement with broader
science endeavors including science education, science communication, and
citizen science. The workshop will work towards the overarching goal by
fortifying existing bridges with other disciplines relevant to public engagement
with science including science communication, science education, and science and
technology studies. The first two days of the workshop will consist in morning
and early-afternoon lectures from experts on each of the four key areas
indicated above, followed by interactive breakout sessions in the late afternoon
on each topic. The third day will focus on developing philosophy of science's
potential to contribute to these areas of public engagement with science. Some
of the core questions to be addressed are the following. What do philosophers of
science have to contribute to this area of public engagement? What are some ways
in which that contribution be realized? What resources or discussions in other
disciplines already exist? What research do philosophers need to do public
engagement? What are potential challenges? The end goal of this workshop is the
development of new research networks between philosophers of science and other
communities that focus on public engagement with
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.