* 1946788
* Collaborative Research: Effects of cross-race contact on perceptual expertise, expectancies, and individuated face processing
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Joshua Correll, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2024
* USD 342,322.00

Most people know from their own experience that it is harder to recognize
someone of a different race than it is to recognize someone who belongs to one’s
own racial group. We call this phenomenon the cross-race recognition deficit (or
CRD). The CRD is a robust effect which has been studied all over the world. It
influences both White people trying to remember Black faces, but also Black
people trying to remember White faces, and both groups trying to remember Asian
faces. The team will investigate two psychological processes that may contribute
to the CRD. First, people may fail to pick up on useful information in cross-
race faces because they are untrained at finding the right kinds of information
in those faces. Second, people may harbor an expectation that faces, in general,
should look like faces from their own racial group, leading them to see cross-
race faces as inherently foreign. In addition, the team will examine natural
variation in cross-race contact which may underlie CRD, and will implement
focused training with cross-race faces which will be delivered online or through
a smartphone application. In this study, the team hopes to (a) shed light on a
robust, important phenomenon that affects how people see one another, (b)
examine a strategy to improve cross-race recognition, and (c) introduce improved
tools (like a smartphone app) and measures that will be available for free to
scientists and lay people alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this set of
studies, the researchers will examine (a) the CRD, (b) the relationship between
the CRD and the extent of an individual’s contact or experience with members of
other racial groups, as well as (c) the cognitive operations that give rise to
both the CRD and its relationship to contact. The work will leverage two
prominent theories of visual processing – perceptual learning and predictive
coding – to make predictions about the CRD, a phenomenon with far-reaching
social psychological and societal consequences. Aim 1 of this proposal tests a
theoretical model (Correll, Hudson, Guillermo, &amp; Earls, 2016) which argues
that the relationship between cross-race contact and the CRD is mediated by
changes in (a) perceptual learning, which allows the perceiver to more
efficaciously encode individuating information from the kinds of faces that a
perceiver typically encounters; and (b) expectancies about what a face should
look like, which again reflect the perceiver’s social experience. In Aim 2, the
team turns to the question of how the CRD impacts generalization from one face
to another. For example, if a participant learns that one member of a group is
friendly (or unfriendly), does that information generalize to other members of
the group? Robust theoretical arguments contend that similarity between stimuli
should promote generalization, and the CRD – at its heart – reflects the
perception of similarity among cross-race faces. The scientific impacts of this
work are numerous: It will integrate vision science and social psychology, and
explore an unusual method for reducing prejudice and stereotyping. Furthermore,
the team will develop a free face-training smartphone application that will be
available for researchers to use. The broader impacts of the work are also wide
ranging: The CRD has many consequences outside the laboratory (e.g., eye-witness
testimony, interpersonal interactions), and this project will investigate ways
to reduce CRD. The team will develop and validate a free app that will be
available to lay people who want to practice cross-race face recognition. In
addition, given a diverse group of undergraduate research assistants at both
institutions, this work will expose under-represented populations to the type of
science from which these groups are often excluded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.