* 1946273
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Detecting Vulnerabilities and Remediations in Software Dependencies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* William Enck, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,928.00

Software is at the very center of today's society, permeating commerce,
transportation, information exchange, and entertainment. Today's software is
rarely written from scratch and is frequently dependent on a large ecosystem of
open source libraries and tools. As a result, a single vulnerability in a
library often has a cascading effect, resulting in corresponding vulnerabilities
in the many software systems and applications that depend on it. The goal of
this project is to aid software developers in identifying and updating
vulnerable dependencies through the creation of methods that detect, measure,
and remediate a software project's use of external, open source software with
security flaws. As part of achieving this goal, the investigators will develop
the first global vulnerable-dependency graph to characterize the problem within
the broader open source ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of this
global vulnerable-dependency graph depends on addressing two key research
challenges. First, software dependencies exist in many forms, ranging from clear
listings in package manifests to copies of external libraries added to a
software project's code repository. Second, not all vulnerability fixes are
announced. Developers often discover and fix vulnerabilities without issuing an
announcement (or perhaps even without knowing a vulnerability was fixed). This
project will address these challenges through novel application of static
program analysis and text analytics. These techniques will scalably recover
software dependencies, mapping both publicly known vulnerabilities as well as
discovered silent vulnerability fixes to individual versions of software
libraries and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.