* 1946022
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Adversarial Network Reconnaissance in Software Defined Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Patrick McDaniel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 575,000.00

Software-defined networks (SDNs) have fundamentally altered the way in which
networks and the systems built upon them are created and maintained. The ability
to rapidly deploy and reconfigure SDNs and their supported services allow
organizations to be agile in addressing changing needs and threats. Moreover,
when deployed together with Network Function Virtualization (NFV), SDN enables
network services such as firewalls, network intrusion detection systems (NIDS),
and load balancers to be abstracted from the physical infrastructure that they
are deployed on, thereby greatly simplifying service composition and scaling.
However, as SDNs become widely adopted, the issue of security emerges. On the
one hand, the logically centralized view of SDN eases defenses against
traditional IP-network attacks such as port scanning and firewall probing. On
the other hand, SDN introduces new opportunities for adversarial reconnaissance,
which is a family of techniques that allow insider and outsider attackers to use
the network behavior and control-plane messaging to infer the structure,
configuration, and vulnerabilities of the target SDN. To secure future networks
against such attackers, this project proposes to develop a systematic
understanding of the techniques, capabilities, fundamental limits, and
countermeasures of adversarial reconnaissance in SDNs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project plans to develop systematic modeling and analysis of reconnaissance
techniques and enabled attacks in SDNs. The objectives of such reconnaissance
include the covert extraction of the policies (e.g., rule replacement policy)
and the states (e.g., network congestion state, link loads) at both the network
level and the service level. The project plans to achieve these objectives by
developing and evaluating explicit inference algorithms that can learn the
internal parameters of the target SDN from easily obtainable measurements, with
concrete efforts focused on host-based reconnaissance of the internal parameters
of switches, as well as switch-based reconnaissance of the internal logic and
state of important control applications. To understand the consequence of
adversarial reconnaissance, the project also plans to develop and evaluate
intelligent attacks that make use of the network parameters learned during
reconnaissance. The general objective of such attacks is to minimize the risk of
detection while causing measurable damage, with concrete efforts focused on
intelligent host-based attacks that design attack flows to achieve the optimal
tradeoff between attack performance and cost, as well as intelligent switch-
based attacks that exploit the learned logic and state of the target control
application (e.g., load balancer) to manipulate its decisions. This work will
develop new theories, algorithms, methodologies, evaluation harnesses, and
online tools by combining network science with security analysis in concert with
simulated and real-world experiments. Its outcome will advance the science and
practice of SDN security and vulnerability analysis and enhance the security of
future SDNs by motivating attack-resilient designs. The work will also support
education at the participating institution and develop workforce expertise in
SDN and security analysis, as well as fostering the PIsâ€™ already active efforts
in Broadening Participation in Computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.