* 1946553
* CyberCorps: Principled Leaders with Cybersecurity Expertise
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Jordana Navarro, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,453,159.00

This new project addresses the need for cybersecurity experts with different
backgrounds by supporting students who will pursue academic programs in Computer
Science, Criminal Justice, and Intelligence and Security Studies along with a
minor in cybersecurity. The project represents a college-wide effort that will
combine resources and expertise from the newly created Department of Cyber and
Computer Sciences, Department of Criminal Justice, Department of Intelligence
and Security Studies, Center for Cyber, Intelligence and Secure Studies, STEM
Center of Excellence, Academic Support Center, Office of Admissions, and Career
Services. Specific efforts will be made to attract a diverse population, in
particular to recruit women and underrepresented minorities. This is the first
CyberCorps project in the state of South Carolina and is therefore uniquely
positioned to serve the Lowcountry area including the nearby Naval Information
Warfare Center (NIWC) Atlantic. The outcome of the proposed project will be a
pool of principled leaders to meet the nation's cybersecurity workforce
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Citadel has been designated as a National Center
for Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education by the National Security
Agency and Department of Homeland Security. This project will use the existing
Citadel Scholars program framework to recruit academically talented students and
will strive to increase the number of women and minorities in cybersecurity. To
retain these students, the project will leverage institutional support through
the Student Success Center and mentoring activities. Students will pursue a
cybersecurity education program that incorporates Computer Science, Criminal
Justice, and Intelligence and Security Studies in the context of a military-
focused liberal arts college. Students will also participate in research,
outreach activities, and cyber defense competitions. The goal will be to produce
well-rounded cybersecurity leaders for federal and state agencies. The project
will benefit from the Citadel’s leadership training component and the
established relationship between The Citadel Career Center and government
entities, including defense and intelligence agencies.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service
(SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or continuing scholarship
programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to
develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation, scholarship
recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or
tribal Government organization for the same duration as their scholarship
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.