* 1946537
* CyberCorps SFS: Preparing the Next Generation of Cybersecurity Professionals
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Von Welch, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,112,869.00

Developing a well-trained cybersecurity workforce is broadly critical to the
nation’s economic competitiveness and security. The Indiana University
Cybersecurity Scholarship Program (IUCSP) will provide 16 diverse students a
novel cybersecurity educational program that combines Indiana University’s (IU)
interdisciplinary academic curriculum with real-world internship experiences. To
ensure diversity, IUCSP will engage in active recruitment and outreach through
an array of initiatives. These initiatives include cybersecurity summer camps
hosted by IU’s Center for Applied Cybersecurity Research, existing partnerships
with Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana, and collaboration with IU’s Office
of the Vice President for Diversity, Equity, and Multicultural Affairs, the
Black Student Union, the IU-Minority Serving Institutions STEM Initiative, and
the Center of Excellence for Women in Technology. The combination of strong
academic preparation with applied experience, via the IU Cybersecurity Clinic,
will produce cybersecurity leaders uniquely situated to strengthen the U.S.
government workforce, national security needs, and critical infrastructure
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IU is a designated National Security Agency and
Department of Homeland Security Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense
in both Education and Research. The proposed IUCSP will produce a pipeline of
students holding undergraduate, master’s, and doctoral degrees from one of IU’s
academic degree offerings: a bachelor’s in Computer Science, a doctorate in
Computer Science, a master’s in Secure Computing, or an interdisciplinary
master’s in Cybersecurity Risk Management. This project will determine the
efficacy of the IUCSP components, which include recruitment and outreach at
major cybersecurity conventions, educational programming as part of the IU
Cybersecurity Clinic, summer internships with government organizations,
dedicated mentoring, and involvement in workshops and other activities that will
ensure IU’s programs continue to be state-of-the-art. Degrees will be coupled
with real-world experience from several established, IU-led cybersecurity
organizations, as follows. The Omni Security Operations Center helps higher
education institutions reduce the impact of cybersecurity threats through a
joint Security Operations Center collaboration. The National Science Foundation
(NSF) Cybersecurity Center of Excellence leads other NSF-funded research
organizations in addressing cybersecurity challenges. The Research and Education
Network Information Sharing and Coordination Center serves over 620 member
institutions within the higher education and research community by promoting
cybersecurity operational protections and response. The IU Cybersecurity Clinic
pairs students with Indiana-based organizations to tackle real-world
organizational cybersecurity challenges. In addition, students will benefit from
IU’s own cybersecurity operations team, which protects 100,000+ students and
employees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.