* 1946231
* RII Track-1: Louisiana Materials Design Alliance (LAMDA)
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Michael Khonsari, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2025
* USD 12,463,344.00

This project, known as LAMDA, aims to improve the global competitiveness of U.S.
industries that use advanced manufacturing methods, specifically additive
manufacturing (which is also known as 3D printing). The additive manufacturing
process builds a three-dimensional (3D) object from a computer-aided design
model, usually by successively adding material layer by layer. The layering
material is commonly metal or polymer. Because the layering process can
introduce defects, research is needed to improve both the understanding of the
additive manufacturing process and the metals and plastics used for layering.
LAMDA will achieve this research by using machine learning to improve the design
of metals and polymers that give superior performance when used in additive
manufacturing. End-user input for the project will be provided by industrial
manufacturing and aerospace leaders from across the U.S. LAMDA’s education
products will include new courses and course modules, as well as an industry-
supported technology demonstration testbed. The project’s research activities
will be integrated with an ambitious agenda to engage students and faculty of
all levels across the state with targeted activities that will lead to a better-
trained, more diverse STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LAMDA brings
together several of Louisiana’s public and private academic institutions to
generate fundamental insights into the complex relationships among composition,
processing, microstructure, performance, and structural integrity within the
context of additive manufacturing. Achievement of this objective will be
accelerated by using machine learning. LAMDA research will focus on designing
complex concentrated alloys and thermoset shape memory polymers specifically for
additive manufacturing applications. The scientific vision of LAMDA is to build
the design framework for new complex concentrated alloys and thermoset shape
memory polymers for additive manufacturing with required performance and
structural integrity, reliability, and durability. To realize this vision, a
machine-learning-guided approach will be employed to navigate extended
compositional spaces towards the design goals. The LAMDA project will forge new
collaborations among participating institutions and establish new partnerships
with federal agencies and industries to build sustainable research and education
programs in Louisiana focused on additive manufacturing. LAMDA will grow the
Louisiana STEM workforce with a series of activities including extended/reverse
research experiences for undergraduates, professional development for
undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral fellows, course module
development for undergraduate and graduate education, hiring and mentoring of
new faculty, and training for community college
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.