* 1946947
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social and Cultural Drivers of Assistive Device Design and Re-Design for People Living in Low-Resource Settings
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Peter Redfield, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 11/30/2021
* USD 9,572.00

Historically, people who have suffered limb-loss and live in low-resource
regions might improve their mobility by modifying donated assistive devices or
by designing and building their own devices using found materials. Recently,
however, there has been a drive on the part of industry and professional schools
in high-resource regions to design assistive devices specifically for people
living in low-resource settings. In designing for this new market, engineers and
device makers frequently modify standard prototypes by using cheaper materials
and simplifying product design to make the final product easier to build, use,
and repair. But the intended recipients value more than simplicity and cost when
it comes to assistive devices. They use assistive technology to help them
develop new social relationships, engage in paid work, function as care-givers,
and address the negative impact of disability on their identities. This project
seeks to understand how engineers from high-income regions develop new kinds of
designs when they build prosthetic legs intended for recipients in low-resource
settings. It then asks how people in in low-resource regions accept, reject, or
alter assistive devices to better meet their needs for self-efficacy, improved
economic prospects, and social relationships. Broader impacts of this research
include advancing scholarship about how culture and social relationships
influence the ways people living in low-income regions use technology to address
disability. It will also promote capacity building by training local research
assistants in mixed-methods social science research, uncovering pathways of
resource distribution, and publicizing findings about resource adaptation and
use to organizations by and for persons with disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed-methods project blends qualitative and
quantitative data collection and fieldwork to understand how designers in high-
resource regions can best design prosthetics for users in low-resource regions.
It begins with participant observation in a high-resource region with a
bioengineering group that distributes 3D printers capable of printing prosthetic
limbs for children at a pediatric orthopedic hospital in low-resource settings.
These observations are then complimented with data from the low-resource region
captured by administering semi-structured interviews and distributing
quantitative surveys to those who have sustained limb-loss, their family
members, and health care providers. The project thus enhances understanding of
the assumptions that engineers and prosthetists living in high-resource regions
make about the needs of their end-users as they develop devices intended for
recipients living in low-resource regions, and how people in low-resource
settings accept, reject, or alter assistive devices to better meet their needs.
Taken together, project results can help enable the production of more effective
prosthetics for low-resource regions. This research advances Science and
Technology Studies by studying how the inequitable distribution of technological
innovations in the form of assistive devices influences how individuals and
communities in high and low-resource settings perceive "normal" and "disabled"
bodies, navigate health systems, and reorganize social
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.