* 1946496
* Collaborative Research: Improved Geochronology-Based Sediment Provenance Analysis Through Physico-Mechanical Characterization of Zircon Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Alexander Pullen, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 195,884.00

The generation and movement of sediments by wind and water currents are
fundamental geologic processes that have shaped the surface of our planet for
billions of years. Through these processes, material removed from higher
elevation areas by weathering and erosion is mechanically transported to lower
elevation regions (i.e., basins), thereby leveling topographic highs (e.g.,
mountains). Studying and understanding these processes in a quantitative way
provides Earth Scientists with fundamental information about geography,
evolution, human migration, climate, tectonics, and the development of
economically important sedimentary basins. One of the most robust ways to study
sediment transport in modern and ancient sedimentary systems (e.g., rivers,
deserts), is by measuring the geologic ages of weathering-resistant minerals
such as zircon that contain radioactive parent and daughter isotopes. By
studying the age patterns of far-travelled zircons, Earth Scientists can draw
linkages to potential source areas with comparable ages and reconstruct ancient
sediment routing systems. Students will be trained in the research methods and a
new Creative Inquiry course for undergraduates will be developed as part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying sediment transport through age-dating of
detrital minerals is not without complexities and potential biases. Although the
mechanical sorting and fractionation of particles carried by tractive currents
have been well-known processes in sedimentology for well over a century, our
knowledge of how sediment transport affects detrital zircon populations and
influences U-Pb age spectra remains critically inadequate. Using fluvial systems
as natural laboratories, this project will quantify the effects that the
physical characteristics of zircon, such as grain size, morphology, and
accumulated radiation damage, have in systematically biasing detrital zircon age
spectra during transport. This project will: 1) collect robust age and physical-
properties information of detrital zircon fractionation during transport, and 2)
apply methods of statistical inference to quantify the latent effects these
physical characteristics have in biasing the observed age spectra. These
insights will allow Earth Scientists to perform more ‘geologically informed’
inter-sample comparisons, enhancing the accuracy of tectonic reconstructions,
quantitative provenance models, and sediment-transport pathways derived from
detrital zircon U-Pb data. The code developed will be user friendly and
available to other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.