* 1946937
* REU Site: Genomics and Computational Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Jonathan Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 453,730.00

This REU Site award to the University of Georgia, located in Athens, GA, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-
2022. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. The program has been in existence for 21 years and has
trained over 200 REU participants, who have contributed to fundamental
discoveries about telomerase, gene regulation, the biological clock, and the
biochemistry of red tides. All REU participants are expected to present their
research at national meetings, and about 20% are expected to publish their
research findings in peer-reviewed journals. A majority of past participants
have been African-Americans; other minority students and veterans are encouraged
to apply. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA
tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths and to provide future contacts for current REU
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program focuses on genomics and
computational biology that includes research using systems biology,
metabolomics, proteomics and glycomics. Faculty mentors come from various
departments and centers including Genetics, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Institute of Bioinformatics, Computer Science, Physics and Astronomy, Plant
Biology, Plant Pathology, Complext Carbohydrate Research Center, and
Microbiology. Past research projects have included the study of the biological
clock, telomerase, adaptive immunity through CRISPR/CAS systems, novel
algorithms for network reconstruction, identification of network motifs, and
constructing large scale database tools in systems biology. In addition to
conducting a research project, students receive training in ethics and and the
responsible conduct of research and effective communication. Seminars and
workshops provide additional opportunities for students to learn about important
topics in genomics. More information about the program and an online application
are available by visiting http://www.genetics.uga.edu/FGCB, or by contacting the
PI (Dr. Jonathan Arnold at arnold@uga.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. David Logan at
davidalogan77@gmail.com).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.