* 1946302
* EAGER:  Development of a learning community focused on sea-level rise and coastal habitat change
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Elizabeth Watson, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 03/31/2023
* USD 228,212.00

Rising sea levels are affecting coastal shorelines by drowning marshes and sea
water seeping into forests, farms, and cities along the coasts. Within this
century rising sea water will affect 5% of the global population living along
the coastline and 10% of the global gross domestic product. When combined with
projected coastal wetland loss, rising sea levels will make communities more
susceptible to flooding and economic disruptions. Over the past decade, as
coastal scientists have observed signs of increasing decline in coastal wetlands
and maritime forests of the U.S. Northeast, the goal of coastal restoration
projects has shifted almost completely towards adaptation to sea level rise.
Coastal marshes play a key role in mitigating these effects of sea level rise
but are themselves vulnerable to rising water. Fundamental research is needed to
understand how sea level rise affects marshes and adjacent coastal areas and
what can be done to make them more resilient. This EAGER award will provide
novel and important insights into the processes responsible for coastal marsh
die-off and potential mechanisms to enhance marsh resilience through expansion
into adjacent forests and fields. Through field sampling and remote sensing this
award will measure the means by which sea water rise affects both the marsh and
adjacent forests and fields. An important and creative component of the research
is the engagement of under-represented groups through the creation of a
mentoring network focused on the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award has high potential for producing a transformative understanding of the
effects of sea level rise on the resilience of coastal marsh systems in the
northeastern US. Through a novel combination of insitu assessment of hydrologic
stressors and remote sensing geospatial analyses, the award will assess the
proximate hydrologic and ecological causes and consequences of sea level rise.
By combining new technology (e.g., UAV flights, low cost pressure transducers,
GEOBIA, machine learning algorithms), the research will provide a new
understanding of how hydrologic factors drive coastal habitat transitions, which
can provide important information on how interventions can be applied
successfully to conserve coastal habitats for wildlife and flood mitigation
values. In addition to understanding the factors responsible for marsh die off,
a particularly unique aspect of this EAGER award is understanding the hydrologic
and biogeochemical mechanisms by which transgression of the marsh into adjacent
terrestrial systems occurs. The research takes a robust approach to
understanding the temporal and spatial scales over which these processes occur.
This award will develop an innovative mentoring network framework to engage
under-served students in estuarine research. By taking a near-peer cohort
approach to training the students will benefit from immersive funded research
experiences and a supportive research community. The expansive training plan
includes professional workshops, education workshops, and other professional
enhancement activities (annual professional meetings, participation in
professional networks).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.