* 1946194
* Towards the Future Direction of the NSF Program on the Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Ritu Ritu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The NSF Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI) program
has been critical in not only supporting the development and deployment of
innovative software and data products, but also in several workforce development
and community-building initiatives. The projects funded through the CSSI program
have promoted the nation's competitiveness and leadership in the fields of data,
High-Performance Computing (HPC), networking, cybersecurity, software, and
workforce development. A workshop on the "Future Direction of the NSF CSSI
Program" can be instrumental in gathering the community-feedback on the current
scope and objectives of the CSSI program and guiding its future direction such
that the nation's leadership in the aforementioned fields is maintained.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop on the "Future Direction of the
NSF CSSI Program" is to bring together researchers and practitioners from the
industry, academia, and government laboratories to assess the impact of the CSSI
program, share best practices in supporting sustainable software and data
products in present and future, and identify gaps (if any) in the scope of the
CSSI program and needs of the community. A report resulting from this workshop
will help inform NSF of future directions for the CSSI program. The workshop
will strengthen multi-disciplinary collaborations on developing the
cyberinfrastructure (software and data) for supporting research and innovation
in different fields of science and technology. This project is critical for
enabling the organization of the aforementioned workshop and supporting the
participation of a diverse range of researchers and practitioners in the
development of the future CSSI solicitations. Some participants may need
financial support for traveling to the workshop. This project will help in
supporting the travel of such participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.