* 1946599
* SFS@BAMA: Shaping the Next Generation of Cyber Professionals
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2025
* Jeffrey Carver, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,650,474.00

This project seeks to address the growing national need for highly-trained,
well-rounded cybersecurity professionals by recruiting a diverse set of scholars
from three academic programs at the University of Alabama: Computer Science,
Criminology and Criminal Justice, and Management Information Systems. The trans-
disciplinary project leverages the complementary strengths of the three academic
programs and builds on the University’s current relationships with local, state,
and federal government organizations. Scholars will develop deep technical
knowledge from Computer Science, an understanding of the social and behavioral
aspects of cyber-crime from Criminology and Criminal Justice, and a grasp on how
these concepts fit within organizational contexts from Management Information
Systems. Because scholars will be exposed to topics not normally presented in
their respective academic programs, they will graduate with a more well-rounded
cybersecurity education than their peers. Furthermore, they will be well-
prepared to take on the challenges in today’s cyber environment and to serve as
leaders in the cybersecurity workforce of the future, beginning with positions
in the federal government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Alabama is
designated as a Department of Homeland Security and National Security Agency
Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Research. This project leverages
the strengths of the current cybersecurity education and research programs as
well as existing relationships with federal, state, and local government
organizations. This project will help close the gap between the number of highly
qualified cybersecurity professionals needed and the number currently available
by awarding six scholarships each project year to exceptional and diverse
students drawn from the Computer Science, Criminology and Criminal Justice, and
Management Information Systems programs. In addition to completing the core
cybersecurity courses within their chosen major, the selected scholars will take
courses from the other two academic domains as part of their core curriculum.
The Computer Science department offers a Cybersecurity concentration consisting
of courses that provide students with a depth of technical content about many
aspects of cybersecurity. The Criminology and Criminal Justice department offers
one of the few Cyber Criminology minors in the United States, which focuses on
applying social and behavioral sciences to the study of the causes and
consequences of crimes in cyberspace. The Management Information System program
also offers core cybersecurity courses that focus on the application of
cybersecurity concepts in a corporate environment. In addition, scholars will
receive faculty mentoring, professional development opportunities, and support
as they pursue summer internships and full-time employment following
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.