* 1946578
* Mid-scale RI-2 Consortium: Biogeochemical-Argo: A global robotic network to observe changing ocean chemistry and biology
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2025
* Jorge Sarmiento, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kandace Binkley
* 10/31/2025
* USD 29,146,013.00

The ocean covers more than 70% of the surface of our planet. It provides
services that are critical for life on Earth, including absorbing 93% of the
heat from recent warming and a quarter of human carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions
each year. However, rising ocean temperatures and CO2 levels fundamentally alter
the marine environment: pH and oxygen levels fall, ocean currents change, and
the distribution of nutrients shifts. Each of these changes has impacts on
ecosystems and the cycles of oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon throughout the ocean
and atmosphere. Observing these biogeochemical (BGC) processes over large areas
and long time periods has been virtually impossible due to the high costs
associated with ship-based measurements. Yet such observations are essential for
understanding the natural state of ocean chemistry and biology and for
predicting how the ocean system will evolve in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Global Ocean Biogeochemistry (GO-BGC) Array project
aims to drive a transformative shift in our ability to observe and predict, at
the global scale, the effects of climate change on ocean metabolism, carbon
uptake, and living marine resource management. The project team plans to
implement an innovative and sustained robotic network of 500 profiling floats
carrying chemical and biological sensors, that would take measurements from
2000-meters depth to the surface every 10 days for several years. These floats
will be distributed among all of the major ocean basins and will transmit the
data to shore via satellite communication systems. Data will be publicly
available within 24 hours. In the past, regional arrays of BGC floats have been
deployed with great success, but never has there been a global array. This
global array has the potential to provide essential observational data in remote
areas where there is little to no routine ship traffic and can operate in the
harshest sea conditions such as winter in high-latitude environments. Such
measurements from the regional SOCCOM (Southern Ocean Carbon Cycle Observations
and Modeling) project have resulted in unanticipated discoveries that highlight
the need for a global scale array. It is expected that this unprecedented data
stream will drive a transformative shift in scientific and public understanding
of chemical and biological (biogeochemical) cycling in the ocean at the global
scale. The GO-BGC Project is a partnership of researchers from many of the major
oceanographic institutions in the U.S. who bring experience in oceanographic
data collection and analysis and in public engagement on ocean issues. The Team
would engage Kindergarten-12 schools through the “Adopt-a-Float” Program,
providing direct contact between students and scientists and involving students
through naming and tracking individual floats. The researchers will host
seminars and workshops to familiarize the research community with the data
streams and how to use them. They will provide training for undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdocs in sensor calibration and GO-BGC float
deployment and maintenance, directly contributing to the development of the
"Blue Workforce." The resulting datasets will be used in classrooms, in
scientific research, and in making decisions that move ocean science forward.
Societal benefits arise from using the data for weather and climate forecasts as
well as in marine resource management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the eight
priority science questions that came out of the National Research Council’s Sea
Change: 2015–2025 Decadal Survey of Ocean Sciences report asked, “How have ocean
biogeochemical and physical processes contributed to today’s climate and its
variability, and how will this system change over the next century?” The GO-BGC
Project would make a major contribution toward answering that question. One of
the primary impediments to addressing this question to date has been the lack of
continuous biogeochemical measurements on a global scale and during all seasons.
Ship-based biogeochemical measurements are made on various individual campaigns
in selected parts of the world’s ocean, but data are sparse in time and space,
leaving major gaps in our knowledge of biogeochemical processes on a global and
regional scales. The GO-BGC Project is the result of over a decade of planning
by the oceanographic community to address these gaps. The Project has the
potential to revolutionize our understanding of the ocean’s role in the global
carbon cycle, acidification and deoxygenation of the global ocean, and ecosystem
productivity and health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.