* 1946115
* Development of Selective Attention to Multisensory Information in Human Infants
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* David Lewkowicz, Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 04/30/2023
* USD 697,000.00

Studies have found that infants perceive, learn, and remember better when they
can simultaneously see and hear the objects and events in their everyday life as
opposed to when they can only see or hear them. This project tests the
hypothesis that the reason for this is because redundant (i.e., matching)
multisensory information elicits greater attention than does either mis-matching
multisensory information or unisensory information. The results from this
project will provide key insights into infant perception, attention, learning,
and memory and, as a result, they will suggest better ways for helping infants
acquire critical cognitive and social skills. In addition, the results will
provide new insights into the root causes of some developmental disabilities
(e.g., autism) which are known to involve impaired perception and attention to
multisensory information. Finally, the results from this project will provide a
scientific foundation for the design of tools that will permit clinicians to
more effectively detect and ameliorate impaired attention to multisensory
information in young children with developmental disabilities, thereby improving
their cognitive and social development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By around 6 months
of age, a previously rudimentary, reflex-like selective attention response
system becomes transformed into an endogenously driven selective attention
system. This new functionality permits infants to deploy their attention to
sources of multisensory redundancy that are of specific interest to them. The
project seeks to answer three main questions. First, what mechanisms underlie
developmental changes in infant selective attention to sources of multisensory
redundancy? Second, how does early experience contribute to developmental
changes in selective attention to multisensory redundancy in infancy? Third, how
does improving selective attention to multisensory redundancy contribute to
information processing across different psychological domains? Infants residing
in monolingual and bilingual households will be tested with eye tracking methods
to assess attention to multisensory redundancy inherent in talking faces. In
some cases, eye tracking will be used with an intersensory matching procedure to
examine infant matching of auditory and visual attributes of speech. In other
cases, eye tracking will be used with a habituation/test procedure to
investigate learning of multisensory events. The investigators will analyze the
temporal distribution of attention as well as the latency of responses. The
findings from this project will provide novel insights into the emergence of
attention and learning in infancy, clues to maximizing attention and learning in
typically developing infants, and clues to improving attention and learning in
infants at risk for developmental disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.