* 1946941
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploring on-farm innovation, environmental change, and rural livelihoods in the US hop industry
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Matthew Comi, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 05/31/2022
* USD 15,150.00

Agricultural technological development in North America has been largely
directed by large companies controlling innovations in machinery, plant
genetics, and agrichemicals. However, hop growing is one agricultural industry
that confounds this model. Hops are an herb used in beer-making applications and
many of the large Yakima Valley hop growers have invested both in local breeding
programs and on-farm infrastructure innovations. The goal of this project is to
understand the conditions under which some farmers research and develop their
own agricultural technologies while others rely on outside research and to
examine the innovations yielded by these diverging approaches to agricultural
technologies. Hop farming in the United States offers a natural experiment to
understand these differences. This project collects data from hop farmers
through on-farm visits and in-depth interviews with farm owners and operators to
better understand the social and applied scientific worlds of hop growing in the
Northwestern and Midwestern United States. Doing so has the potential to help
enhance understanding of how including farmers as research contributors may
yield a more vibrant and sustainable agricultural and environmental future for
farming in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on qualitative data
collected through on-site interviews and on-farm participant observation, this
project responds to two core research questions: (1) How do environmental and
market pressures impact decisions about technologies used on the hop farm? (2)
What comparative lessons do hop producers have for environmental and technical
considerations in other agri-food regimes? Responding to these questions in the
context of hop farmersâ€™ novel agricultural practices yields insights into broad
societal concerns about labor, culture, and environment at the human-technology
frontier. This is especially evident when studying agricultural practices where
genetic and mechanical technological innovation has widely been employed to the
detriment of farmer profits and the social health of farming communities. The
unique position of hop farmers as on-farm innovators yields insights for
alternative futures for agricultural technologies in cognate industries. This
project contributes to research discourses in both STS and environmental
sociology by critically considering where expert agricultural scientific
knowledge is produced and maintained, and by questioning who may be considered
an expert in agricultural science, particularly plant science. The implications
of these queries are important for science-based policy in agricultural and
environmental sectors if such policies are to be both inclusive as well as
evidence-based. This original research provides novel insights into potential
environmental alternatives to conventional models for other agricultures of
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.