* 1946684
* A Multi-User Relational Database of Habeas Corpus Petitions in the American West
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Katrina Jagodinsky, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 08/31/2023
* USD 529,410.00

While habeas corpus is primarily conceived as the constitutional protection to
petition against wrongful arrest or detainment, the habeas procedure also offers
petitioners an opportunity to challenge deprivations of rights and liberties.
This project plans to document the use of habeas corpus by creating a relational
(interactive) Database of writ of civil habeas corpus petitions in the American
West from 1812 through 1924. The goal of the Database is to enable scholars and
others to understand how marginalized populations utilized the habeas corpus
procedure to claim rights and liberties, and to learn how they used habeas
petitions to push for and expand legal reforms. The project also will document
judicial decision making in these cases during this early time period of U.S.
expansion and history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing a strategic sample of six
Western states, the project will collect and encode roughly 6,000 unpublished
habeas corpus petitions currently housed in federal and state archives in those
sampled states. The result will be an open source and open access graph Database
incorporating an indexed and quantifiable compilation of legal documents by
individuals who sought to use habeas petitions to express dynamic notions of
citizenship. The Database will be freely available to the general public and
scholars alike, allowing for searches on the jurists and parties involved, the
jurisdictions hearing the petitions, and keywords drawn from the petitions. Data
from these habeas corpus petitions will inform the work of scholars and
practitioners in multiple disciplines, including (among others) child and family
law, federal Indian law, immigration law, labor law, race relations, criminal
justice, and legal mobilization and reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.