* 1946857
* CSBR: Natural History: Preserving the genomes of the type specimens in the Museum of Comparative Zoology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Breda Zimkus, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 495,489.00

Species are the basic units of biodiversity. To be recognized, species have to
be described and named based on physical specimens, generally known as type
specimens or name-bearing specimens. These type specimens must be registered and
deposited in a public institution, typically a natural history museum, where
they are available to the scientific community for further study. Traditionally,
such specimens, whether bones or a dry skin, a pinned insect, or a specimen
preserved in fluid, have been stored on museum shelves. However, these
conditions are suboptimal for the long-term preservation of their precious DNA.
To stop DNA degradation in type specimens, this award provides a means to
subsample and cryo-preserve most of the primary types in the Museum of
Comparative Zoology (MCZ) to ensure that genomic work can be conducted in the
future. In addition, the project provides an opportunity for students to be
trained in museum sciences and to work in a state-of-the-art facility for
cryopreservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 31,000 data based primary
types of non-fossil species are currently housed in the collections of the MCZ.
These are preserved in a variety of ways, both dry (e.g., bones, skins, corals,
sponges and sea stars) and wet (e.g., ethanol, formalin), but few of these are
cryopreserved, and thus their DNA has been degrading rapidly over time. The
principal aim of this project is to prevent further DNA degradation in most of
the MCZ primary types by subsampling ca. 17,000 specimens and depositing them in
the MCZ Cryogenic Collection—a facility where specimens are stored in vapor
liquid nitrogen freezers at approximately -167 °C, a gold standard to preserve
genetic resources. The MCZ becomes the first natural history museum to conduct a
concerted effort to stop degradation of DNA in a large number of its name-
bearing specimens. This will ensure the possibility that in the future, every
name-bearing specimen may have the possibility to have a sequenced genome
associated with it. In addition, the widescale preservation of genetic material
these types will have impacts beyond science, providing a resource for future
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.