* 1946970
* Mid-scale RI-2 Consortium: Network for Advanced NMR
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Jeffrey Hoch, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Cooperative Agreement
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 37,028,611.00

Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) is an essential tool for research
into molecular structures and dynamics. This award will support the
establishment of a geographically distributed Network for Advanced NMR (NAN) in
the U.S. to provide ultra-high field NMR spectrometers to allow users to tackle
important and diverse scientific problems and to educate and train the next
generation of scientists and engineers. Scientific research areas enabled by
these systems cover a wide range of problems in structural biology, dynamics and
function of different biological systems from molecules to whole cells and
tissues, complex mixtures, metabolomics, and natural products. Non-biological
applications include, but are not limited to, amorphous materials, battery
components, pharmaceutical ingredients, nanomaterials, surface coatings, and
catalysts. User support and training will be provided through community outreach
and an extensive “KnowledgeBase” of online tutorials, protocols, NMR pulse
sequences, and additional technical materials. Remote users at any institution
will be able to bring or send their samples to take advantage of NAN resources.
Targeted outreach to undergraduate and minority serving institutions will
promote broadening participation in the NMR research community. In combination,
the enhanced cyberinfrastructure and new instruments will help to address a
national deficit in high-field NMR capacity. Training and enabling more
researchers and new transformative research will serve the NSF mission priority
to advance all fields of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NAN
will operate by a hub and spoke model that dynamically adapts to meet evolving
community needs. The hub at the University of Connecticut will facilitate access
to state-of-the-art NMR instrumentation, experimental protocols, and experts by
US researchers. Existing cyberinfrastructure will be leveraged and expanded to
serve the storage, analysis, and data-reuse needs for a large community of
researchers. The project also includes plans to purchase two 1.1 GHz NMR
spectrometers for installation at the NAN spoke locations. One system will be
installed at University of Wisconsin for solid-state NMR research. The second
system will be installed at the University of Georgia and be dedicated to
solution NMR studies. Additional locations will be added as the NAN expands to
incorporate more member locations with existing instrumentation in the U.S.
Significant efforts will be directed toward the advancement of NMR technology,
including improvements for spectral sensitivity, resolution, relaxation
dynamics, indirect detection, sampling, machine learning and other methods. Once
established, the NAN will operate with tiered support levels to both enable and
support U.S. researchers seeking to use the new 1.1 Ghz high-field NMR systems
or one of the 21 other NMR 300-900 MHz instruments available at other locations.
Improved and distributed utilization of this large complement of NMR systems is
a key benefit of the NAN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.