* 1946456
* Effects of Mechanically-Induced Stress on the Proteome and Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jonathan Minden, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 03/31/2024
* USD 491,230.00

This grant will support work to better understand how the physical environment
influences biology. Specifically, this grant will support work to better
understand how proteins respond to mechanical forces. Organisms are continuously
sensing mechanical forces and respond appropriately. For example, the Earth’s
gravity is constantly pulling down and the atmospheric pressure which compresses
from all directions, yet organisms can remain upright. If the ability to sense
these physical effects is compromised, it can lead to developmental disorders,
muscle and bone loss, neurological abnormalities, immunological, and age-related
problems. These conditions have been observed even in astronauts, who are
exposed to microgravity during prolonged times away from Earth. The work done
under this grant use novel microtechnology systems that mimic different physical
environments. These microtechnology systems will be used to investigate how
mechanical changes in the physical environment differentially affect thousands
of proteins. Characterizing these biological responses will ultimately lead to
improvements in national health. For example, the results of this work may
ultimately inform future therapeutic strategies or disease prevention
techniques. This project will also create an educational and training program
for interdisciplinary collaboration. Engineers and biological scientists will
work together, and participation in research for underrepresented groups will be
broadened. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different types of Earth’s physical forces
continuously impact living beings as a part of their ceaseless adaptation to
external stimuli. While much is known about mechanotransduction in specific
sensory systems, little is known about generalized mechanosensation of the
surrounding physical environment by whole organisms. One reason for this lack of
knowledge is the limited methods to mechanically stimulate enough whole
organisms to enable comprehensive proteomic analysis. To investigate generalized
mechanosensation, hundreds of living Drosophila embryos will be exposed to
multiple modes, amplitudes, and durations of various mechanical stimulation such
as microgravity, hypergravity, and external compression using microfabricated
high-throughput devices that will be developed. This work will utilize the
comparative proteomics approach of 2D-DIGE (2 Dimensional Difference Gel
Electrophoresis) to identify changes in protein abundance or post-translational
regulation in response to these different modes of mechanical stimulation. This
approach will also enable the proteomic comparison of local/acute to
chronic/ubiquitous mechanical stimulation. By using comparative proteomics in
conjunction with the analysis of developmental phenotypes, the extent to which
these mechanical modes are specialized, or overlap in a universal pathway of
mechanotransduction in the context of whole organisms will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.