* 1946625
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Argument Realization and (Non-)agreement
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* John Beavers, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 14,522.00

The distinction between arguments and adjuncts is assumed to be a universal
distinction made by languages and is specifically built into the architecture of
many modern syntactic theories. Broadly speaking, arguments are phrases that the
verb requires to form a complete meaning, while adjuncts add in optional extra
information. Recent linguistic investigation has identified a language that
challenges the argument-adjunct distinction as a linguistic universal in two
ways. First, while most arguments are weakly distinguished from adjuncts by
being marked on the verb, certain typical arguments lack even this as a
distinguishing feature. Second, the processes for reducing a verb’s arguments
seem to operate through generalized mechanisms that may ignore the verb’s
specific meaning, unlike in other languages. The documentation here will form a
core component of the doctoral dissertation of the Co-PI. Broader impacts
include a publicly available deposit of recordings and transcriptions at a
digital repository housed at the University of Texas at Austin.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines secondary objects and middles within
a larger investigation of argument realization in a language that allows at most
one object to be indexed on the verb; thus there is currently no distinction
between secondary objects and unindexable adjuncts. This project explores three
questions about secondary objects: (a) do secondary objects introduce new
participants or realize those already in the predicate's meaning; (b) what is
the grammatical function of secondary objects and are they distinct from other
dependents; and (c) what factors govern which dependent is indexed on the verb?
Finally, this project aims for a fuller description of middle constructions,
with a focus on how the lexical semantics of the verb affects its behavior in
middle contexts, and how such argument suppression interacts with argument
realization properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.