* 1946203
* Host immunological characteristics and disease experience in past human populations
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Sharon DeWitte, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 260,000.00

Biological anthropologists rely on skeletal data to understand how biology and
culture have interacted in past human populations, especially when historical
records are biased, limited, or entirely absent. In this project, the
investigators will examine how chronic stress, age, health conditions, and
immune status relate to the trajectory and severity of syphilis in a number of
documented skeletal samples. The project will advance knowledge about factors
that influence vulnerability to disease in the past, as well as the role of
health and disease in shaping the human experience. The research findings may
also inform clinical guidelines for the screening and diagnosis of modern cases
of syphilis to more accurately identify host characteristics that are likely
associated with persistent infection. In conjunction with the project, K-12 and
public science outreach and education activities will be conducted by the
research team in Kentucky, South Carolina, and Mississippi. The project will
also enhance public and K-12 science education infrastructure through the
creation of two permanent exhibits in the public Archaeology Museum of the Cobb
Institute of Archaeology, Mississippi State University. As the museum has
thousands of public and K-12 visitors each year, the exhibits will support
efforts to broaden access to and participation in STEM fields. This project is
jointly funded by the Biological Anthropology and Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the research team will investigate human host characteristics that are
associated with the resolution of syphilis infection after the early stage of
the disease (primary, secondary) and those that are associated with persistence
into late stage (tertiary) infection, which causes destructive and debilitating
symptoms and is sometimes fatal. The investigators will combine data for over
300 skeletons in U.S. museum collections representing individuals who were
diagnosed with syphilis prior to their deaths to: 1) determine whether chronic
stress, nutritional status, age, and co-morbid disease conditions are associated
with persistent syphilis; 2) examine whether excessive inflammation (hyper-
inflammatory response/phenotype (HIP)) against other disease causing agents,
specifically those which cause periodontal disease, is associated with late
stage syphilis; and 3) develop a multi-stage interpretive model for
bioarchaeological studies of syphilis that would enable the reconstruction of a
human hostâ€™s immune status during early-stage infection, as well as their
inflammatory response during late-stage infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.