* 1946347
* Collaborative Research: Cascadia2020: Investigating subduction zone segmentation with a 3D high-resolution Vp model
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Anne Tr√©hu, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2023
* USD 443,779.00

The Cascadia subduction zone is known to generate infrequent (every ~500 years)
but potentially very large (up to magnitude 9) earthquakes. The most recent such
earthquake occurred on January 26th, 1700, and GPS data acquired during the last
two decades suggest that strain is accumulating across the subduction zone fault
in preparation for a future earthquake. However, there is considerable
uncertainty about how the geologic structure of the subduction zone will impact
strain release during a Cascadia earthquake. Different plausible earthquake
scenarios result in quite different predicted ground shaking, which in turn
influences building codes and emergency response plans. This project will image
the structure of the crust in the region where large Cascadia earthquakes are
thought to occur. The objective is to understand three-dimensional variations in
seismic velocity in order to provide insights into the factors that control
segmentation of slip during earthquakes and the resulting amplitude of ground
shaking in populated areas and sedimentary basins. With its large footprint and
involvement of many field hands, this project will provide student research
experiences and opportunities for public outreach and education about geohazards
in the Pacific Northwest. This project is a collaboration between Oregon State
University, University of Oregon, Eugene, South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology and the U.S. Geological Survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
the ultimate goal of generating a high-resolution model of an active subduction
system that will span the Cascadia plate boundary, including the transition
between major along-strike segments, and cross the transition from the nominally
locked zone down-dip to depths where plate motion is accommodated by episodic
tremor and slip. A dense network of temporary short-period seismometers along
the coast of the Pacific Northwest will extend high resolution imaging of the
structure of the overlying and down-going plates, as well as the thickness and
characteristics of material within the plate interface zone, to depths that are
critical for understanding earthquake processes. The array design includes a
single deployment of three-component instruments at 1-km intervals along the
onshore extension of dip lines embedded within a sparser grid of seismometers
spaced 7-10 km apart for a total of ~700 three-component seismic stations. To
tie results from the seismogenic part of the plate boundary to larger-scale
forearc and arc structure, two profiles will extend across the forearc. All
stations will record natural sources as well as man-made sources for the
duration of the deployment. The seismic data from this experiment will be made
immediately available to the community. The resulting high-resolution 3D Vp
model will also be made accessible and is critical for constraining analyses of
seismic noise, magnetotelluric and potential field data, as well as for
improving predictions of earthquake ground shaking and tsunami generation in the
Pacific Northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.