* 1946229
* SBIR Phase I:  Leaf Global Fintech: Blockchain-Backed Financial Services for Refugees and Migrants
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Victoria Samples, LEAF GLOBAL FINTECH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable secure, digitized financial services.
Digitizing financial services lowers the risk of theft associated with carrying
cash and greatly reduces exchange and transfer fees. The market is currently
estimated at $42 B. The research will assess blockchain’s impact on customers
lacking reliable access to cryptocurrency or smartphones. The results could
include 60% cost reduction compared to traditional money transfer systems,
&lt;30 second transaction completions, and a 0% fraud rate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to research and develop
a blockchain-based money management solution to store, send, and exchange money
without a smartphone or internet. Leaf’s core technology includes a blockchain
back-end that powers an Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) front-
end, allowing mobile devices to securely send and receive data without an
internet connection. Custodial wallets on a public blockchain will provide a
transparent and secure ledger. Custom digital representations of value (tokens)
pegged to fiat currencies allow portability of assets without exposing users to
speculative cryptocurrency risks. In conjunction with a novel identity
management system, this solution will create economic identities for users
without forfeiting control of sensitive data. Research will evaluate blockchain
as a method of legally-compliant money storage and transfer, integrated with the
fiat system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.