* 1946072
* The Annual Cycle of the Biological Carbon Pump in the Subpolar North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Hilary Palevsky, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2023
* USD 103,015.00

Ocean biology plays an important role in the Earth's carbon cycle. While most of
the organic material produced by phytoplankton in the sunlit surface waters of
the oceans is eaten and recycled in the surface waters, a small amount sinks to
the deep ocean in what is called the "biological carbon pump." The biological
pump is particularly hard to study in high latitude regions, which can be
difficult to get to and challenging to work in. It is also particularly
important to understand the biological pump in these parts of the ocean, where
much of the world's deep ocean waters are formed. The export of carbon to deep
waters can be estimated by carefully measuring the amount of excess oxygen left
behind in surface waters. Oxygen in seawater can be measured very precisely
using sensors deployed on moorings, floats, and gliders. These sensors can be
deployed for years at a time, but their measurements must be carefully
calibrated. In this project, investigators would use carefully calibrated oxygen
sensors on gliders to, in turn, calibrate the oxygen sensors on a set of
moorings in the high latitude North Atlantic Ocean, to study the biological
carbon pump over a period of two years. The project would train several
undergraduate students and a graduate student, and result in the development of
educational laboratory materials that incorporate glider and mooring data from
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
observationally constrain the annual magnitude and seasonal timing of the
biological carbon pump (determined as annual net community production; ANCP) and
its influence on air-sea carbon dioxide flux by using biogeochemical sensor
measurements from the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) Irminger Sea Array.
However, existing OOI oxygen sensor calibration suffers from both pre- and post-
deployment drift, currently precluding the ability to calculate ANCP by oxygen
mass balance. The investigators therefore propose to improve the accuracy and
utility of OOI Irminger Sea oxygen measurements by deploying two gliders
configured for air calibration of their oxygen sensors when surfacing between
profiles. These air-calibrated gliders will be used to intercalibrate all 12
existing oxygen sensors on the Irminger Sea Array and produce a calibrated
oxygen product incorporating data from all sensors, which will ensure sufficient
accuracy to calculate ANCP. Both the annual magnitude and seasonal timing of
ANCP, including upper ocean biological productivity and thermocline respiration,
will be determined using an oxygen mass balance approach within a data-
constrained 1D physical model. A suite of 1D model simulations including the
inorganic carbon system, gas exchange, and ANCP determined from oxygen mass
balance will be used, together with OOI carbon dioxide measurements, to diagnose
influences of physical and biological drivers of air-sea carbon dioxide flux,
improving both quantitative and mechanistic understanding of how the biological
pump influences the carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.