* 1946767
* Memory systems, metacognition, and cognitive control
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Robert Hampton, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 04/30/2024
* USD 998,334.00

This research will help us understand critical aspects of human thinking through
comparative analysis of non-human primates. This project will study the ability
of nonhuman primate species to monitor, or introspect about, their thinking. The
ability to monitor and control thinking is referred to as “cognitive control”
and is shown when humans pay attention, remember, and inhibit unwanted behavior.
This research will help us know what makes human thinking unique, and will
provide better animal models to use to understand and develop treatments for
human brain diseases. This project will train scientists from the undergraduate
to postdoctoral level. The research group will participate in public education
about primate cognition at Zoo Atlanta, and science outreach activities in
public schools. Specifically this work will, 1) improve an undergraduate
research course using the Zoo Atlanta collection, 2) prepare graduate students
(14% of current students are underrepresented groups) for careers in science
through training in research program development, grant writing, and scientific
communication, 3) share enthusiasm for science through visits to schools during
Brain Awareness Week, through programs such as Roots &amp; Shoots, and by
interaction with the public at Zoo Atlanta, 4) train students through Emory
research experience programs, which involve students from underrepresented
groups, 5) share information through expansion of an existing lab website, aimed
at the public interested in cognitive science as well as undergraduates
interested in primate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive control is
critical for complex cognition in humans, and differences in cognitive control
may underlie many differences in cognitive ability between humans and other
primates, including in directing perception to needed information, active
maintenance of information in memory, and inhibition of inappropriate behavior.
In humans, cognitive control is associated with explicit cognition, in that
explicit cognition, such as episodic memory, is accessible to metacognitive
monitoring whereas implicit cognition, such as priming and habits, is not so
accessible. Metacognition is the capacity to monitor one’s own ongoing cognitive
processes, and to exert cognitive control over them, for example by actively
holding information in working memory or ceasing to study new vocabulary words
as they are mastered. Evidence from both psychophysical and memory tests
indicates that some cercopithecoids introspectively monitor some cognitive
processes, demonstrated by selective avoidance of difficult tests. The PI will
extend this work and advance knowledge of the evolution of complex cognition and
of what makes humans unique with comparative studies of primates. The proposed
research is significant because it will identify the role of cognitive
monitoring and control in complex primate cognition, and begin to investigate
how the evolution of language has changed human memory. The work will advance
our understanding of the evolution of metacognition and cognitive control.
First, the proposed work will identify the extent to which cognitive systems
differ in their access to metacognitive monitoring. This will include comparing
different memory systems as well as the auditory versus visual sensory
modalities. Second, these studies will determine the kinds of information
metacognitive systems operate upon to exert cognitive control, for example
abstract codes in working memory. Third, the work will advance our understanding
of cognitive evolution and differences in memory between cercopithecoid and
hominoid primates, leveraging our exciting recent findings comparing memory in
these taxa. The proposed work involves mentored research experiences for
developing scientists from the undergraduate to postdoctoral level, public
education about primate cognition at Zoo Atlanta, science outreach activities in
public schools, and international collaboration. This project is funded by both
the Perception, Action and Cognition program in the Social, Behavioral, and
Economic Sciences Directorate and the Behavioral Systems Cluster in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.