* 1946185
* Variability in oxygen concentrations in Atlantic intermediate waters during the last deglaciation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kassandra Costa, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 370,324.00

Oxygen is a primary component of the biological and chemical cycles of the
ocean. Its involvement in photosynthesis and respiration links the changes of
oxygen concentration to that of carbon in the ocean, and ultimately in the
atmosphere. As the oceans take up more and more carbon, oxygen concentrations in
the ocean are declining, with the potential to reach levels low enough to reduce
biodiversity. The last ice age provides a natural experiment to investigate how
oxygen concentrations may have varied under different climate conditions in
order to help forecast what might happen in the future. Most previous studies
have only been able to distinguish the relative change in oxygen concentrations
(higher or lower), but in this project a new application will be developed that
can quantitatively constrain oxygen concentrations in the past. In regions like
the tropical Atlantic, where oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) approach but do not
reach a total absence of oxygen today, it is critical to pinpoint the
environmental conditions that can cross that threshold into an absence of
oxygen. This project will promote training and learning for several
participants, including one early-career scientist without previous NSF support
and one undergraduate summer student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will produce high quality U-Th isotope and trace element data in a suite
of intermediate depth sediment cores from the western tropical Atlantic and one
site under the eastern tropical OMZ. These data will be used to test hypotheses
regarding the evolution of bottom water oxygen concentrations (BW [O2]) during
the last deglaciation in response to changes in the intensity of the eastern
tropical OMZ. Specifically this project seeks to understand how the spatial
extent and absolute magnitude of the OMZ has varied , and how these changes may
relate to intermediate water ventilation and carbon storage. The first component
of this proposal involves method development of a quantitative proxy system for
BW [O2]. It parameterizes sedimentary [O2] with authigenic uranium and organic
carbon fluxes with Baxs fluxes to generate a comprehensive approach to
reconstructing BW [O2]. This component focuses on the Demerara Rise, where
preliminary data indicate a high probability for successful application, and
then it combines the new data from the Demerara Rise with additional work in the
Arabian Sea and previously published data from the Pacific to prospect the
global utility of the approach. The second component of this proposal
investigates how and why oxygen concentrations in tropical intermediate waters
may have varied in the past in response to changes in zonal circulation,
meridional circulation, and organic matter fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.