* 1946465
* Science and Innovation Leadership for the 21st Century: Challenges and Strategic Implications for the United States
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Gail Cohen, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,000.00

The United States faces significant and growing strategic and competitiveness
concerns stemming from the scientific and engineering progress around the world
coupled with more open and connected markets that affect nearly every aspect of
modern life. Responding to the opportunities presented by this change, countries
--not only allies but also adversaries--are making significant investments in
policies, institutions, and infrastructure with the goal of gaining
technological competence and superiority in areas of strategic
&lt;br/&gt;national economic and security interest. Technological sophistication
in both allies and adversary nations around the world have important
consequences for the continued economic competitiveness and security of the
United States: For the nation to adapt to new competitive realities, it must
develop a broad awareness of current exigencies as well as emerging
opportunities and challenges. To address these issues, the Board on Science,
Technology, and Economic Policy (STEP), in cooperation with the Committee on
Science, Technology, and Law (CSTL), both part of the Policy and Global Affairs
Division's theme on U.S. Science and Innovation Policy, proposes to convene an
ad hoc study committee that will examine the current competitive position of the
United States in emerging technologies; identify challenges to its continued
leadership in science, technology, and innovation; and identify the strategic
implications of the loss of scientific and innovation leadership in key areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The committee will organize a series of four workshops
that will serve to gather data and informed perspectives for the committee.
Following each workshop, a proceedings in brief of the presentations and
discussions will be prepared by a designated rapporteur in accordance with
institutional guidelines. Finally, the evidence gathered at these workshops will
inform the deliberations of the study committee, which will issue a consensus
report with findings and recommendations. The study will draw attention to
institutional and policy challenges, if any, facing the United States in
maintaining technological superiority in key areas identified by the committee.
The study will highlight recent research on U.S. competitiveness and trade,
technology, and innovation policies; and highlight how existing policies and
institutions may interact. In particular, the committee will discuss potential
costs and benefits associated with open science; discuss current market or
institutional failures to accelerating research advances that have the potential
for game-changing economic, human health, and national security leadership
efforts; and consider how practices by other countries, including recruitment of
top talent, large resource investments, and novel use of information
technologies to advance their competitiveness and governance systems can, in a
globalized world, affect U.S. institutions and
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.