* 1946922
* Unilateral Action and the Presidency
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Jon Rogowski, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jan Leighley
* 11/30/2021
* USD 336,325.00

The evolution of the office of the presidency is among the most important
institutional developments in American political history. However, surprisingly
little is known about how presidential policymaking activity has varied with
these developments. While comprehensive information about legislative enactments
passed by Congress and opinions issued by the Supreme Court is readily
available, no comparable database exists for the initiatives undertaken by
presidents. This project remedies this omission by constructing and analyzing a
new database of presidential directives issued between 1789 and the present. The
database provides a comprehensive description of presidential behavior across
American history and facilitates a new research agenda that more fully
incorporates the presidency into studies of public policymaking. Using these
data, the investigator develops and tests a theoretical framework to explain how
and for what purposes presidents engage in policymaking making activity and
explore its variation across time and political context. The findings provide
new insight into historical patterns of presidential activity.

This project studies the historical development of the American presidency by
creating a new database of presidential directives from 1789 to the present.
Though presidents since George Washington have made use of unilateral powers,
existing scholarship focuses mostly on the modern era and on executive orders to
the exclusion of other unilateral tools. The primary goal of the project is to
understand how presidents historically have used unilateral directives to
supervise the executive branch and create new policy outcomes. It will produce a
database that characterizes the content of nearly 100,000 directives and is
linked to other publicly available databases on American political institutions.
Using these data, the investigator examines how and for what purpose presidents
have issued unilateral directives and link patterns of presidential behavior to
institutional developments in Congress and the bureaucracy. The database will be
made publicly available to facilitate additional theoretical and empirical
scholarship about the presidency and its role in the American political system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.