* 1946311
* ANTS XIV: Algorithmic Number Theory Symposium 2020
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Kiran Kedlaya, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 34,800.00

This award provides funds for early-career researchers (graduate students,
postdocs, and tenure-track faculty not having other NSF support) based at US
universities to attend the fourteenth edition of the Algorithmic Number Theory
Symposium (ANTS-XIV) held June 29 - July 4, 2020 at the University of Auckland,
New Zealand. The ANTS meetings, held biannually since 1994, are the premier
international forum for new research in computational number theory. As an
established conference series, ANTS attracts invited and contributed lectures of
the highest quality, and serves as a forum for dissemination of new ideas and
techniques throughout the research community in the area of computational number
theory and number-theoretic aspects of cryptography. In addition to numerous
applications to theoretical mathematics, these fields have immense importance
through real world connections to computer security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ANTS meetings are devoted to algorithmic aspects of number theory, including
elementary number theory, algebraic number theory, analytic number theory,
geometry of numbers, arithmetic algebraic geometry, modular forms, finite
fields, and applications of number theory to cryptography. Participants include
academic researchers in both mathematics and computer science, as well as
mathematicians in industry who work on cryptography and other areas of
application; similarly, the topics presented include both pure and applied
topics. The review process for contributed lectures and the subsequent
production of a proceedings volume provides documentation of the presented
results at a quality level comparable to an international research journal in
mathematics. This award funds US-based researchers to participate in this
premier event. Funding priority will be given to those contributing papers or
posters; the organizers also seek to actively promote participation by women and
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information about the
conference can be found at &lt;br/&gt;https://www.math.auckland.ac.nz/~sgal018/A
NTS/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.