* 1946007
* Collaborative Proposal: Redefining the ecological memory of disturbance over multiple temporal and spatial scales in forest ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2025
* Andrew Finley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 01/31/2025
* USD 195,768.00

Most research on forests occurs within a single forest or only over a few years
or, less often, a few decades. It is typically believed that local disturbances
affect trees only in that forest. However, recent evidence suggests that
disturbances affected forests over hundreds of miles and more by the same series
of drought events and a hard spring frost that occurred 250 years ago. These
extreme weather events made it possible for many ancient trees within this
region to grow from small saplings into the canopy trees they are now. These
large-scale but very short-lived events like drought and frost are predicted to
occur more often and become worse in the future. If that happens, regional
forest declines could become more important in the future. To see if this is a
real possibility, this award will yield new data from old forests throughout the
Northeastern U.S. to investigate how trees and forests respond to extreme events
similar to those from 250 years ago. The broader impacts will focus on
recruiting people who are not well represented in scientific and academic
institutions. Students and project participants will be trained on how to
conduct science with humility, have respect for all people, and to combat
institutional racism and gender bias. The team will be active on social media
and make presentations at scientific meetings, public lectures, and educational
events to share what is learned through our study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ecological memory of forested ecosystems to extreme climatic events is not
adequately captured by theories of disturbance and vegetation models; the common
scale of ecological research is spatially too small and temporally too short to
capture long-term ecosystem development. This award will investigate multiple
data streams with two dynamic vegetation models and Bayes hierarchical modelling
to answer several questions, including: 1) How do extreme climatic events impact
ecosystem development and ecological processes? and 2) What are the long-term
interactions between local, high-frequency disturbance (windstorms, gap
dynamics, etc.) and large-scale, low-frequency disturbance (severe drought)?
Through these questions, the research will rigorously test theory by confronting
models with realistic disturbance scenarios from 600 years of tree-growth data
covering 400,000 km2 of the northeastern US to determine to what extent extreme
climatic events synchronize disturbance across spatial scales and their
potential long-term legacies. The award outcomes will be useful in forecasting
climate-forest interactions, as extreme events are expected to increase in the
future. By scaling from seasons to centuries, this project bridges short- and
long-term studies to provide information at the scales necessary to guide land
use decisions in complex systems under a changing climate. In addition to
training, the project will conduct a modelling workshop to push the margins of
forest science by inviting experts and people from a range of disciplines and
underrepresented groups to produce a conceptual paper at the intersection of
data-model assimilation, Bayesian statistics, and spatial and temporal
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.