* 1946423
* I-Corps: Decentralized fertilizer production for improving soil quality and plant growth
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in
introducing a new process for producing fertilizer locally in rural areas using
locally available resources and labor. By reducing the need to transport bulky
fertilizer components from centralized production plants, this process can
significantly reduce the cost of fertilizer access in rural areas, while
improving the customizability of fertilizer at the level of almost single-farm
granularity. By producing customizable fertilizer formulations that can promote
improved crop yield and hence higher income for the end users (e.g. farmers) in
addition to reduced requirements of water and commercial fertilizer components,
this innovation can lead to economic benefits as well as improved food and water
security. Since the proposed technology uses biomass such as farm residue as a
feedstock, it also contributes to effective waste management and nutrient
recycling without affecting the food chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on oxygen-lean thermochemical treatment and upgrading of
biomass, such that the hard-to-digest lignocellulosic fibers can be broken down
100 times faster compared to traditional mulching or composting processes. The
process is autothermal, requiring no external energy to sustain itself
continuously. Based on this chemical concept, the project has been modeled,
developed, built, and tested a laboratory-scale reactor prototype. Positive
control over the reaction condition and output by adjusting the air-biomass
ratio and the removal rate of the product from the reactor has been
demonstrated. Methods to scale-up the design by defining an index of reaction
and linking it to the relevant fertilizer characteristics-such as pH, ionic
activity-and developing a control system to process diverse types of crop
residues has been planned. The range of feedstock tested include rice husk, hay
straws, and walnut shells, producing diverse grades of the output fertilizer
component with different characteristics. The output fertilizer component is
then mixed with locally available nutrient additives resulting in a porosity-
and pH-adjustable formulation that can be custom-tailored for individual farms
to optimize soil quality (e.g. water and nutrient retention
capacity).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.