* 1946346
* Development of an experimental technique for characterizing the effects of magma flow in porous media
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Sarah Lambart, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 200,390.00

The vast majority of magmas that erupt from volcanoes is originally produced in
the mantle (material beneath the crust) and needs to travel up to hundreds of
miles before reaching the surface and becoming a volcanic rock that can be
collected. Volcanic rocks are then used by geochemists and petrologists to
better understand geologic processes happening in the Earth's interior. During
its journey, magmas will inevitably undergo many modifications through
interaction with the solid mantle through which they travel, blurring the link
between the volcanic rocks and the source at depth. The primary objective of
this research is to develop a new experimental technique to simulate the
migration of magmas through the mantle and better quantify the impact of thier
migration on the chemical and physical characteristics of magmas. The
experimental products will be compared to the natural volcanic rocks and will be
used to understand the relation between melting processes at depths and
volcanism at the surface of the Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be
performed in a one-atmosphere furnace. This pilot study will investigate how a
silicate melt flows through a porous solid matrix in open-system, and to
systematically vary the physical (melt flux, permeability, porosity) and
chemical (melt composition, mineral assemblage of the porous rock matrix)
properties of the system. Experimental products will be characterized by
electron microprobe, LA-ICP-MS, SEM and microtomography. This setup will provide
a novel approach to study both the dynamics of melt transport and its impact on
the composition of the melt and the host material. The main objectives of this
project are (1) the quantification of the effect of magma flow and melt-solid
interaction on the range of major and trace element concentrations in oceanic
basalts, (2) the determination of the required conditions for the preservation
of the source signal in primary magmas, and (3) the characterization of the
effect of magma flow on mantle lithologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.