* 1946385
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Urban Longevity and Social Inequality
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Zachary Nissen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,200.00

Doctoral Candidate Zachary Nissen will conduct research that examines the
household labor and socioeconomic conditions which enabled the persistence of an
urban community during a period of political and environmental stress. Cities
are diverse places of dense human interaction that provide ordinary people
important possibilities to make a living through household labor practices, yet
they are also places of concentrated inequality. Today, over half of the global
population lives in cities, and archaeology provides important opportunities to
examine what leads some cities to thrive over the long term while others fail
after a few generations. As periods of stress do not affect all people equally,
this project will investigate whether an urban community's long-term persistence
was built on the socioeconomic exploitation or integration of its most
vulnerable population segment. Through this research undergraduates from
Northwestern university will be trained in archaeological methods. Results will
be shared through public and academic presentations, journal articles, an online
database, and community events to ensure a broad audience (including academics,
government representatives, and the general public) has access to the project's
findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nissen and his research team will investigate
the labor practices and socioeconomic access of urban commoner households in a
prehistoric urban center. A period of prolonged drought and conflict, and
heightened inequality which lead many people to leave urban centers and settle
in smaller rural communities. To investigate what enabled one city to persist
while other cities could not, Nissen's team will assess the labor practices of
commoner households and the degree to which these practices enabled them access
to the city's economic and social resources, such as fine trade goods and
community ritual practices. They will conduct systematic excavations designed to
collect a range of residential artifacts and samples for chemical and
microartifact analysis to reconstruct the activities of four urban commoner
households. Together, the research conducted by Nissen and colleagues will
provide insights into the labor practices that sustain diverse urban centers, as
well as the socioeconomic forces that shaped the lives of city residents during
a period of regional stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.