* 1946321
* RAPID: Seismic Monitoring of Post-Fire Debris Flows Associated with the Museum Fire, Northern Arizona
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Abraham Springer, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 39,881.00

Within the western United States, the frequency and intensity of wildfires are
increasing. When these events occur, they burn vegetation and bake the soil,
which reduces the infiltration of precipitation into the ground and the
stability of the land surface. Due to these effects on soil, wildfires are often
followed by debris flows when precipitation events occur. These debris flows
pose a major risk to human lives and property. A major wildfire, the Museum
fire, is currently burning in the hills above the city of Flagstaff, located in
northern Arizona. The scale and proximity of this fire to the city is likely
characteristic of future wildfires in the western US. Within northern Arizona,
much of the annual precipitation comes in the form of intense late-summer
monsoonal rain storms, which are currently starting to occur across the region.
Due to this combination of a recent wildfire and intense rain, debris flows and
flooding are anticipated in parts of the city downslope from the
fire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing body of research showing that
seismometers can be used to monitor debris flows based on the vibrational energy
they produce as they travel downslope. In this project, the investigators will
deploy a network of seismometers in the vicinity of the Museum fire and
downslope drainages to monitor and characterize debris flows originating from
the burned region. These seismic observations will be combined with flow
measurements in drainages, post-event surface observations, rain gauge data, and
observations of downstream debris flow deposits to better understand how debris
flows initiate and travel downslope. This work will also be used to assess the
effectiveness of using seismic arrays as early warning systems for debris flows.
Due to the increasing number of people living at the wildland-urban interface,
the results of this work have important implications for protecting human lives
and property from future natural disasters. This project will also support the
training of graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
combination of a recent major wildfire and the onset of seasonal monsoons make
the mountains surrounding Flagstaff, Arizona a location where debris flows and
flooding are expected over the next two months (July to September, 2019). In
order to better understand debris flow initiation and characterize their
downslope travel, the PIs will deploy a small network of fifteen seismometers to
record seismic signals associated these events. Seismic data collected by this
array will be compared to surface observations including flow measurements,
post-event surface observations of scoured channels, and downstream debris flow
deposits. This will allow the investigators to calibrate seismic observations to
estimates of debris flow volume, grain size, and velocity and expand upon
previous efforts to assess debris flows using geophysical data. The broad
objectives of this effort are 1) to use seismic signals to characterize debris
flows events as they travel downslope and 2) to determine the effectiveness of
deploying a seismic monitoring network to serve as an early warning system for
debris flows in the future. The data collected from this array will be shared
with the scientific community and general public with the goal of encouraging
and expanding the use of seismic data for debris flow monitoring. Ultimately,
this work will help establish a framework for the rapid assessment of debris
flows using seismic data, which has long-term implications for protecting human
life and property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.