* 1946202
* RII Track-1: ND-ACES: New Discoveries in the Advanced Interface of Computation, Engineering, and Science
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* John Mihelich, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 06/30/2025
* USD 16,092,546.00

In order to diversify North Dakota’s economy beyond agriculture and energy, ND-
ACES will generate new knowledge and increase jurisdictional competitiveness in
bioscience areas, particularly those related to cancer therapies. A key focus is
the improved understanding of the region of contact, or biointerface, between a
biological tissue and a biomaterial. Scaffold biomaterials will be designed that
stimulate the growth of new tissue at the biointerface. ND-ACES will optimize
the design of biointerfaces through a collaboration among multiple fields of
sciences and engineering, including materials science, cell biology and
biochemistry, medicine, and computational modeling. Computational tools will
allow the modeling of the 3D cancerous tumor environment and resulting cellular
responses. These studies will address the urgent need to increase the
understanding of interactions between cells and surfaces in the context of tumor
growth, metastasis, and response to therapies. ND-ACES will enhance research
resources and develop the computationally skilled workforce in North Dakota.
During the five years of this project, a diverse group of researchers and
students from ten academic institutions in North Dakota, including four tribal
colleges, three primarily undergraduate institutions, and one master’s
university, will participate in the research and educational activities. This
project will forge partnerships with industries and other stakeholders and
prepare a well-trained workforce capable of meeting the needs of bioscience in
North Dakota and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The North Dakota EPSCoR Research
Infrastructure Improvement Track-1 project, ND-ACES, will use computational
modeling to develop improved interdisciplinary understanding of biological and
engineered materials biointerfaces; expand expertise in novel cellular growth
and analysis paradigms for mimicking the in vivo environment of cancerous
tumors; catalyze research/computing capabilities; support the translation of
research into use through products, partnerships, and collaborations with
various stakeholders; and inform North Dakota's citizens. ND-ACES builds
research capacity to better understand design rules that govern in vitro
biointerfaces and influence in vivo decisions surrounding the understanding of
biochemistry and the cell biology of cancer cells and tumors. Computationally
created design rules can enhance predictability of cellular responses to
material surface characteristics and provide fundamental information to address
many bioscience challenges. Thus, the integration of computational modeling as a
prominent research tool allows for more extensive testing than possible with
trial-and-error methods. ND-ACES efforts incorporate both faculty and students
at all ten participating institutions in collaborative research, early career
development, education enhancement, and outreach to increase the abilities of
early career faculty, increase advanced scientific computing capabilities, and
broaden the participation and number of STEM undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.