* 1946308
* COMPCOG: Intuitive Physics without Intuition or Physics: Leveraging Deep Neural Networks to Model Human Physical Reasoning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* George Alvarez, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 553,779.00

The broad purpose of the proposed research is to leverage recent advances in
artificial intelligence (AI) and deep learning to gain insight into the inner
workings of human cognition. While the nature of human perception and cognition
can only be inferred from behavior, deep neural networks that emulate human
behavior offer a unique opportunity to scrutinize the inner workings of the
system and potentially understand how and why the system works the way it does
(and, thus how and why the human system works the way it does). While cognitive
science has always employed formal computational models, for the first time the
cognitive abilities of artificial agents has begun to rival or exceed those of
humans in several domains, providing the opportunity to formally understand
complex human behavior using these models. Specifically, in the proposed
research the investigators will use deep neural network models to better
understand intuitive physical reasoning — our ability to understand the behavior
of objects in our environment. For example, at a glance, people can judge
whether a stack of plates is about to fall, or whether it’s stable. This type of
intuitive physical reasoning is a fundamental aspect of human cognition which
underlies our everyday reasoning about objects in the world, but likely also
supports formal education in the physical sciences (e.g., learning Newtonian
physics). Thus, the general purpose of the proposed research is to leverage
recent advances in deep learning to develop a rich basic level understanding of
human intuitive physical reasoning, which ultimately has the potential to impact
formal STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed work, the
investigators will combine tools from cognitive science (ideal observer
analyses), with tools from artificial intelligence (deep, convolutional neural
networks), to test a novel psychological theory (intuitive physical reasoning as
extrapolation in shape space) to gain insight into a core aspect of human
cognition (intuitive physical reasoning). This work involves testing human
participants to obtain human performance benchmarks on a variety of intuitive
physical judgments, then training deep neural network models to perform the same
tasks, in some cases constrained to behave as ideal observers (systems that
perform the optimal computation to perform the task). By examining similarities
and differences between humans and these deep neural network models, and
scrutinizing the inner workings of models that perform the task with human-level
accuracy, the investigators will develop neural network based models of human
intuitive physical reasoning. As such, this work presents an interdisciplinary
integration between cognitive science and artificial intelligence, with the
potential to impact basic cognitive theory and its applications to formal STEM
education, and to increase the synergy between the fields of machine vision,
artificial intelligence, and autonomous agents that aim to emulate human
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.