* 1946289
* NSF Student Travel Grant for Workshop on String Algorithms in Bioinformatics (StringBio), 2019
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Sharma Thankachan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

Many current genomics data processing tools rely on string algorithms and
related data structures, and therefore 'string analytics' problems relating to
the bioinformatics domain have attracted a lot of interest. Focused solely on
string algorithms in bioinformatics, the annual String Algorithms in
Bioinformatics (StringBio) workshop aims to gather researchers, practitioners,
and students with a format that is composed of short tutorials and research
talks. This travel award will provide partial support to 10-15 students to
participate in this workshop. Preference will be given to students from under-
represented groups and females. Encouraging student participation might inspire
many participants (especially undergraduates) to pursue higher studies in
related areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tutorials are scheduled to be given by
experienced researchers on foundations of string processing to cover related
algorithms and data structures from standard to advanced levels. These tutorials
aim to help students and researchers who would like to make a quick start in
bioinformatics challenges by addressing the basic building blocks and current
state-of-the-art. Different from standard conference presentations of already
achieved progress, the research talks by experts at StringBio will describe
current and ongoing research studies to which, the attendees can join by
expressing their interests and potentials. The talks are expected to provide an
excellent opportunity, particularly for the beginners in the path to their first
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.