* 1946152
* EAGER:  Development of an RNA editing tool for probing the function of plant mitochondrial genes and proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2021
* Stephane Bentolila, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 10/31/2021
* USD 299,998.00

This project aims to develop enabling technology for studying essential gene
functions in plant mitochondria. In plant cells, like in animals, mitochondria
are known as the cellular powerhouses, generating the energy needed for
essential activities. Mitochondria contain their own genomes, which are known to
be more complex and much larger in plants than in animals; yet, how plant
genomes work to produce characteristic RNA and protein products is not well
understood. Moreover, genetic tools for studying genes in mitochondria are
lacking. Therefore, the tools to be generated by this project could
revolutionize the ability to analyze and potentially engineer mitochondrial
genes and their products. In addition to this scientific impact, the project
will have beneficial educational outcomes by providing undergraduate students
with hands-on research training to prepare them to become members of the future
STEM workforce.

This project aims to resolve the lack of genetic tools to probe mitochondrial
gene functions by providing a technology that will allow editing of
mitochondrial transcripts at certain nucleotides. The CRISPR revolution in
genome editing relies on the use of nucleases, Cas proteins, which act in
bacterial immunity by generating double-stranded breaks in invading phage DNAs.
Recently, "dead" Cas proteins that have lost their endonuclease activity but
retained their binding affinity for nucleic acids have been used to engineer
nuclear single base editors acting on either DNA or RNA. This project aims to
develop a similar tool for mitochondrial RNA. The impact of this work will
provide a novel technology for the field of plant mitochondrial biology. It will
open up unprecedented opportunities to understand the function of mitochondrial
genes, gene regulatory sequences, and proteins by making precise changes that
cannot be made by mutating nuclear genes that encode mitochondrial proteins.
This methodology could also provide a way to genetically engineer plant
mitochondrial function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.