* 1946566
* I-Corps: Antimicrobial Microgels for Air Purification
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Susanne Striegler, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
new cost-effective and efficient polymers for air and water purification to
minimize the risk of infections caused by bacteria and other pathogens. The
technology has the potential to improve or replace traditional methods for air
purification in established heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems
without modifications of existing equipment. While hospitals heavily rely on
high-efficiency particulate air filters to fulfill their need for bacteria-free
air, the required air handlers consume a significant energy, are expensive, and
often cost-prohibitive for some facilities. The platform technology developed
here potentially addresses these drawbacks and also accommodates a wide range of
other potential applications, such as manufacturing of protective fabrics, and
paints, as part of cosmetics and bandages, or as coatings of medical devices and
implants without the need for specialized equipment for the end-user. The
platform facilitates the integration into existing manufacturing processes and
gives access to various market segments at minimal upfront investment.

This I-Corps project further develops a platform for antimicrobial microgels
with initial applications centering on air purification. The cross-linked
polyacrylates contain immobilized transition metal complexes. The material is
synthesized using UV-light initiated radical polymerization of miniemulsions at
ambient temperature or below. The miniemulsions are obtained by ultra-sheering
of monomer mixtures in aqueous solutions in presence of appropriate hydrophobes
and ionic surfactants. The resulting suspensions show high antimicrobial
activity towards Gram-positive and -negative bacteria that result from a synergy
of material properties. Extended shelf-life stability and activity of the
material have been demonstrated, the activity of the polymer suspensions in
Petri-dish assays have been documented, and proof-of-concept data for material
activity when mounted on paper have been obtained.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.