* 1946768
* Police Shootings and Civic Engagement
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Thomas Clark, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,291.00

In promoting public safety and order, and responding to perceived threats
against them or others, police oﬃcers sometimes harm civilians, using lethal
force, inclusive of shootings. Moments of lethal force by the police remind us
of the power, authority, and discretion policymakers and the public grant the
police for law enforcement and public security. Those moments also raise
questions about the frequency, causes, and consequences of lethal force by the
police. Neither policymakers nor the public, however, know how often police
oﬃcers use lethal force, particularly how often they shoot civilians. Media
coverage, crowdsourcing, and government reports of police shootings paint an
incomplete picture of lethal force in U.S. policing. It often excludes, for
example, the majority of police shootings—non-fatal shootings. Furthermore,
policymakers and the public know little about the civic and communal eﬀects of
police shootings. Accordingly, policymakers and the public need more data about
incidents of police harm of civilians. They also need data-driven assessments of
whether police harm of civilians negatively aﬀects civic life, inclusive of
public trust and participation. Collecting, cataloging, storing, and sharing
comprehensive data about police shootings, fatal and non-fatal, is necessary.
Higher-quality data and analyses may contribute to reducing police harm of
civilians and bettering relationships between police and communities they are to
serve and protect without bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The researchers will
collect data on shootings of civilians by police in the U.S. for the period
2000-2019. The primary sources of data will be the police departments of the 285
largest cities (i.e., cities of at least 100,000 residents as of the 2010
Census). The researchers will use each city’s and/or their state’s “freedom of
information” statutes to request public records of every instance of a police
oﬃcer involved in a shooting of a civilian, both fatal and non-fatal. They also
will request the dates, times, and locations of the oﬃcer-involved shootings,
along with information about the demographics of the oﬃcers and civilians. As a
supplement, the researchers will collect newspaper stories about the oﬃcer-
involved shootings in the sample cities. They will code them to assess media
coverage and content of the shootings. The researchers will use the data they
collect to build a public repository for aggregating, hosting, and disseminating
data about police shootings. Additionally, they will produce a descriptive
analysis of lethal force by police. Finally, they will conduct multivariate
analyses to identify whether lethal force by police harms civic engagement,
including the propensity of citizen-initiated contact for emergency (911) and
non-emergency (311) services from municipalities. Evaluating whether lethal use
of force by the police, be it fatal or non-fatal, decreases citizen-initiated
contact with local governments will inform theoretical, empirical, and public
understandings of police-civilian interactions. The data, inclusive of its
public dissemination, and analyses of it will better illuminate the degree to
which police use lethal force and suggest how to better balance police
discretion to use lethal force for public safety and order while fostering or
maintaining public trust in the police, particularly by communities of
color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.