* 1946797
* 2020 Environmental Sciences: Water Gordon Research Conference; Plymouth, New Hampshire; June 28-July 3, 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Heileen Hsu-Kim, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2023
* USD 35,000.00

This grant will support the Environmental Sciences: Water Gordon Research
Conference at Holderness, New Hampshire. The theme of the conference is
Innovative Science for the Grand Challenges in the Aquatic Environmental
Sciences. The week-long conference will focus on sustainable water quality under
stress from global change, fate and transport of persistent chemicals in the
environment, and data science innovations to improve water quality. Benefits to
both human and ecological health will result from the focus on improving water
quality. The immersive format of the conference will facilitate networking and
collaborative exchange among participants. The development of the next
generation of environmental science leaders will be fostered through
interactions with leading researchers in academia, industry, and government.
Diversity and inclusion of the discipline will be enhanced through scholarships
for attendees from underrepresented groups. Educational and career development
success will be assessed by surveys of all participants at the end of the
conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to support the
Environmental Sciences: Water Gordon Research Conference, to be held June
27-July 3, 2020 in Holderness, New Hampshire. The 2020 conference theme is
Innovative Science for the Grand Challenges in the Aquatic Environmental
Sciences and will feature a program of thought-provoking research that strives
to address today's most pressing environmental challenges. The conference will
focus on 1) Sustainable water quality under stress from global change, 2)
Exposures and effects of persistent chemicals in the environment, and 3)
Technological and data science innovations to improve water quality. Benefits to
both human and ecological health will result from the focus on improving water
quality. Such solutions rely on research at the intersections of traditional
disciplines. These efforts will be fostered by bringing together 190
participants to discuss cutting-edge water quality science. The immersive format
enables meaningful networking and collaborative exchange of ideas between
conference participants. Student and post-doctoral research trainees will be
fully engaged in this immersive scientific conference. Their development as
researchers will be fostered through interactions with leading researchers in
academia, industry, and government. All invited presenters will be first time
speakers at the meeting to develop the next generation of environmental science
leaders. The meeting will foster diversity and inclusion in the discipline
through scholarships for attendees from underrepresented groups. The success and
impacts of the conference will be gauged by surveys of all participants at the
end of the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.