* 1946650
* CyberCorps SFS Renewal: A Transdisciplinary Approach to Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2026
* Lorie Liebrock, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,437,775.00

Cybersecurity is a multi-faceted and complex problem that needs to be studied
from different angles and requires the integration of multiple disciplines. This
project seeks to continue and expand the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service
(SFS) program at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology (NMT). Using
a transdisciplinary approach, the NMT SFS project will prepare scholars to
become leaders in civil service in the field of cybersecurity. The proposed
integration of theory, practice and principles from multiple disciplines
reflects guidance from the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education
Cybersecurity Workforce (NICE) Framework. SFS scholars will be well-prepared for
success in the cybersecurity workforce as a result of the broad skillset
obtained through this education and training program. This project will also
work to increase the percentage of scholars from underrepresented minority (URM)
groups. NMT is a Hispanic Serving Institution, primarily focusing on science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Increasing the number of URM
students involved in this project will result in an increase in the number of
cybersecurity professionals who may serve as successful role models for URM
groups. In addition, this project will continue collaborating with 2-year
colleges to share cybersecurity curricula and mentor their applications to the
Centers of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense (CAE-CD) Associate program. The
impact of this project will extend beyond the selected scholars as the
cybersecurity courses and research will benefit all students interested in
cybersecurity at NMT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NMT has been designated as a National
Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Research (CAE-R) by the National
Security Agency and Department of Homeland Security since 2009. Four cohorts of
undergraduate and graduate scholars will be added to NMT’s existing SFS program,
which has a strong emphasis on providing a transdisciplinary cybersecurity
education to scholars. The project will establish new transdisciplinary graduate
(master’s and doctoral) degree programs and support scholars to obtain a
professional cybersecurity certificate upon graduation. In addition, new
cybersecurity courses will be developed across a wide variety of disciplines,
such as Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Psychology, Business and
Technology Management, and the humanities. Scholars will also benefit from
research seminars and cybersecurity research opportunities with faculty and
researchers from NMT, the National Security Agency, Idaho National Laboratories,
Los Alamos National Laboratories, Sandia National Laboratory, and other
government agencies. These scholars and all NMT cybersecurity students will
continue to positively impact the government agencies they will work for as they
apply their expertise and leadership to improve our nation’s
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.