* 1946555
* Dissertation Grant: Engineering Stillness: The History of Site Selection and Signal Epistemological Development of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO)
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Tiffany Nichols, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 12,323.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation research project in history of
science on the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO). The
project has two goal. It will provide a better understanding of the process
through which the paired sites of Hanford (Washington) and Livingston
(Louisiana) were selected, and of how scientists and engineers using LIGO came
to distinguish background noise from gravitational wave signals. To extract a
very small signal from vast amount of noise, LIGO must exclude all local
disturbances not present at both sites; to maximize the likelihood of being able
to filter out such disturbances from the background, scientists and engineers
had to choose relatively quiet sites. Once the sites were chosen, they had to
identify and understand the sources and characteristics of the local
disturbances (e.g., logging activity, earthquakes, and traffic) at the selected
sites in order to maintain and improve the capacity to detect gravitational
waves. A sociological understanding of local life became integral to the process
of characterizing local disturbances and so to the larger aim of discerning
gravitational wave signals from the background noise. The novel term “signal
epistemology” is used by the researcher to refer to the acquiring, combining,
and applying a hybrid of technical and social knowledge about vibrations within
LIGO's interferometers. The results of this research will serve as a resource
for future site selection by LIGO for the placement of additional large-scale
interferometers and other large-scale physics experiment enterprises which must
consider the land due to the sensitivity and size of their instruments, and it
will serve as a case study that provides insights for other nationally funded
big science projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project on the early
history of LIGO has three distinct components. First, it analyzes the LIGO site
selection process. Second, it examines the construction of LIGO's signal
epistemology, especially with respect to the question of how LIGO's environment
pertains to the operation and output signals of its interferometers. Third, it
studies the importance of maintaining interferometer sensitivity and a still
experimental environment relative to its actual geographic location, so that
LIGO scientists can extract the incredibly minute gravitational wave from the
background noise. The overarching issue addressed by the project is the
perennial question of how land characteristics and placement choices affect
large-scale physics experiments and how considerations of land and territory
became integral to the performance of experiments on such sites. Existing
literature uses sociological methods to examine interpersonal relationships in
the site selection process. By contrast, this research fills a critical gap in
our understanding by using archival record analysis to analyze LIGO's
development, placement, design evolution, experimental runs and its
understanding of distinctions between gravitational wave signals and terrestrial
background noise. The project will address the experience of those who occupy
the land surrounding LIGO's sites, with the aim of showing how their
relationships with and knowledge of the land became part of LIGO's gravitational
wave experiments and interpretation of data. The points of intersection between
local knowledge and the knowledge acquired by non-resident experts entailed in
site selection is a novel feature of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.