* 1946746
* A Comparative Life Cycle Assessment of Commercialized Hydroponics vs. Aquaponics for Vegetable Production in New Jersey
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Daniela Shebitz, Kean University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 170,005.00

1946746 (Mu). This project will conduct a comparative Life Cycle Assessment
(LCA) to quantify resource use and environmental and human health impacts of
vegetable production with two water-based farming techniques in five
commercialized facilities (three for hydroponics and two for aquaponics) built
in densely populated areas in New Jersey. The research team will undertake both
on-site data collection and software modeling in conducting LCA. The scope for
analysis will cover all the impacts in facility establishment, vegetable
production, and upstream supply chains. The project is expected to improve
understanding of hydroponics and aquaponics, and provide recommendations to
improve technologies and guidance to select among various farming techniques.
The study has the potential to lead to greater application of water-based
farming in urban areas and add another source of food supply to city dwellers
that have limited access to fresh and nutritious foods. Increased applications
could help reduce hunger and increase food diversity, independence, and
resiliency of cities. In addition, the project will extend research on
sustainable farming and provide a learning practicum for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project targets to: 1) Establish an inventory
of resources used, vegetables produced, and emissions from the facilities; 2)
Analyze environmental and human health impacts of various vegetables produced
and identify key factors that cause resource use and impacts; and, 3) Compare
the LCA results and figure out how resource use and impacts are related to
facility design, scale, and type of vegetable growing. Finally, the study will
discuss how to improve hydroponic design and operation to reduce resource
consumption and impacts, and create a general guide for cities, communities, and
families to select water-based farming techniques according to varied locations,
land and resource availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.