* 1946773
* Conference on Data Science and Law; Chapel Hill, NC; Spring 2020
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Stanley Ahalt, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 10/31/2022
* USD 49,995.00

Data science, particularly via artificial intelligence (AI) and/or machine
learning, is becoming increasingly omnipresent in our lives and culture, in the
way we interact with each other, in the way we get goods and services, and in
the way our personal information is used and shared. In the legal field, data
science is changing how judicial and governmental decisions are made and, more
broadly, how law is practiced. NSF has recognized the impact that computer and
data science (as well as other disciplines including engineering and social
sciences) can have on the law. Collaboration between legal professionals, data
science experts, and other domain experts is needed to establish evaluative
frameworks that can bring the advanced quantitative reasoning made possible
through data science to the domain of law. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference
award will be used to organize a two-day workshop—with representatives from law,
data science, engineering, and social science and including students from these
fields—to focus interdisciplinary perspectives on four to five broad data
science questions in the law. As a result of this workshop, teams will form to
develop innovative research proposals aimed at developing data science solutions
to legal problems through future collaborations and proposals for submission to
NSF and other funding agencies and foundations committed to the scientifically
valid practice of law. Those proposals in turn may lead to data science tools
that, for example, allow for more efficient open-source legal research, create
methods for authenticating digital evidence, or evaluate algorithms for accuracy
or bias. Additionally, the proposed workshop will represent the first step
towards developing an interdisciplinary community of data scientists, legal
professionals, and other domain experts. An essential outcome of this workshop
is that these communities understand the profound impact they share as the
nation’s legal, academic, and professional communities move toward more data-
driven decisions regarding legal outcomes, legal implications, and legal impacts
of data analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.