* 1946890
* Phase II IUCRC Texas A&amp;M University: Center for Unmanned Air Systems C-UAS
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2020,06/30/2022
* John Valasek, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2022
* USD 329,712.00

The Texas A&amp;M University project seeks to address the current and emerging
Unmanned Air Systems (UAS) safety and use needs of industry, government, and the
public through research and education that enhances workforce development. It
investigates novel fixed-wing and novel rotorcraft design, smart structures,
cybersecure air vehicles, validation &amp; verification of autonomous systems,
and sensor integration and fusion. Unique facilities are the 2,000 acre RELLIS
Integrated Proving Ground of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Lone Star
Test Site, and the Disaster City training and test facility used by federal and
state agencies for emergency and disaster response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal is the creation of a strong and sustainable site that conducts projects
facilitating the development of high quality engineering researchers: both
faculty and students. These researchers are responsive to conducting both basic
research and applied research in Unmanned Air Systems (UAS) by advancing the
state-of-the-practice, in addition to the state-of-the-technical-art. The
projects will contribute to cross-disciplinary challenges, and have strong
integrated systems aspects (design, structures, intelligent payloads, sensors,
and control), in addition to unique operational aspects (such as disturbance
rejecting vertical flight). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unmanned Air Systems (UAS) are
a transformative technology that impact research, education, and everyday life.
The investigators team directly with earth scientists, agriculture scientists,
and geo scientists on research that is expected to be impactful on these
important areas. The team will continue current outreach to underrepresented
groups in the State of Texas, PK-12 students, and the historically strong
involvement of undergraduate students on the research team. The team has
excellent federal experience with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
House and Senate aviation committees, and national academies service that has
helped shape not only technology but policy and
regulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the duration of the project a repository
will store applied research and collaborative experimental data products from
C-UAS projects, consisting of flight data, video data, simulation codes and
data, air vehicle design software, structural design software, autonomy and
controls software, and all project reports and publications. All software will
have clear instructions for installing and downloading and configuring for use.
Flight logs will be stored in spreadsheet or professional flight log electronic
format and made available to the C-UAS team as well as Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), and university authorities. The single Center-wide
repository is used. https://c-uas.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.