* 1946352
* RII Track-1: Guam Ecosystems Collaboratorium for Corals and Oceans
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Terry Donaldson, University of Guam
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 12,718,786.00

This research infrastructure improvement project will bring together researchers
from both within Guam and across the nation to a world-class research and STEM
training facility. Guam, located in Micronesia in the western Pacific, is the
westernmost reach of U.S. influence in the world. As such, it is located in
close proximity to the nation’s most diverse, complex and understudied coral
reef systems. Unfortunately, due to factors such as climate change, these coral
reef systems are under threat from diseases. Coral diseases can be devastating
to not only the corals themselves but also to the animals and plants that live
within the corals. This project will study these systems using state-of-the-art
techniques to understand how these coral reef systems, and their associated
animals and plants, respond to climate change and diseases that are becoming
more prevalent in the region. In addition, the project will create an on-line
catalogue of animals and plants that live in the region so that they can be
archived in perpetuity for future generations. Finally, this project will
develop a cadre of effective programs to educate the workforce in science
fields. The project will engage the community in order to promote island
sustainability and will help build new and innovative business opportunities to
that end. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research infrastructure improvement project
will create a world-class research and STEM training facility that will address
challenges to the survival of coral reefs under rapidly changing environmental
conditions within the region. Guam has the nation’s most diverse and complex
coral reef systems and there is an urgent need to bring modern and cutting-edge
studies to this ecosystem to address climate change challenges. This project
will implement a systematic, diverse research agenda incorporating new knowledge
of biodiversity, population genetics, genomics, phylogenetics, ecology,
microbiology, oceanography, and mathematical modeling to document and predict
the taxonomic and functional diversity of reef-builders and associated taxa in a
changing environment. To this end, the project will address questions involving:
1) the role of genetic diversity and connectivity in conferring reef resilience;
and 2) detection of key traits for resilience for reef builders. Additionally,
the project will facilitate the expansion of a state-of-the art digitization,
imaging and mapping laboratory and an online database within the University of
Guam. This biorepository will include over 4,000 taxa from existing and new
collections on Guam, improve the curatorial infrastructure, and provide broad-
based documentation and understanding of biodiversity on Guam and throughout the
Pacific. The biorepository will provide specimens, curatorial services, and
biodiversity analyses to the entire scientific community. This project will also
develop innovative programs for STEM education, workforce development and
community engagement to promote island sustainability. In particular, the
project will target the underserved Pacific Island Chamorro communities.
Finally, this project will enhance and further establish the University’s
cyberinfrastructure as a nexus for high-speed networks in the Pacific Rim and
build virtual supercomputer capabilities for big data analysis for the genomic
and oceanographic components of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.