* 1946637
* A Consortium for Cultivating Future Artificial Intelligence Researchers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Jim Boerkoel, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 45,900.00

The Association of the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI)
Undergraduate Consortium and Mentoring Program aims to help prepare a workforce
of future artificial intelligence (AI) researchers that is representative of
broad societal diversity. The project plans to increase the number of
undergraduates who attend the annual AAAI conference and to increase the
diversity of conference attendees. Supporting undergraduates at top-tier
international academic conferences is important for their academic and
professional growth. However, conferences typically offer limited opportunities
for undergraduates to make the most of their conference experiences. This
project intends to reinforce the research identities of future AI researchers
across diverse backgrounds. It will do so by providing undergraduates with an
enhanced conference experience. Enhancements will include opportunities for
undergraduates to practice written and verbal presentation skills, to build
mentoring relationships with AI experts, to construct a diverse network of
peers, and to explore graduate school and careers in AI research. The long-term
objectives are to broaden the pipeline of students pursuing AI graduate
education and research careers and to produce tools and materials that
researchers and educators can use to enhance the undergraduate experience at
other academic conferences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The programming objectives of
the AAAI Undergraduate Consortium and Mentoring Program are to offer
undergraduate students an enriched conference experience as they (1) present and
receive critical feedback about their work in a professional, academic setting;
(2) meet prospective graduate advisors; (3) receive mentoring about the
advantages and disadvantages of pursuing graduate studies in AI as well as
practical early career advice; (4) expand their professional network to include
AI experts, graduate students, and undergraduate peers; and (5) receive advice,
tools, and resources for successfully applying to and attending graduate school
in an AI-related research area. In partnership with AAAI, data will be collected
on undergraduate participation at AAAI and participants will be invited to
complete optional pre-/post-consortium and longitudinal surveys. These data will
be used to measure changes in participant perceptions and behaviors related to
their identity as researchers, as well as changes in the AAAI-Undergraduate
Consortiumâ€™s efficacy and pipeline effects over time. Analysis of these data
will be used to assess the outcomes of the AAAI-Undergraduate Consortium and to
improve future recruitment, programming, and retention efforts. The project will
maintain and disseminate a repository of undergraduate programming opportunities
that can be used in conjunction with any professional computer science
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.