* 1946434
* The granular physics contribution to rate- and state-dependent fault friction
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Allan Rubin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 01/31/2024
* USD 327,781.00

Friction plays a critical role in many areas of societal interest, including
transportation and manufacturing. In Earth Sciences, understanding friction is
critical for a better understanding of the hazards associated with earthquakes
and landslides. The friction properties of materials have been studied for
centuries, but the physics and chemistry underlying their time dependence remain
obscure. Yet, small fluctuations in friction properties during earthquakes and
landslides can have tremendous effects on the size and speed of these events.
Friction on sliding interfaces such as tectonics faults are usually described by
the so called "rate- and state-dependent friction" laws. These empirical laws
account for the sliding speed ("rate") and for the evolving properties of the
interface termed "state"; this latter, a function of the slip history, is
difficult to observe directly. The rate-and-state framework is widely used to
model frictional sliding. But the corresponding laws fail to accurately describe
laboratory observations for a range of conditions relevant to earthquakes. Here,
the team aims to better understand the physics underlying the frictional
properties of rocks. The researchers use computer simulations to model the
behavior of granular layers of finely-ground rock, called gouge, that are
present along tectonic faults. The goal is to test whether rock friction and its
time dependence is governed at the grain scale by grain-to-grain interactions.
The simulation outputs are constrained by experimental observations: in many
cases they describe them better than the most successful rate-and-state friction
laws. The team, thus, gradually unveils the physics underlying the behavior of
earthquake-generating faults. In addition to its strong societal relevance, this
project provides support for an early career scientist as well as training for
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To model the behavior
of the gouge, the researchers employ Discrete Element Method simulations. They
use model geometries and loading conditions designed to mimic standard rock-
friction experiments, such as "velocity-step" and "slide-hold-reslide"
protocols. They test the hypothesis that rock friction as observed in the
laboratory is governed by time-independent properties at the grain-grain contact
scale. This innovative approach differs from more traditional ones which assume
that time-dependent plasticity or chemical bonding at microscopic contacts are
the source of the rate-and-state dependence of friction. The granular
simulations are consistent with the most successful rate-and-state-dependent
friction equations for sliding protocols where those equations accurately
describe experiments ("velocity-step" and “slide-hold” protocols). They better
match laboratory data for sliding protocols where those equations fail (e.g.,
the reslides following "slide-hold" protocols). Furthermore, output of the
granular simulations allows investigating the source of the rate-and-state-
dependent friction-like behavior of the model. The team finds that if the
kinetic energy of the gouge particles is suitably normalized by the confining
pressure, it produces an estimate of the velocity dependence that is consistent
with the simulations and within the ballpark of laboratory data. The researchers
continue exploring the granular flow model by comparing it to a wider range of
sliding protocols that are not well explained by existing equations (e.g.,
"slide-hold-reslide" and "normal-stress-step" experiments). They also compare
the compaction/dilation of the gouge layers in the simulations to experimental
observations; the goal is to evaluate the role of porosity on the gouge sliding
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.