* 1946619
* CyberCorps SFS Renewal: Federal and University Training Union for Research and Education on Security (FUTURES)
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2026
* Dong Xu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,388,452.00

Recognizing the importance of cybersecurity and the shortage of skilled
cybersecurity professionals in federal agencies, the Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science Department at the University of Missouri-Columbia proposes a
renewal of their existing CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) project.
This Federal and University Training Union for Research and Education on
Security (FUTURES) SFS project will address the need for cybersecurity
professionals. It will provide master’s (MS) and doctoral (PhD) degree students
with a state-of-the-art cybersecurity education that includes innovative hands-
on learning experiences to prepare them for current and future cybersecurity
threats. The development of a wide range of security-related courses and the
research activities associated with this project will significantly expand
cybersecurity education and research capabilities in the University of Missouri
System. The FUTURES SFS project will also strengthen existing ties between the
University and federal organizations. The curricula and research activities
support the National Cyber Strategy and the need for robust cybersecurity
technology, policy, and practices. Broader impacts of this project will include
efforts to increase the number of minorities and women in cybersecurity
professions. In addition, the project will perform outreach to disseminate
cybersecurity knowledge to the community, including: K-12 teachers, middle and
high school students, neighboring colleges, and the cybersecurity academic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FUTURES SFS project builds on the success and
experience of the previously funded SFS project, strong institutional support,
and the University of Missouri-Columbia’s designation as a National Center of
Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Research (CAE-R) by the National Security
Agency (NSA) and Department of Homeland Security (DHS). This project will
provide scholars with high-quality cybersecurity research and educational
activities, which include innovative experiential learning opportunities,
dedicated diversity and inclusion support, and robust extracurricular and
outreach activities. Undergraduate and graduate level cybersecurity courses
cover all the categories and most specialty areas specified by the National
Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Cybersecurity Workforce Framework.
Each scholar will be required to complete at least 18 credit hours of lecture
courses on cybersecurity, and 12 or 54 cybersecurity research credit hours
towards an MS or PhD thesis, respectively. Service-learning courses, which
combine academic coursework with relevant and impactful service to the
community, will provide the scholars with innovative experiential learning.
Outreach and dissemination activities will take the form of seminars, workshops,
and summer camps organized by the SFS scholars and the project team, as well as
research publications and presentations to academic and professional societies.
The university has established an Education Partnership Agreement with several
federal agencies and the project team has extensive collaborations with federal
organizations such as the National Science Foundation, NSA, National Institutes
of Health and DHS, which will provide direct channels for SFS scholars to secure
internships as well as permanent jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds
proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and
aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity
workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.