* 1946945
* Acquisition of TQ-ICP-MS for Geochemical Research in the Department of Earth and Environmental Science at the University of Minnesota
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Cara Santelli, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 231,783.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program award
supports acquisition of an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS)
which will be used in support of Earth and Ocean science research and research
training in the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences at the University
of Minnesota. The instrument will support geochemical research that requires the
ability to determine trace element concentrations and isotope ratios in natural
fluids to better understand processes that occur in minerals-fluid interactions
in high temperature hydrothermal systems in lakes and the oceans, the effects of
biological activity on toxic elements introduced into the environment from
mining and agricultural activity and for the study of the sedimentary record of
Earthâ€™s past climate dynamics. The instrument will support student training in
methods of geochemical analysis and will serve as a departmental resource for
environmental research on topics of societal relevance including studies with
implications for human health hazards related to anthropogenic activities and
remediation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compositional variability of fluids
coexisting with minerals in natural aquatic systems in time and space provides
fundamental insight on a wide range of processes critical to the chemical
evolution and climate history of Earth. Specific research and teaching
activities that will benefit from this acquisition include: geochemical controls
on sublacustrine and subaerial hydrothermal activity and associated
biogeochemistry in Yellowstone National Park; microbially mediated mineral
alteration, weathering, and metal and metalloid redox transformations;
development of stable potassium isotopes as a novel proxy for the potassium
cycle; and development, calibration and application of high resolution dating
methods to study changes in Earth climate and ocean
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.