* 1946520
* Understanding Access to Justice: Social Sources of Variation in Everyday Relationships to Law
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Kathryne Young, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 03/31/2024
* USD 249,883.00

Civil justice problems are widespread in the United States. For decades,
scholars assumed the access to justice crisis was created by a shortage of
lawyers or lawyers' unaffordability, but more recent research shows that the
main reason people seek no assistance is that they do not think of their
problems as “legal.” The failure to seek solutions to civil justice problems has
long-term consequences, including income loss, stress, damage to relationships,
and tolls on mental and physical well-being. While we know quite a bit about
which Americans experience which civil justice problems, we know less about why
this is so, and do not yet understand the social processes that underlie various
groups’ approaches to these problems. Investigating civil justice problems from
the perspective of people who are experiencing them will allow us to design more
effective solutions to common justice problems—solutions tailored to how
different groups actually think about law. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will shed new light on the United States access to justice crisis by uniting
theoretical questions at the core of socio-legal studies and applied questions
at the core of access to justice research. Two data collection components will
be used to understand how people approach seven common justice problems. The
first phase will use a survey design to understand the connections between
demographic characteristics such as race, class, and gender and the problem-
solving routes people consider. The second phase will use a series of in-depth
interviews with a broad cross-section of people over time in a medium-sized U.S.
city who are currently experiencing, or have recently experienced, one of these
key justice problems. This multi-method approach will provide a rigorous
understanding of the social sources of variation in how people think about law,
the ways people approach and experience civil justice problems, and how
different justice problems are related to one another in everyday people’s
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.