* 1946891
* The Dissemination of Undergraduate Research Initiatives that Support Diversity and Inclusion in the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Reginald Blake, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2020
* USD 49,830.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a partnership between the New York City
College of Technology (City Tech), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, and Rutgers
University that provides an opportunity for geoscience experts to come away from
their busy routine activities (most of which do not allow the time and the
setting for thoughtful reflection and engagement about the geosciences in
general and about their own geoscience programs and innovations, in particular)
and to huddle together for three days in a bid to create a geoscience support
group, to exchange ideas about geoscience programs for URMs and marginalized
groups, to document their tested strategies and best practices, and to forward-
think about the shaping and the reshaping of a geoscience landscape that
implements strategies and methodologies that encourages, embraces, and
integrates diversity and inclusion. &lt;br/&gt;The deliverables from this
project will have transformative and sustainable effects on the geosciences. Not
only will the project attract, add, and encourage a new cadre of geoscience
experts to the geoscience writing and publication community, but it will also
increase and proliferate best practices for engaging URMs and other marginalized
groups in the geosciences and thereby potentially increase the successful
participation of these neglected groups in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;This workshop seeks to take
advantage of extant expertise in the atmospheric sciences to bolster the efforts
related to workforce development and inclusive educational practices.
Specifically, the project will: a) collect and compile geoscience research
studies that will potentially advance knowledge about how best to engage URMs
and other marginalized groups in the geosciences; b) provide hand-held guidance
on how to prepare and submit a geoscience educational article that focuses on
diversity and inclusion, and c) train and engage City Tech undergraduates in
geoscience educational research. By providing expert guidance in writing and
submitting geoscience educational research papers to peer-reviewed journals,
articles developed at the workshop will be widely disseminated. Moreover, by
posting the articles on City Tech's OpenLab site, they will be easily accessible
to not only the geoscience community, but also to any group, institution, or
person across the globe who has interest in cultivating diversity in the
geosciences or in any other discipline. One of the highlights of this project is
that it is replicable, adaptable, and adoptable. It may be scaled to involve
more partners, more participants, and ultimately to produce more geoscience
educational research articles that will help to inform how best to expand the
geoscience tent as far as diversity and inclusion are concerned. Through this
proposed project, geoscience practitioners who perhaps never would have
documented their work, now have an opportunity to do
so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.