* 1946999
* CRII: III: Informative Bayesian Learning and Data Gathering Through Expert-Acquired Data
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Mahdi Imani, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Data in many practical problems are acquired according to the decisions or
actions made by users or experts to achieve specific goals. For instance,
genomics and metagenomics data reflect the policy in the mind of biologists
during the intervention process, and data from cyber-physical systems are
impacted by the actions/decisions made by experts/engineers to control/stabilize
a system. The dynamics, complexity, scale and uncertainty of many practical
systems or phenomena necessitate the maximum extraction of information carried
by data for accurate learning/modeling process. The innovation of this project
resides in the fact that it enables optimal incorporation of the user
information during the learning process, as well as learning from multiple data
acquired by non-similar users/experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance the state of the art in learning and data gathering processes, and
contribute to the science base of machine learning, control/learning theory and
Bayesian statistics. Original contributions are expected in: 1) Informative
Bayesian Learning through Experts’ Data for allowing maximum extraction of
information from experts’ data for dynamics or policy learning; 2) Multi-
Fidelity Bayesian Optimization framework for efficient learning of very large
systems with possibly huge amount of uncertainty; 3) Multiple-Expert Bayesian
Learning for efficient incorporation of multiple experts’ data during the
learning process; and 4) Near Optimal Bayesian Deep Reinforcement Learning Data
Gathering for acquiring the most informative data. The applicability to
practical systems will be the key feature of the proposed frameworks in this
project due to their rigorous statistically-oriented nature that enables risk-
based, efficient, real-time and scalable learning and decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.