* 1946442
* Argo Cyber Emerging Scholars (ACES): Developing a Cybersecurity Community of Practice
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Caroline John, University of West Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,222,608.00

This project will establish a cybersecurity community of practice to grow and
sustain a superior cybersecurity workforce through scholarships, professional
and leadership development, high-impact learning practices, competency-based
cybersecurity skills development and community partnerships. The University of
West Florida (UWF) Argo Cyber Emerging Scholars (ACES) program will provide
scholarships to four cohorts of undergraduate and graduate students from the
Cybersecurity, Computer Science, and Information Technology academic programs
over five years. This project will serve as a replicable and scalable model to
develop a highly skilled cybersecurity workforce, and emphasize the recruitment,
retention and advancement of underrepresented and underserved populations,
including women and veterans. UWF is ranked fifth in the nation as a military-
friendly university. UWF provides leadership to advance cybersecurity education
among colleges and universities in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, South
Carolina and Puerto Rico, and will leverage this role to scale and disseminate
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UWF is designated as a Department of Homeland
Security and National Security Agency Center of Academic Excellence (CAE) in
Cyber Defense Education, and as the CAE Regional Resource Center for the
Southeast United States. The project will leverage this Regional Resource Center
role to disseminate the project, share best practice models and resources, and
build a scalable community of practice. A multidisciplinary team-based approach
will be used to mentor students and prepare them for government cybersecurity
work roles. Students will participate in cybersecurity career readiness
activities through high impact learning practices. These will include research,
internships and competency-based skills development using the Florida Cyber
Range, which will be mapped to the CAE Knowledge Units and NICE Cybersecurity
Workforce Framework. The project will promote the participation of women by
establishing professional mentoring and networking programs for female students
through the Women in Cybersecurity Florida Affiliate. The project team will
recruit veterans and provide training opportunities to attract them to UWF
cybersecurity programs and prepare them for government cybersecurity work roles.
The project will also develop a pilot transfer pathway between a community
college in Florida and UWF. UWF’s partnerships with federal, state, local and
tribal government organizations will be leveraged and expanded to help students
find cybersecurity career opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds
proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and
aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity
workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.