* 1946917
* Dissertation Grant: Antibiotic Resistance, Planetary Crisis, and Bacteriophage Futures in the 21st Century
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Michael Fischer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 8,840.00

This award supports doctoral dissertation research that focuses on critical
socio-technical facets of antibiotic resistant pathogens (also known as
"superbugs"). It will examine the scientific, economic, technological, and
ecological impacts of antibiotic-resistant infectious entities on human society
in the 21st century. In doing so, it will uncover the cultural values, political
experiences, and historical contingencies that lead to the dominance of
antibiotics for infection-control in 20th century. It will then focus on an
alternative approach that uses bacteriophage technologies as a promising
frontier in a post-antibiotic world. The results of this research will serve to
create civic awareness and to promote informed public participation in research,
design, and agendas of emerging life-sciences. It will also be useful to
policymakers, regulators and scientists in developing of socially-grounded
strategies for confronting antibiotic resistance at local, national, and global
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project examines historical and
socio-technical dimensions of the diminishing efficacy of antibiotics. It will
outline the crisis, the causes, and the catastrophic potentials of antibiotic
failure; that will in turn serve as a locus of an examination of the political
and ethical stakes in the production of scientific knowledge, and of the ongoing
challenges in deployments of resurgent technologies like bacteriophages to
secure human wellbeing. The results of this project will further our
understanding of the nexus of extant industrial practices, toxic ecologies, and
recalcitrant organisms implicated in the development of planetary antibiotic
resistance, conceptualized as the contemporary legacy of the 20th century mass-
deployment of synthetic antimicrobial agents; bacteriophages provide a promising
frontier in a post-antibiotic, having the potential to unbind that nexus. This
project will also reveal reticulated relationships between scientific
epistemologies, technological materials, political histories, cultural
practices, and planetary futures; it will generate wider conceptions of the
ecology of human-bacterial-animal-viral entanglements and their
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.