* 1946338
* Conference: Developing US Leaders and US Leadership in the Mechanics of Materials and Structures; St. Louis, Missouri; 13-15 October 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Guy Genin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2020
* USD 34,960.00

The mechanics of materials and structures has been an area of US leadership for
nearly a century. Leaders like the late Paul Paris, who developed the fracture
mechanics framework to design with metals against failure from repeated loading,
enabled US dominance in the aircraft industry that continues to this day. Thus,
the mechanics of materials and structures, more than any other field, has
enabled the great prosperity and welfare that we enjoy today, and the
continuance of US leadership in this area is crucial for our continued
prosperity and welfare. This conference will help develop future leaders in this
area and support current researchers in this area by providing them with
mentoring and guidance, by enabling cross-disciplinary seeding of new research,
and by enabling communication of key results both within the field and in the
broader community of engineering science. The grant will enable the entire
engineering science community to enjoy the benefits of a National Science
Foundation grantees meeting. The event will enable young researchers from
diverse backgrounds to connect with established, funded researchers in the area,
and also with NSF funding directors, and will allow MOMS researchers to showcase
their work to attendees of the SES conference. The broader impacts of this
conference lie in the historical economic impact of developing the field of
mechanics of structures and materials as a whole, and in the development of
young researchers from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will
fund a series of grantee meetings, networking events, and outreach events at the
56th Annual Meeting of the Society of Engineering Science (SES) at Washington
University in St. Louis, Missouri, from October 13-15, 2019. A grantee meeting
of PIs from the NSF Mechanics of Materials and Structures (MOMS) program will be
held that will enable MOMS researchers to expand their impact by disseminating
their work to a high-level, broad audience. The conference will afford ample
opportunity for students to interact with internationally leading professors
both scientifically and socially. A mentoring lunch and opportunities for one-
on-one meetings with NSF program managers will enable investigators across
career stages to gain insight into pathways to success in these areas. A
specific aim is to help young investigators maximize career development
opportunities at this conference by providing them comfortable foundations of
both scientific background and networking. Careful evaluation of the event will
be performed to optimize offerings and program structure for future
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.