* 1946180
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Safeguarding and Enhancing the Experience of Public Internet Users.
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* William Staples, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 516,000.00

The ready availability of computing resources such as word processing, social
media, and broadband Internet access has become a social and economic necessity.
However, the way in which those resources are accessed is influenced by larger
issues of social and economic inequality. Those who do not have their own
computer to access digital resources must rely on public computing systems such
as those offered by public libraries. This population faces a unique set of
challenges: their computing lives are resource-limited, transient, and less
private and secure than those who own their computers and access the Web through
broadband at home. Public Internet usersâ€™ engagement with library computers is
somewhat analogous to the way people experiencing physical homelessness relate
to a temporary shelter: the facility may provide basic necessities and be an
essential resource for them, but it is not a substitute for the many benefits
and control people have in their personal home. This project seeks to understand
and mitigate the challenges faced by people who must use public resources to
connect to the Internet and fully use its resources. A key contribution will be
the development of a hybrid software-hardware prototype device. The device would
allow a person to have a seamless, secure computing session carried out and
maintained on the device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes the design
of a functional prototype, and iterative tests of the device in collaboration
with members of the target population, incorporating their experiences in the
design process. For those persons, the lack of secure, private computing
resources undermines their participation in new forms of civic involvement. This
work can lead to a new, inexpensive, and easily replicated technology that could
be adopted widely by public libraries in many different communities. Doing so
would address the security and functional challenges of citizens without private
Internet access and advance the goal of a secure and trustworthy cyberspace.
This societal benefit will address the needs of under-represented and under-
served populations and ameliorate key aspects of the unequal distribution of the
risks and resources associated with online life for some of our most vulnerable
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.