* 1946626
* SFS: Applied Cybersecurity Training
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Konstantin Busch, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,702,654.00

Cybersecurity professionals perform essential roles in the protection of
critical commercial and government infrastructure from cyberattacks. These roles
include actively defending computer systems, analyzing malicious software
involved in attacks, investigation and attribution, cybersecurity education, and
more. Unfortunately, demand currently far exceeds the supply of highly qualified
cybersecurity professionals. One of the most pressing needs is in the federal
sector, where salaries are often lower than in the commercial sector.
Compounding this problem is the fact that many students are unaware of the
interesting job opportunities available in the federal government. This project
will provide scholarships to undergraduate and graduate students studying
cybersecurity at Louisiana State University (LSU). Students will receive a solid
education in cybersecurity, marketable skills, and exposure to cybersecurity
opportunities available in the federal government. Recruiting students from
populations currently underrepresented in the cybersecurity workforce, including
women and minorities, will be a priority. This project will support the
expansion of the cybersecurity workforce in the United States while nurturing
highly-qualified cybersecurity students and enabling each of them to make a
personal impact in a field that is critically important to national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LSU has a strong cybersecurity program that
offers students the opportunity to study a variety of topics in applied
cybersecurity and to conduct research using state-of-the-art facilities. The
project will offer scholarships to 21 students over a five-year period to
participate in an intensive academic program in cybersecurity, which includes
several important activities. These activities will include both coursework and
research in cutting-edge areas such as memory forensics, reverse engineering,
malware analysis, blockchains, machine learning, and network security. Students
will also participate in a federal internship program and obtain at least one
cybersecurity certification.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the CyberCorpsÂ® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals
establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with
the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce.
Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.