* 1946910
* Collaborative Research: Glial regulation of extracellular potassium as an underlying developmental mechanism for the male-female difference in pacemaker neuron firing frequency
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Gunther Zupanc, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2024
* USD 886,385.00

Differences in body form and behavior between males and females are well
established in numerous species, but little is known about how they are
organized during development. Electric communication by the brown ghost
knifefish provides a unique opportunity for elucidating the cellular mechanisms
mediating one such difference. In this weakly electric fish, males produce
electric organ discharges that contain higher frequencies than those of females.
The difference in discharge frequencies is controlled by the pacemaker nucleus,
a neural circuit in the brainstem. Using an interdisciplinary strategy, a novel
mechanistic hypothesis will be tested: astrocytes (a glial cell type) regulate
(buffer) extracellular potassium ions differently in males and females, and this
is responsible for the difference in their electric organ discharges. Besides
providing new insights into the molecular and cellular mechanisms that underlie
one specific behavior that is dimorphic between males and females, this research
will also advance knowledge about the role of astrocytes in potassium buffering
in the nervous system, and about the regulation of neural networks by these
ions. The latter two topics play an important role in the etiology of
pathological conditions involving pattern-generating neural circuits (for
example, high-frequency epileptic seizures are thought to result from an
impairment in potassium buffering that enhances the susceptibility for such
seizures). Because of the interdisciplinary nature of this research, multiple
opportunities are also provided for training students in diverse disciplines,
and for curriculum development at the interface between biology and other STEM
disciplines. Undergraduates will be involved in carrying out this research
project via directed study courses being offered at both Northeastern University
and the University of Virginia; 6-month internships will also be offered for
students from Northeastern University to participate in the parts of the project
conducted and at the University of Virginia. The PI and co-PI will also use
parts of this research in laboratory-based upper-level undergraduate courses
that they teach at their respective institutions, as well as engaging in
outreach activities at local high schools and a series of STEM events for the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electric organ discharge of the weakly
electric fish Apteronotus leptorhynchus is a robust and well-characterized
behavioral system. The frequency of these discharges is reliably different in
males and females, and controlled by the neural activity of the pacemaker
nucleus, an endogenous oscillator in the medulla oblongata. The neurons
critically involved in the generation of these oscillations are the pacemaker
and relay cells, which are enveloped by astrocytic syncytia. Significant male-
female differences exist in the morphology of these astrocytes, their expression
of glia-specific proteins, and the gap-junction coupling of individuals cells
within the syncytium. The study will test the hypothesis that the development of
the male-female difference in the frequency of the electric organ discharge is
regulated through modulation by the astrocytic buffering capacity of
extracellular potassium ions in the pacemaker nucleus, thereby resulting in
changes in the extracellular potassium concentration and ultimately in the
oscillation frequency of the neural network composed of pacemaker and relay
cells. To achieve this objective, a multi- and interdisciplinary approach will
be employed, including morphological and molecular analysis of the association
of the astrocytic syncytium with the pacemaker and relay cells; pharmacological
manipulation of glial function and examination of its behavioral effect;
electrophysiological characterization of the ionic mechanisms of astrocytes that
control the firing frequency of the pacemaker nucleus; and computational
modeling of (i) the uptake and redistribution of potassium ions by the
astrocytic syncytium, (ii) the effect of this action on the frequency of the
neural oscillations of the pacemaker nucleus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.