* 1946952
* Western Algebraic Geometry Symposium
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Sebastian Casalaina-Martin, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 10/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

The Western Algebraic Geometry Symposium (WAGS) is a series of biannual
conferences in the field of algebraic geometry. This award supports six WAGS
conferences which will be held at University of Utah on November 2-3, 2019, at
Pomona College in Spring 2020, at Stanford in Fall 2020, at University of
Colorado in Spring 2021, at University of Washington in Fall 2021, at UCLA in
Spring 2022. (While the first two locations are established, some variation in
location may happen as a consequence of unforeseen circumstances.) Algebraic
geometry is a central subject in mathematics, with deep and substantial
connections to almost every aspect of modern mathematics: besides its central
role in fundamental research, several recent applications of algebraic geometry
(to robotics, big data, machine learning, financial mathematics etc) have made
its contributions to society at large more immediate and visible. This broad and
active field is widely represented in the Western United States. The primary
goal of WAGS is to foster knowledge and communication among members of the
algebraic geometry community in the western part of the United States;
particular attention is given to fostering an equitable and inclusive
environment where all members of the algebraic geometry community can find
stimulus and support in pursing excellence in their mathematical activity.
Information about the conference series may be found at
www.wagsymposium.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For almost twenty years
WAGS has served as a catalyst for the development of algebraic geometry in the
Western region of the United States. The collaboration between Cascini, Hacon
and McKernan that lead to massive progress in the minimal model program was born
through interactions at WAGS. At WAGS Bertram was first exposed to Bridgeland
stability conditions, which are now an important aspect of his research
activity. Several young researchers, including the PI of this grant, found their
PhD thesis problem or benefited from interactions with senior mathematicians at
WAGS. Graduate students on the job market have had the occasion to present their
work in WAGS poster sessions. Besides continuing the excellent work that has
been done, WAGS is seeking to enlarge and improve its scope: besides selecting
excellent researchers and communicators as speakers, we endeavor to give a broad
representation of both areas of algebraic geometry and of speakers; besides
poster sessions, we want to introduce capsule talks and panels to aid the
development of younger mathematicians; in particular we are seeking to devote
the first afternoon of the conference to some activity organized by and for
graduate students, as a way to give junior mathematician ownership of part of
the conference with a minimal organizational burden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.