* 1946557
* CyberCorps SFS Renewal: Strengthening the National Cybersecurity Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2026
* Daniel Andresen, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2026
* USD 2,061,276.00

The project will continue the CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program
at Kansas State University (KSU), building on a history of producing high-
quality graduates that fill national, state, local, and tribal government
demands for skilled cybersecurity personnel. Through a newly restructured and
streamlined cybersecurity curriculum, students will receive a comprehensive
education in cybersecurity theory, fundamentals, and the state of the art. This
project will also result in a strategic plan for cybersecurity that includes
research focus areas, measurable goals, and a plan to improve and evolve the
program. As Kansas and the Midwest have a large under-served, mostly rural and
first-generation student population, KSU's renewed CyberCorps® program will help
broaden the participation of diverse and under-represented groups. KSU is
uniquely situated to recruit: (1) veteran, active duty, and non-scholarship
Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) students through our proximity to, and
established relationship with, the US Army’s Midwest Regional Network Enterprise
Center at Fort Riley and the Kansas Air National Guard in Wichita; (2) first-
generation college students from under-served rural areas and from Kansas
designated Opportunity Zones, through our strong ties to rural schools and
community colleges. This training and education program will result in a
cybersecurity workforce that can readily adapt to new situations, technologies,
and computing modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the umbrella of a
university-wide Center for Information and Systems Assurance, CyberCorps® has
been synergistic with KSU's National Security Agency and the Department of
Homeland Security National Center of Academic Excellence in Cybersecurity
Research (CAE-R) designation in attracting and retaining students interested in
cybersecurity. The number of students enrolled in cybersecurity courses was
80-95% higher than the number of CyberCorps® scholarship recipients. The
training and education program will include special interest areas in
cybersecurity, hands-on experience with real-world cybersecurity problems
through the multi-stakeholder Information Security Research and Education
(INSuRE) project, and an annual goal and performance review system to tailor
instruction and research involvement to the learning style of each student. KSU
faculty provide CyberCorps® scholars with one-on-one mentoring and personalized
research opportunities. Extra-curricular activities such as the Cyber Defense
Club (CDC) promote self-study with small-group cybersecurity/system
administration activities, as well as trips to regional and national
competitions. The CDC competition team was instrumental in allowing KSU to host
the annual Central Area Networking and Security Workshop (CANSec), a regional
cybersecurity workshop and cyber defense competition, in 2018. Additional
outreach includes a K-12 mentorship program, the annual Association of Computing
Machinery Hour of Code for grade school students, YMCA daycare computer science
lessons, cybersecurity competitions, and a "Retro Gaming Night" at the local
Flint Hills Discovery Center museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds
proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and
aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity
workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.