* 1947558
* Collaborative Proposal: Miocene Climate Extremes: A Ross Sea Perspective from IODP Expedition 374 and DSDP Leg 28 Marine Sediments
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* R Leckie, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 352,081.00

Nontechnical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Presently, Antarctica’s glaciers are melting as
Earth’s atmosphere and the Southern Ocean warm. Not much is known about how
Antarctica’s ice sheets might respond to ongoing and future warming, but such
knowledge is important because Antarctica’s ice sheets might raise global sea
levels significantly with continued melting. Over time, mud accumulates on the
sea floor around Antarctica that is composed of the skeletons and debris of
microscopic marine organisms and sediment from the adjacent continent. As this
mud is deposited, it creates a record of past environmental and ecological
changes, including ocean depth, glacier advance and retreat, ocean temperature,
ocean circulation, marine ecosystems, ocean chemistry, and continental
weathering. Scientists interested in understanding how Antarctica’s glaciers and
ice sheets might respond to ongoing warming can use a variety of physical,
biological, and chemical analyses of these mud archives to determine how long
ago the mud was deposited and how the ice sheets, oceans, and marine ecosystems
responded during intervals in the past when Earth’s climate was warmer. In this
project, researchers from the University of South Florida, University of
Massachusetts, and Northern Illinois University will reconstruct the depth,
ocean temperature, weathering and nutrient input, and marine ecosystems in the
central Ross Sea from ~17 to 13 million years ago, when the warm Miocene Climate
Optimum transitioned to a cooler interval with more extensive ice sheets. Record
will be generated from new sediments recovered during the International Ocean
Discovery Program (IODP) Expedition 374 and legacy sequences recovered in the
1970’s during the Deep Sea Drilling Program. Results will be integrated into ice
sheet and climate models to improve the accuracy of predictions. The research
provides experience for three graduate students and seven undergraduate students
via a multi-institutional REU program focused on increasing diversity in
Antarctic Earth Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Deep-sea sediments reveal that the Miocene Climatic Optimum
(MCO) was the warmest climate interval of the last ~20 Ma, was associated with
global carbon cycle changes and ice growth, and immediately preceded the Middle
Miocene Climate Transition (MMCT; ~14 Ma), one of three major intervals of
Antarctic ice expansion and global cooling. Ice-proximal studies are required to
assess: where and when ice grew, ice sheet extent, continental shelf geometry,
high-latitude heat and moisture supply, oceanic and/or atmospheric temperature
influence on ice dynamics, regional sea ice extent, meltwater input, and regions
of bottom water formation. Existing studies indicate that ice expanded beyond
the Transantarctic Mountains and onto the prograding Ross Sea continental shelf
multiple times between ~17 and 13.5 Ma. However, these records are either too
ice-proximal/terrestrial to adequately assess ocean-ice interactions or under-
studied. To address this data gap, this work will: 1) generate
micropaleontologic and geochemical records of oceanic and atmospheric
temperature, water depth, ocean circulation, and paleoproductivity from existing
Ross Sea marine sedimentary sequences, and 2) use these proxy records to test
the hypothesis that dynamic glacial expansion in the Ross Sea sector during the
MCO was driven by heat and moisture transport to the high latitudes during an
interval of enhanced climate sensitivity. Downcore geochemical and
micropaleontologic studies will focus on an expanded (120 m/my) early to middle
Miocene (~17-16 Ma) diatom-bearing/rich mudstone/diatomite unit from IODP Site
U1521, drilled on the Ross Sea continental shelf. A hiatus (~16-14.6 Ma)
suggests ice expansion during the MCO, followed by diamictite to mudstone unit
indicative of slight retreat (14.6 -14 Ma) immediately preceding the MMCT. Data
from Site U1521 will be integrated with foraminiferal geochemical and
micropaleontologic data from DSDP Leg 28 (1972/73) and RISP J-9 (1978-79) to
develop a MCO to late Miocene regional view of ocean-ice sheet interactions
using legacy core material previously processed for foraminifera. This
integrated record will: 1) document the timing and extent of glacial advances
and retreats across the prograding Ross Sea shelf during the middle and late
Miocene, 2) provide orbital-scale paleotemperature reconstructions (TEX86,
Mg/Ca, δ18O, MBT/CBT) to establish atmosphere-ocean-ice interactions during an
extreme high-latitude warm interval, and 3) provide orbital-scale
nutrient/paleoproductivity, ocean circulation, and paleoenvironmental data
required to assess climate feedbacks associated with Miocene Antarctic ice sheet
and global climate system development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.