* 1947889
* CRII: AF: The Polynomial Method in Learning, Communication, and Quantum Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Mark Bun, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Modern computing offers exciting paradigms for processing and analyzing large
datasets. Machine learning, data-stream analytics, and quantum computing have
revolutionized areas ranging from electronic commerce, to bioinformatics, to the
development of secure cryptosystems. This project takes a unified approach
toward understanding both the power and the fundamental limitations of each of
these computing paradigms. Tasks which can be performed efficiently in each of
these models correspond to mathematically simple objects, namely, functions
which can be approximately represented by low-degree polynomials. The goals of
this project are to understand which functions have these simple representations
and to identify specific new implications of this understanding within each of
the aforementioned areas. Students of all levels will play an essential role in
carrying out this research and will be engaged in a broad cross-section of
research areas within the foundations of computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main technical components of this
research project. The first component will hone the body of techniques for
understanding two measures of how well functions can be approximated by low-
degree polynomials: approximate degree and threshold degree. These notions
already suffice to capture how polynomial approximations arise in many areas of
computing. This research will strengthen and improve the versatility of the
"method of dual polynomials," a method for proving lower bounds on these
quantities that is based on linear programming duality. The second component
will lay foundations for applying these techniques to more general objects,
including sets of and distributions over polynomial representations. These more
general objects more accurately capture powerful models in machine learning and
quantum computing, against which techniques for proving lower bounds are
lacking, but seem necessary to tackle longstanding open
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.