* 1947752
* I-Corps:  Electrochemical Platform for Chemical Synthesis from Carbon Monoxide
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Dan Freeman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
development technology that addresses a worldwide need for effective carbon
utilization. Production of fossil-derived chemicals generates over 1.5 gigatons
of carbon dioxide annually, comprising 15% of total emissions. Harnessing waste
carbon from other sectors to generate these same chemicals has the dual effect
of dramatically lowering emissions and reducing dependence on oil and natural
gas. This I-Corps Team is developing a scalable, electrically driven chemical
synthesis device that can transform waste carbon into a wide variety of chemical
products, satisfying needs in both small-scale specialty and high-volume
production. The targeted compounds represent over $350 billion in annual revenue
and form the building blocks of plastics, adhesives, pharmaceuticals, and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will accelerate commercial
development of a scalable, modular electrochemical platform centered around
high-rate conversion of carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide serves as a practical
starting material, which can be derived from emitted carbon dioxide, biowaste,
and even steel production through methods that are commercially available.
Previous laboratory research has identified the keys for effective and stable
production of both high-volume multi-carbon chemicals and functionalized
specialty compounds, lending the technology broad reach to serve a range of
potential customers. The focus at this stage is to identify short-term and long-
term product/market fit to guide technical development priorities and optimize
towards the chemical products that directly match customer needs. Business model
assumptions will be continuously tested and refined, resulting in a validated
business plan with a clear path to commercial chemical production with this
critical piece of carbon utilization technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.