* 1947875
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: GI CATALYTIC TRACK: Cyberinfrastructure for Intelligent High-Resolution Snow Cover Inference from Cubesat Imagery
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* David Shean, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 552,524.00

The ability to observe the Earth from space at relevant spatial and temporal
scales is key to understanding how hydrological and ecological systems will
respond to climate change. In particular, high spatial and temporal resolution
(meter scale, daily frequency) observations of snow-covered areas in mountain
regions are critical as snow is important for water resources, driving the
seasonal hydrological regimes of the Western U.S., with significant impacts on
ecological communities. Planet Labs, Inc. (Planet) is a promising new source of
commercial Cubesat high-resolution imagery that can be used in environmental
science, as it has both high spatial (3.0-4.0 m) and temporal (1-2 day)
resolution. This project will develop open-source, cloud-based
cyberinfrastructure including an automated pipeline for processing, analyzing
and interpreting Planet Cubesat image data using a machine learning approach to
infer snow cover at meter-scale resolution. All models and data products will be
openly available for use and modification by scientific communities. The project
will support the training of students, postdocs and other early-career
researchers through training events, special interest groups, and incubator
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, remotely-sensed snow observations
with adequate temporal (daily) resolution are either captured at a spatial scale
far too large to be relevant to high-resolution hydrology and ecology studies
(e.g. MODIS, 500m) or are appropriate in spatial scale (1-10 m) but have
inadequate temporal resolution and are cost-prohibitive (e.g. airborne LiDAR).
The recent increase of commercial Earth Observation data with high
spatiotemporal resolution may bridge the gap between ground-based and low-
resolution satellite observation data. This project will focus on using
convolutional neural networks-based models to couple ground and airborne-derived
snow observations with Planet imagery in three different montane systems in
Washington, California, and Colorado. These sites have very good coverage of
ground and airborne snow observations at high resolution (3m) collected by the
NASA Airborne Snow Observatory (ASO) and SnowEx missions, which will be used in
the training and validation of the models. The project will develop advanced
cyberinfrastructure using scalable virtual machines, distributed collaborative
architecture, reusable computational frameworks, and replicable machine learning
workflows to empower Earth scientists to access, process and generate high-
resolution snow products from Cubesat data. The project will adopt open-source
strategies and ensure that all data, algorithms, and architecture comply with
FAIR data principles and reproducibility and will include training materials
that promote the adoption of the infrastructure and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.