* 1947410
* Estimating Remaining Life and Availability of Power Semiconductor Devices using Sympathetic String Theory, Dynamic Safe Operating Area and Ultrasound Resonators
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Ahmed Hassan, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2024
* USD 301,413.00

Ultrasound based Lifetime Prediction of Power Electronic Modules using the
Concept of Dynamic Safe Operating Area&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;A power
converter is an integral part of most consumer and industrial products needing
electric power. Various segments such as upcoming all-electric aircraft
industry, existing motor drive market, space mission, electric automotive,
health sector, renewable energy market, high voltage direct current (HVDC)
substation and many others require the use of power converters. Power
semiconductor modules are indispensable elements in any power conversion system,
especially where heavy but critical power is required. Unfortunately, these
power semiconductor modules are failure-prone and when they fail, results can be
catastrophic. When thermal and electrical stress factors are subjected to large
power semiconductor modules, natural degradation takes place, which eventually
degrades their performance and leads to failures even before their expected
lifespan, thus bringing down the system and cause economic, safety, and
environmental problems. Finding the remaining life of a power converter is the
ultimate objective to ensure uninterrupted operation of a power electronic
system. Using the proposed methods, any power electronic application requiring
heavy but critical power will be benefitted. This project will significantly
help the manufacturers and end users to increase the system reliability by
deploying a self-monitoring system that can be applied to the existing
insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) and metal–oxide–semiconductor field-
effect transistor (MOSFET) module packaging. This solution can also provide
real-time alarms to identify device’s changing health conditions, broaden the
existing knowledge of the degradation/failure process and predict remaining
useful life. Establishing such an advanced reliability framework will lead to a
new real-time health monitoring tool, which will benefit any power electronic
application with high power ratings. &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to find a
comprehensive solution to determine the real-time state of health and remaining
life of a power semiconductor module using online in-situ, non-invasive
technique based on ultrasound resonators and the knowledge of dynamic safe
operating area (SOA). Two research outcomes contribute to this goal: The first
part determines the level of aging using embedded ultrasound sensors, which will
be live and non-intrusive in nature, and can be applied to existing IGBT and
MOSFET module packaging. For the first time, sympathetic string theory will be
used to associate ultrasound with device degradation. The second part introduces
the concept of age depended SOA, which is believed to be the underlying reason
for device failure especially when the device is subjected to accidental over
voltage/current. In short, the project envisions that device degradation can be
estimated by accomplishing an accurate online degradation monitoring tool, which
will determine the dynamic SOA. The correlation between aging and dynamic SOA
provides the useful remaining life of the device or the availability of a
circuit. Therefore, this research will provide an integrated framework enabling
autonomous health assessment for power electronic converter systems, and the
outcome of this project will significantly improve the lifespan of the power
converters by performing preventive scheduled maintenance, which will eventually
lead to increased system availability and reduced
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.