* 1947439
* Grain and Phase Boundaries in Mantle Assemblages: Atom Probe and Electron Microscopy/Diffraction Approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Reid Cooper, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 514,496.00

The research pursued under this grant seeks to enhance understanding of the
chemistry and physics of grain boundaries in crystalline solids, with particular
emphasis on boundaries in silicate materials representative of the upper mantle
of the Earth. Typical crystalline solids consist of myriad crystals (grains),
frequently having random spatial orientation, bonded together across ribbon-
like, two-dimensional boundaries. These boundaries have specific structure and
chemistry, different in fundamental ways from the grains on either side; the
boundaries frequently control the physical properties of the solid overall,
e.g., strength, viscosity, electrical and ionic conductivity, optical
transmittance, etc. In Earth and planetary science, the community’s interests
reflect the breadth of these properties, although particularly the mechanical
and electrochemical ones: boundaries between grains of the same mineral,
boundaries between grains of different minerals (phase boundaries) and
boundaries between minerals and melts affect directly phenomena such as (i) the
rate of mantle deformation (which effects plate tectonics), (ii) the attenuation
of seismic wave energy, and (iii) the chemical composition of magmas
(particularly of trace elements, which facilitates understanding of melting and
magma-migration processes in the Earth). Prominent in this specific research is
the application of a new and exciting analytical technique to the study of
grain- and phase-boundary structure and chemistry: atom probe tomography (APT).
With appropriate care in specimen preparation and data analysis, APT can
characterize boundary chemistry at the very atomic scale, allowing precise
questions concerning materials dynamics to be posed and scrutinized. A beauty of
the approach is that one can so learn the physics of scaling of mechanical and
chemical responses from the sub-nanometer to the kilometer-plus dimensions. The
research has implications both economic and in workforce development. Grain- and
phase-boundary structure and chemistry in ionic and covalent-bonded solids (as
are minerals) is a primary concern in the development of advanced ceramics for
battery/fuel cell, photovoltaic, and structural applications. Employing APT in
an effective way for the chemical design of grain/phase boundaries is a direct
extension of the research supported here. The “effective way” caveat has
everything to do with advances in APT approach (specimen preparation, imaging
conditions, data analysis): these necessary advances will constitute no small
part of the education accumulated—and promulgated—by the program participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research specifically focuses on grain and phase
boundary structure and chemistry in (a) deformed rock of upper-mantle
chemistry/mineralogy (olivine plus pyroxenes) and (b) olivine grain boundary
interface(s) with a host magma. The former focus examines mantle aggregates
deformed (experimentally) in diffusion creep–grain/phase boundary sliding.
Characterizing the impact of the spatial orientation of deviatoric stress on
boundary structure and chemistry can elucidate aspects of the physics of plastic
instability in the mantle—a crucial issue in creating and sustaining plate
tectonics. The latter focus addresses issues in the crystallization of basaltic
magma and the role grain boundaries might play in (i) storing incompatible trace
elements as well as (ii) affecting/effecting the mobilization of large magma
bodies that are partially crystallized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.