* 1947087
* Standard Grant: Genetown: Tracing the History of the Biotechnology Industry in the Greater Boston Area, 1973-2000
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Robin Scheffler, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 02/29/2024
* USD 375,799.00

This project analyses the evolution of the biotechnology industry in the Greater
Boston Area from the 1970s-2000. During this period Boston had the densest
concentration of biotech firms and housed leading academic biomedical research
centers in the United States, but the development of this dense biotechnology
cluster remains understudied. This project would first develop a detailed
history of the biotechnology industry in Boston, conceptualizing it as an
interconnected regional ecology of actors and organizations, whereas past
research focused largely on the influence of individual firms, typically in San
Francisco. Second, the project would focus on issues of work and labor in
biotechnology, considering the extent to which the behavior of biotechnology
firms and choice of their locations are influenced by the convergence of capital
investment and academic culture and values. Finally, the project would use this
case to conceptualize the development of bioeconomies centered on innovation in
the life sciences to understand how science, universities, and public policy
enable economic growth, and who benefits from it. Methodologically, the project
is based in oral histories from scientists, entrepreneurs, academic experts,
citizens, and government officials, and in analyses of materials in newspapers
and historical archives. The project will produce a book aimed at a general
readership, and specialized articles in urban history, innovation studies, and
science and technology studies. The Principal Investigator will also design an
undergraduate class on the history of biotechnology, maintain a collection of
oral history interviews for future researchers, and contribute to museum
exhibits documenting biotechnology around Boston. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
studying the development of the biotechnology on a regional basis rather than
through the experience of individual entrepreneurs or companies, the project
provides a more complete picture of how the "bioeconomy,” a new species of
innovation-based economic growth, developed and functioned in practice. The rise
of biotechnology was not only a product of the convergence of entrepreneurship
and scientific innovation, but also a consequence of shifts in the identity of
working biologists and regional redevelopment initiatives by areas facing
deindustrialization. In turn this entails expanding understanding of the types
of people who had an impact on the industry’s growth. Addressing and analyzing
these perspectives allows the project to contribute to broader discussions
regarding how the life sciences, university research, and investors produce
innovation and economic development, and raises concerns that current expert
discussions of the bioeconomy fail to account for the protest and dissent that
shadowed the development of the bioeconomy in places such as the Greater Boston
Area. The project thus provides a more critical and nuanced investigation of
innovation hubs in urban areas and practical information for politicians,
policy-makers, and other stakeholders to understand the costs and benefits of
promoting high-tech sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.