* 1947580
* CRII: SaTC: An Integrated Treatment of Ransomware Through Microarchitecture and Software Solutions
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Anys Bacha, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2024
* USD 191,000.00

Cyber-criminals are constantly seeking ways to make their attacks profitable. As
a result, various mobile users, businesses, and government agencies are falling
victim to a new disruptive class of malware known as ransomware. Ransomware
allows attackers to maliciously encrypt user data then extort them for ransom in
return for restoring their encrypted data. This project aims to develop novel
detection and recovery solutions to defend against ransomware across mobile and
computer systems while introducing minimal performance
overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate novel defenses
against ransomware attacks. The first part of this project will focus on
harnessing convolutional neural networks for ransomware detection across
heterogeneous architectures that span mobile and computer systems. This work
devises a framework that maps application instructions into different spatial
representations. It will then evaluate the effectiveness of such representations
in detecting ransomware with convolutional neural networks. The second part will
focus on the development of a new end-to-end solution that spans the
microarchitecture, firmware, and operating system layers to recover maliciously
encrypted data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to
substantially improve the overall security of systems and data availability
against ransomware threats across the computing spectrum and enhance the
availability of personal and business data that drives our society. Given the
emphasis of this project on data, which serves as the impetus of our society,
the work is expected to have a significant impact on the computing industry,
society, law enforcement, and United States national security. In addition, this
project integrates the research activities with education and outreach to
broaden the participation of women and minorities in computer science
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data generated through this project will
be deposited into Deep Blue Data, the University of Michiganâ€™s institutional
data repository. Content in Deep Blue Data is stored on network storage with
proper backup in campus data centers. Published results and collected data will
be available via this system over the duration of the project and for a minimum
of three years after the conclusion of the award. Further information on the
project repository will be made accessible at
https://anysbacha.github.io.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.