* 1947975
* CRII: III: Effective Geometry of Urban Travel Patterns
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Saray Shai, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 173,650.00

The speed and scale of urbanization brings tremendous challenges in developing
sustainable cities. Half of the global population already lives in cities, and
by 2050 two-thirds of the world’s people are expected to live in urban areas.
This project aims to address open challenges in urban planning, such as traffic
congestions and accessibility, using novel mathematical and computational tools.
Specifically, the project combines the mathematics of Riemannian geometry with
large-scale computer simulations of urban travel in road networks. The work will
result in new algorithms to extract the geometrical features and rules of urban
travel, which facilitate the design of urban mobility solutions for the
sustainable development of cities. Furthermore, this research will support the
training of STEM researchers, and the development of open-source software that
will make this new line of research more accessible to other researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project are divided into two
thrusts. The first thrust develops theoretical and algorithmic tools to compute
a Riemanian metric such that flows on the network are distance-minimizing
geodesics for that metric. One can imagine a road map where instead of having a
fixed scale (for example, every inch on the map corresponds to 1 mile), all
roads have the same speed. Thus, distances on the map represent travel time
rather than actual distances. The main idea is to represent network flows by
vector fields attaching a vector to every node in the network, which shows the
direction and speed of flow from that node to some fixed target node. The
researchers will develop strategies to infer a metric tensor from these vector
fields and show connections between geometric features (such as curvature and
volume) and topological features of the original network. The second thrust will
focus on analyzing real road maps and travel time data in cities around the
world, and use the framework to classify cities based on their geometry and how
it varies with time. The work will demonstrate how geometrical tools can be used
to address open challenges in urban transportation systems such as traffic
congestions and accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.