* 1947851
* CRII:RI:Topological Methods for Robotic Perception
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* William Beksi, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 03/31/2023
* USD 191,000.00

Robotics is at the forefront of technologies that rely on point cloud data
produced by 3D sensors, such as stereo, structured light, time-of-light, light
detection, and ranging. The 3D representation of the environment provided by
these sensors can facilitate robotic tasks such as object detection, pose
estimation, motion planning, grasping, and more. In contrast to other data
modalities, working with 3D point clouds poses several significant challenges
due to the presence of artifacts, non-uniform noise, and variation in density.
Robust real-time robotic applications have yet to be reliably achieved due to
the complications of processing 3D point cloud data. Moreover, research on 3D
point cloud processing has focused on extracting geometric features while
ignoring the topological aspects of the data. Understanding the topology of the
data is important to overcoming these limitations. This research lays the
foundation for understanding the function of topological information obtained
from diverse sensor data and advancing applications that are central to robotic
perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to enhance the capabilities
of perception systems used in robotics applications by developing a framework
that can extract topological features from 3D point cloud data. The crux of the
proposal relies on using persistent homology to study topological features, such
as connected components, holes, and voids, at multiple scales. The research plan
includes the design of algorithms and data structures along with robotic
perception experiments evaluating these concepts. Specifically, this research
will (i) provide fundamental insights into the role of persistent homology for
handling 3D point clouds, (ii) design advanced algorithms and data structures
for obtaining topological features from 3D sensor data, (iii) determine how
topological persistence can complement existing geometric approaches for
improving 3D point cloud processing, and (iv) explore new avenues of robotic
perception skills that make use of agile, robust, and stable topological data
analysis of 3D point clouds. In doing so, this project has the potential to
significantly improve the perceptual capabilities of robots. An open source
library consisting of software developed for this project will be publicly
released for educational and research purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.