* 1947096
* Standard Research Grant: Community Science and Environmental Conservation
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Michael Weisberg, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 463,254.00

Islands are important conservation sites. But because island ecosystems are
often extremely fragile, the people who live on them are simultaneously the
source of the greatest stress on these ecosystems and potentially their most
effective protectors. To begin to address this issue, this project engages
island residents, particularly students, in the process of community science:
co-developing and co-investigating issues of local concern using the tools of
science. This project specifically focuses on training cohorts of high school
students to study the behavior patterns of endangered species. Interactions
between humans and these species can serve as a microcosm of the larger issues
of human ecology on islands, and results of these students' investigations can
help to find ways that people can productively co-exist with non-human animals.
Further, these students' participation in this project may increase their
understanding of the scientific process and their motivations for conservation.
Because this proposed study engages high school students in an ecologically
fragile part of the world, it has the potential to have a significant positive
impact on conservation and ecological awareness in a uniquely vulnerable
environment and to serve as a model for similar efforts around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This community science project has three tiers.
First, local high-school students are trained to collect observations on
endangered species, their behaviors, and any changes to these behaviors due to
the presence of humans. These students are also responsible for disseminating
their results to their community and developing new conservation efforts, with
the guidance of the project team. The second tier involves an empirical
investigation of how these students experience the impacts of their
participation in this project. This research will examine the extent to which
this deep engagement in community science affects the students' attitudes
towards conservation, ecological literacy, and understanding of the nature of
science. The third tier involves philosophical reflections on the project,
specifically the ways in which it can inform questions about the epistemology
and ethics of science and contribute to parallel discussions in philosophy of
conservation biology. This project thus benefits endangered species, has the
potential to increase students' motivations to protect their local environment,
generates novel scientific insights, and stimulates a small but growing
literature on the philosophy of community science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.