* 1947492
* Workshop on Emerging Technologies for Integrated Surveillance and Diagnosis of Infectious Disease and Bio-Secuity Threats; March, 2020; Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Amy Wesolowski, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 49,990.00

This award will fund for a workshop for the development of technologist for
surveillance and diagnosis of pathogens; it will be held at the Johns Hopkins
Center for Health Security in Baltimore, MD in March, 2020. The workshop will
bring togther experts in infectious disease modeling, technology innovation,
surveillance, control, and public health policy over a period of two days to
identify needs and opportunities in this area. Emerging infectious diseases pose
an increasing risk to humans due to a growing world population, changes in
climate and land use, and a highly connected global transport systems. Advances
and accessibility to engineering technologies have increased the threat of
accidental and deliberate harm from biological incidents. To mitigate these
risks requires improved epidemic preparedness strategies, specifically
infectious disease surveillance and control at the local, state and national
levels. This workshop will bring together a range of disciplines to explore
critical gaps in scientific and technological understanding: those that prevent
the translation of current emerging technologies, as well as gaps in the
community?s prioritization of basic research needed for future technological
capabilities. The workshop will identify gaps in current approaches to
surveillance methods and explore how these problems should be addressed with
available emerging technologies. It will identify needs for new technologies.
The results from the workshop will be used to guide the national research agenda
and thus better target support mechanisms to i) aid the development and
integration of new emerging technologies, and ii) ensure the translation of the
technology to public health practitioners; both of which are critical steps to
protect the population from the increased threat posed by infectious
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.