* 1947511
* I-Corps: Automated Activity Monitoring of Construction Machinery Using a Hybrid Approach
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Abbas Rashidi, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
provide a cost-efficient, and easy-to-use tool for construction managers and
equipment owners to monitor performance of their machines, measure productivity
rates and quantities of completed work, record active vs. idle times, and
recognize abnormal conditions for considering preventive/corrective actions. The
system will eventually operate on all equipment pieces in a construction project
and necessary managerial information about the project will be generated. The
project is expected to provide a transformational re-thinking about the concept
of "construction equipment monitoring" and translate it from "location tracking"
tools into informative "performance monitoring and control systems." Considering
the significant costs of maintenance/repair/fuel/operator expenses in overall
costs of construction heavy equipment, the technology can provide considerable
savings to the U.S. architecture, engineering, and construction industries.
Activities of this project will take place in Salt Lake City, Utah, one of
America's emerging tech startup hubs and a setting for rapid construction. This
may facilitate the commercialization phase of the project and also provide
excellent educational and training opportunities, especially for the graduate
student involved in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims
to develop and empirically test the feasibility of a hybrid system for
automatically detecting, tracking, and recording activities of construction
heavy equipment. The system works based on collecting audio, kinematic, and
location data of construction machines using a specially designed hardware unit.
The collected data will be transferred into a central processing unit through
Wi-Fi links and a chronological list of activities and productivity rates will
be automatically generated during each working shift. As the next step, the
information collected and processed from individual machines will be further
integrated and processed to generate managerial information at project and
company levels. The novel aspects of the project are twofold: 1) The hybrid use
of audio and kinematic signals capable of producing more accurate results and
overcoming the limitations and barriers of implementing each signal
individually; and 2) the concept of fusing information from multiple machines
and automatically generating managerial information for the entire project (and
company), which could replace the current manual procedures for updating the
project schedule, budget, and inventory management
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.