* 1947617
* Cyber Security of Power System Model Dataset: Threats, Impacts, and Defenses
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Yuzhang Lin, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 04/30/2024
* USD 287,053.00

Electric power systems are the Nation’s critical infrastructures that are
indispensable for basic functioning the modern society. In the information era,
the operation of power systems is increasingly dependent on cyber technologies
such as sensing, communication, computing, and data storage. Consequently, cyber
security has become a major concern, which if not properly taken care of, may
seriously affect the reliability of power delivery. The power network model
dataset, which mathematically describes the electrical characteristics of power
systems, serves as the basis for many applications in system operations, such as
security assessment, electricity markets, and various control and protection
functions. Hence, maintaining accuracy and authenticity of power system model
dataset is of ultimate importance. Recently, there have been extensive
discussions on the security of other operational datasets such as measurement
datasets, but few efforts have been dedicated to studying the security of
network model datasets. As have been clearly revealed by cyber-attack events
that already happened in other countries, knowledgeable cyber attackers are
capable of intruding into the computer networks of control centers and acquire
privileges of internal personnel, which can pose great risks on power system
model datasets. This project aims to initiate investigation on potential threats
against information security of power system model datasets, their possible
impacts on electricity market operations, as well as effective defense measures.
The proposed framework will help understand the vulnerabilities that may be
exploited by cyber adversaries, as well as the economic consequences once
electricity markets are manipulated via model data falsification. By developing
effective measures against potential threats, the project is expected to provide
knowledge on strengthening the cyber-secure operation of power systems, thus
benefiting national defense as well as public welfare. The project will also
benefit undergraduate and graduate education by introducing cyber-physical
perspectives into power system courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to develop a comprehensive framework for analyses of the threats, impacts, and
defenses regarding the model dataset security issues. We compare the
accessibility, modifiability, and attack motivations of model datasets and
measurement datasets, and show that the practicality of cyber-attacks against
model datasets cannot be overlooked. The proposed work encompasses three
closely-related research tasks. In Task 1, various patterns of stealthy attacks
against network model datasets will be identified and modeled. The possibility
of launching coordinated attacks against measurement and model datasets will
also be studied. Task 2 will establish the framework for studying the impacts of
model data falsifications on the operation of electricity markets. For
quantification of the impacts, a bilevel optimization problem will be
formulated, and efficient solution algorithms will be provided. Task 3 will
create a systematic security assessment method for identification of all high-
impact patterns of model dataset attacks, and develop two measurement-based
measures for mitigating the security vulnerabilities in the system planning
stage and operation stage, respectively. A proper validation plan will be
carried out for validating both the proposed concepts of model data cyber
security, and the proposed methods to analyze, quantify, and mitigate the
security vulnerabilities. For the first time, the proposed research will
formally establish the conceptual linkage between the information security of
model dataset and operational security of power networks, and develop systematic
methodologies for assessing the security risks and design mitigation measures.
The proposed work will bring the community’s attention to the information
security of power system model datasets, and initiate the advancement of
knowledge along this line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.