* 1947756
* LTREB: Resource pulses and the dynamics of rodents, ticks, and Lyme-disease risk in oak forests
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Charles Canham, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 04/30/2025
* USD 473,565.00

Lyme disease is the most frequently reported vector-borne disease in the United
States and is increasing in incidence and geographic range. Diagnostic tests are
imperfect and treatments are sometimes ineffective. As a result, avoidance of
exposure to the infected ticks that transmit the disease-causing bacteria is
critical to protecting the public from this insidious disease. Avoidance of Lyme
disease, in turn, requires knowing where and when infected ticks are expected to
be abundant and risk therefore high. The continuation of these studies will
allow researchers to better understand the effects of predators as well as
environmental variation on mice populations, in order to predict long-term
changes in risk of exposure to tick-borne diseases. The research will predict
disease risk and will communicate this to the public, through multiple media
outlets. The research team will continue to serve on relevant public policy
boards at the local, state, and federal levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Previous
research has revealed that high abundance of acorns in the fall stimulates
population growth of white-footed mice, resulting in high mouse density the
following summer. Newly hatched larval ticks feed more successfully, and acquire
pathogens more efficiently, from mice than from other hosts. Larval ticks
feeding from abundant mice the summer following a high acorn year molt into
nymphs one year later, resulting in high density of infected nymphs, and
therefore high risk of Lyme disease, two summers following mast production. The
investigators propose to continue research at six core study sites to maintain
long-term data on: 1. Acorn and other tree seed production; 2. Population
dynamics of mice, chipmunks, squirrels, and deer; 3. Population dynamics of
larval, nymphal, and adult blacklegged ticks; 4. Infection prevalence of ticks
with zoonotic pathogens; 5. Tick responses to specific climatic variables; and
6. Occurrence of predators and dilution hosts. Despite the predictability of
Lyme-disease risk from past acorn production, new patterns and questions have
recently emerged. Thus, five central objectives will be pursued: 1. Integrating
host-seeking and attached tick subpopulations to develop full models of tick
population dynamics under conditions of environmental variability; 2.
Establishing a mechanistic basis for modeling climate effects on Lyme disease
risk; 3. Determining long-term trends in tree seed production as a consequence
of changes in climate, ontogeny, and the relative abundance of species; 4.
Understanding top-down effects of mouse predators on rodent-tick interactions;
and 5. Develop and iteratively evaluate forecasts for Lyme disease risk from the
component parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.