* 1947562
* Antarctica as a Model System for Responses of Terrestrial Carbon Balance to Warming
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Paul Dijkstra, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,411,419.00

Part I: Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Earth’s terrestrial ecosystems have
the potential to either slow down or hasten the pace of climate change. The
direction depends in part on both plant and microbial responses to warming. This
study uses Antarctica as a model ecosystem to study the carbon balance of a
simplified ecosystem (simplified compared to terrestrial ecosystems elsewhere)
in response to a warming treatment. Carbon balance is dictated by sequestered
carbon (through photosynthesis) and released carbon (plant and microbial
respiration). Hence, to best assess plant and microbial responses to warming,
this study uses a plant gradient that starts at the glacier (no plants, only
soil microbes) to an old site entirely covered by plants. Experimental warming
in the field is achieved by open-top chambers that warm the air and soil inside.
The net ecosystem carbon exchange, the net result of sequestered and released
carbon, will be measured in warmed and control plots with a state-of-the art gas
exchange machine. Laboratory temperature incubation studies will supplement
field work to attribute changes in carbon fluxes to individual plant species and
soil microbial taxa (i.e., “species”). Data from this study will feed into earth
system climate change models. The importance of this study will be shared with
the broader community through the production of a video series created by an
award-winning science media production company, an Antarctic blog, and through
interactions with schools in the United States (on-site through Skype and in-
person visits). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Responses of the carbon balance of terrestrial ecosystems
to warming will feed back to the pace of climate change, but the size and
direction of this feedback are poorly constrained. Least known are the effects
of warming on carbon losses from soil, and clarifying the major microbial
controls is an important research frontier. This study uses a series of
experiments and observations to investigate microbial, including autotrophic
taxa, and plant controls of net ecosystem productivity in response to warming in
intact ecosystems. Field warming is achieved using open-top chambers paired with
control plots, arrayed along a productivity gradient. Along this gradient,
incoming and outgoing carbon fluxes will be measured at the ecosystem-level. The
goal is to tie warming-induced shifts in net ecosystem carbon balance to warming
effects on soil microbes and plants. The field study will be supplemented with
lab temperature incubations. Because soil microbes dominate biogeochemical
cycles in Antarctica, a major focus of this study is to determine warming
responses of bacteria, fungi and archaea. This is achieved using a cutting-edge
stable isotope technique, quantitative stable isotope probing (qSIP) developed
by the proposing research team, that can identify the taxa that are active and
involved in processing new carbon. This technique can identify individual
microbial taxa that are actively participating in biogeochemical cycling of
nutrients (through combined use of 18O-water and 13C-bicarbonate) and thus can
be distinguished from those that are simply present (cold-preserved). The study
further assesses photosynthetic uptake of carbon by the vegetation and their
sensitivity to warming. Results will advance research in climate change, plant
and soil microbial ecology, and ecosystem modeling. Science communication will
be achieved through an informative video series, a daily Antarctic blog, and
online- and in-person visits to schools in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.