* 1947883
* Neural predictors of individual differences in speech perception
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Erika Skoe, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 646,962.00

Speech perception maps sounds into meaning. During development, sound
differences important to meaning become more perceptually salient than those
that are unimportant. Surprisingly, adults show wide variability in the ability
to perceive differences between sounds that belong to the same speech category.
Despite considerable evidence for this variability, studies of the neurobiology
and behavior of speech perception rarely take this perceptual diversity into
account. This project will tackle these questions. In a diverse group of young
adults, the brain systems involved in speech perception will be studied, from
the brainstem to the cortex. Specifically, this project will test the theory
that variation in neural encoding predict individual differences in speech
perception and comprehension. These studies may indicate novel solutions for
hearing in noisy environments or for treatments for disabling disorders. Through
public outreach, this project will promote the neuroscience of speech
perception, and foster awareness of the importance of speech perception in
education and for the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speech perception maps a
complex set of sounds to a limited number of phonetic categories. Categorical
perception enables the listener to cope with acoustic variability in speech, by
heightening sensitivity to acoustic differences across category boundaries, and
lessening sensitivity within categories. Individuals show sizeable differences
in “categoricity,” the degree of sensitivity to acoustic variability within a
speech sound category. Despite considerable evidence of individual differences
(IDs) in categoricity, little is known of how IDs relate to the neural
processing stream or to other behavioral measures of speech and language. The
current project tests the hypothesis that IDs in speech perception arise from
IDs in the neural processing stream, from brainstem to cortex. The project
studies the neural processing of younger adults (n=100) at early levels of the
auditory pathway, measured using the auditory brainstem response (ABR); and at
cortical levels, measured using fMRI. The tasks include behavioral measures of
factors that may drive individual differences in sound and speech
representation, such as musical skill and measures of reading ability. The
combination of ABR, fMRI, and behavior will link IDs in speech processing to
neural precision in sound encoding in the brainstem and neural specificity for
phonetic responses in cortex. It will also elucidate how IDs in perception and
neural encoding explain IDs in well-established speech and language
metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.