* 1947776
* Characterizing and quantifying the impact of phagotrophic protists at hot spots of primary production at Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Julie Huber, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2023
* USD 874,851.00

Microorganisms are the ancestral forms of life on our planet and have been
instrumental in shaping all of Earthâ€™s environments into what they are today. In
the ocean, microbial prokaryotes and eukaryotes form the foundation of marine
food webs through their activity and interactions. Single-celled microbial
eukaryotes (or protists) are some of the most important species on the planet,
yet our understanding of how their activities influence and regulate the ocean
ecosystem is poorly constrained. At deep-sea hydrothermal vents in particular,
our understanding of microbial food web dynamics is incomplete without including
the role of microbial eukaryotes. This project provides quantification of
phagotrophic protistan grazing on the microbial communities inhabiting the
highly productive diffuse vent mixing zone at hydrothermal vents, where the vent
fluid-seawater interface promotes an increase in biological activity compared to
the surrounding deep seawater. The results are contributing novel insights into
the diversity and metabolic activities of the microbial eukaryotic community at
vent fluid-seawater interfaces, establish the extent to which microbial
eukaryotes impact primary production in the deep ocean by quantifying predation
pressure, and estimate the amount of carbon transferred from primary producers
to larger organisms. The investigators are training community college students
from Cape Cod Community College by involving them in laboratory research through
summer internships. The goal is to promote science, technology, engineering and
math literacy among community college students through hands-on research
experiences, peer-to-peer mentoring, and professional development opportunities,
while also encouraging students to transfer to a four-year university, obtain a
degree in a STEM subject, and continue on in a STEM
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grazing by microbial eukaryotes is a significant
source of mortality for microbes in the oceans, thus influencing the composition
of communities and serving as a major route for remineralization of organic
material to all organisms. This project is quantifying the in situ rates of
eukaryotic grazing on prokaryotic communities at hot spots of primary
productivity in the deep sea and characterize the diversity of microbial
eukaryotes, their abundance, and metabolic activities at the seafloor. The focus
of the effort is at the underwater volcano Axial Seamount, home of the Ocean
Observatories Initiative (OOI) Regional Cabled Array with well-characterized
low-temperature diffusely venting fluids. &lt;br/&gt;The two objectives of the
work are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Quantify the rates and impact of phagotrophic
microbial eukaryote grazing on prokaryotic communities at the seafloor in low-
temperature diffuse fluid mixing zones.&lt;br/&gt;2. Characterize microbial
eukaryotic diversity, abundance, and metabolic gene expression at the seafloor
in low-temperature diffuse fluid mixing zones.&lt;br/&gt;The modular Microbial
Sampler-Submersible Incubation Device (MS-SID) is being used for in situ
seafloor tracer incubations and compared to shipboard incubations for the
proposed grazing studies. This combination of technology provides detailed and
quantitative assessments of protistan communities and establishes the extent to
which microbial eukaryotes impact primary production in the deep ocean. Expected
outcomes include the quantification of protistan grazing rates on bacterial and
archaeal communities within the seafloor mixing zone, comparison of predation
pressure at the vent-seawater interface and surrounding deep ocean water, as
well as identification of key bacteriovores, fungi, and other protists and
associated major active metabolic pathways within the hydrothermal mixing zones.
The project is providing a significant advance in the understanding of the
microbial loop in the deep ocean as current depictions of microbial ecology at
hydrothermal vent sites do not typically include the role of microbial
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.