* 1947114
* Research: Predicting Achievement and Improving Equity in Engineering Using Contextualized High School Performance
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Michael Bastedo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 254,381.00

This project seeks to improve the number of well-qualified women, low-income
students, and students of color who pursue and obtain postsecondary engineering
degrees. Previous NSF-funded research showed that the use of contextualized high
school performance in engineering admissions has the potential to increase the
number of women, low-income students, and students of color in engineering. Yet
surprisingly little is known about how contextualized high school performance
relates to student success in engineering. The research that exists, however,
suggests that doing well in high school compared to your peers has predictive
validity above and beyond the student’s raw credentials. This project will solve
significant data, design, and methodological challenges to investigate this
question. This project will create a unique dataset drawn from state unit-record
data and data from institutional inventories of ABET-accredited engineering
programs within that state. The project directly addresses research on the
transition from high school to four-year college/university. This project is
expected to increase the admittance of underrepresented students into
engineering degree programs. Prior research has shown that both admissions
offices and national actors are open to changes that support equity and
fairness. The research will inform future efforts to improve equity in college
admissions, such as the College Board’s Landscape, which has been implemented in
over 150 colleges in 2019-2020. This project has the potential to inform not
only practices in engineering admissions offices, but also the activities of
important national actors such as the College Board, the Coalition for College
Access, and Common Application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, this team
will investigate the following research questions: Are contextualized high
school GPAs and test scores more predictive of engineering outcomes than raw
GPAs? Is there a relationship between taking a rigorous high school curriculum
and successful engineering outcomes? Are there heterogenous effects for low-
income students, underrepresented minority students, and women in engineering?
The hypothesis is that students with higher contextualized achievement, either
through either contextualized GPAs, SATs, or curriculum selection, will be more
likely to succeed in engineering programs, even after conditioning on raw
achievement, and that effects will be stronger for women, low-income students,
and students of color. This project will utilize unique student unit-record data
from the Michigan Department of Education and the Michigan Education Data
Center, allowing examination of outcomes for state residents at 15 public ABET-
accredited institutions. This study will use quantile regression techniques,
which will enable researchers to test the relationship between an independent
variable and the entire distribution of a dependent variable, usually divided
into quantiles. This technique will be very helpful for this project, where
there may be substantial differences in causes and effects across outcomes like
first-year GPA and college graduation, rather than simply focusing on the means
for those variables. The results will be disseminated through policy briefs,
research publications, and work with national leaders on college admissions and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.