* 1947406
* BEE: SG: How host migratory behavior shapes the evolution of parasite virulence
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Allison Shaw, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 207,635.00

From birds to whales, monarchs to fish, animals across the globe embark on
seasonal migrations each year, traveling thousands of miles. These big movement
patterns also affect smaller organisms – namely the parasites that infect animal
hosts. Over the course of a year, migrants come into contact with different non-
migratory animals. Since migratory and non-migratory species may each be
infected by different parasites, these new contacts present opportunity for
parasite transmission between species. However, it is not clear under what
conditions parasites are actually able to move between hosts, and how costly
parasites will be to their new hosts. The aim of this project is to develop a
predictive understanding of when parasites are able to move between migratory
and non-migratory hosts, and how much parasites are likely to decrease the
survival of their new hosts. Researchers at the University of Minnesota
(including undergraduate and graduate students) will accomplish this by
developing novel mathematical models. The outcome of this work will help shape
our understanding of parasite transmission between migratory wildlife and
sedentary livestock and aquaculture species. The findings will be communicated
to the scientific community through national and international presentations and
publications, and to the public through local outreach programs at a natural
history museum and farmer’s markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite increasing
concern as to how migratory species influence emerging infectious disease, there
is no conceptual framework to predict under what conditions parasites can move
between hosts and what the consequences will be for parasite virulence
(parasite-induced host mortality). Parasites are under selection for strategies
that increase transmission to new hosts. Intriguingly, predictions from general
theory (interpreted in the context of migration) suggest that parasites should
be more virulent in migratory hosts, while empirical patterns from parasites of
migratory hosts suggest the opposite. This research will develop theory
specifically aimed at understanding how host migration patterns should shape
parasite virulence, in order to reconcile this conflict in the literature. The
models will test the role of (i) host life history parameters, (ii) the degree
to which parasites impose similar costs in different host sub-populations, and
(iii) cost currency of parasite infection, in shaping parasite transmission-
virulence strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.