* 1947498
* EAGER: Rapid evolution of enhancer DNA sequences in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Gregory Reeves, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 11/30/2022
* USD 299,861.00

During animal growth and development, fertilized egg cells must divide and give
rise to distinct types of cells (e.g. muscle, skin, neuron). Errors in this
process result in developmental defects and disease in humans. In order to
understand how an animalâ€™s developmental program is encoded by its DNA, it is
useful introduce changes in the DNA and analyze the effects on development. At
present, however, it is only possible to generate and analyze a few genetic
changes at a time in multicellular animals. To overcome this limitation,
researchers at North Carolina State University (NCSU) will rapidly probe how
cells adopt their fates by quick evolution of small DNA segments that help
control gene expression in fly embryos, a good model for other animals. In
parallel, the researchers will develop a device for high-throughput analysis of
fly embryo development. This project will be undertaken by graduate students at
NCSU as part of their research training, and the outcomes will be communicated
through workshops and journal articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid evolution
of small, targeted stretches of DNA will be achieved through repeated rounds of
transcription, reverse transcription, and reintegration in live Drosophila cells
and embryos. The error-prone process of reverse transcription will introduce
mutations into a DNA sequence that is designed to drive the expression of a GFP-
tagged reporter gene. To screen a large number of Drosophila embryos for
mutations that affect gene expression, a high-throughput platform consisting of
a microfluidic array and automated imaging protocols will be constructed. Live
embryos will be imaged, and machine learning algorithms will detect and sort
embryos that have altered gene expression patterns. The sorted embryos will be
harvested for further study. Beyond this study, the development of the high-
throughput platform will enable screening protocols in Drosophila embryos, and
also in other animal species. This technology can open new avenues in biological
design and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences - Genetic Mechanisms and
Systems and Synthetic Biology Clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.