* 1947070
* Ultrafast Magneto-photonic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Stephen Rand, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2023
* USD 353,727.00

This project will study the extraordinary way that common optical materials can
respond to the electric and magnetic field components of intense light, which
are capable of working together to surpass the traditional bounds of
electrodynamics. It will focus on a process called magneto-electric (M-E)
rectification, which induces a separation of the charges composing ordinary
insulators in much the same way that application of an electric field causes a
battery-like separation of charges in a capacitor. This process promises to
enable the conversion of intense sunlight directly to electrical energy in a
novel fashion (that does not require the light to be coherent), but will be
investigated here for its potential to advance the field of photonics by
mediating fast switching of light with the Lorentz force of light for the first
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to launch the field of
magneto-photonics by providing ultrafast optical device technology based on
magnetic rather than electric interactions of matter with electromagnetic
radiation. The novelty of the proposed effort centers on switching a signal-
carrying beam on and off on a sub-picosecond timescale with a control beam
incident at right angles. Switching of light by light in a right-angle geometry
is unprecedented and could lead in a single step to matrix-style signal
processing and correlators for pattern recognition in exceptionally compact
designs. This research will explore magnetic processes relevant to spin physics,
energy conversion, high speed communication and quantum computation through its
connections with fundamental topics like angular momentum and parity-time-
symmetry in quantum mechanics. It will therefore foster advanced training of
graduate students, provide an important pathway for promoting diversity in our
workforce, and will emphasize inter-disciplinary research to match up new
materials with the demanding objectives of modern photonics. This effort will
culminate in ultrafast device technology that exploits the revolutionary
properties of magneto-photonic materials and
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This
experimental research program will undertake a systematic investigation of
magneto-electric rectification to assess its utility for enabling ultrafast
switching of light by light in new, compact geometries and to test our
theoretical understanding of this process. A novel modulator designed to switch
the transmission of a signal beam on or off will be subjected to a control beam
propagating at ninety degrees with respect to the first in nonlinear media
having large second-order, magneto-electric susceptibilities. Unlike
conventional second-order photonic interactions, magneto-electric rectification
can theoretically take place in all media, but experiences enhancement in
materials with large, off-diagonal, third-order susceptibilities. So samples of
two varieties will be compared – ones which are electro-optic (like KDP
isomorphs) and ones which are not (like pentacene) – in an effort to verify and
understand how this emerging class of magneto-optical interactions could spur
photonic device technology in much broader classes of material than ever before.
Because of its focus on transient dipole field generation in field-free media,
this project will also exploit a sophisticated tilted wavefront technique to
show that light can be converted to THz radiation without any external energy
source other than the light itself. Since the magneto-electric process is
mediated by the Lorentz force of light, this project will also shed light on
mechanisms that enhance relativistic dynamics at modest light intensities, far
below the customary threshold for relativistic optics at intensities of I~1018
W/cm2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.