* 1947608
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Intracellular Patterning in the Ciliate Cell Cortex
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Eric Cole, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 01/31/2024
* USD 417,418.00

This project seeks to identify universal mechanisms that organize specialized
structures on the cell surface using the single-celled protozoan Tetrahymena
thermophila. Structures studied include ones important for both feeding and
excretion. Knowledge will be generated as to how newly synthesized cell-surface
components are delivered to the proper location and in the proper abundance.
This project will engage early career scientists (primarily undergraduates) in
genetics, cell biology, and advanced microscopy through a combination of
independent and course-based research experiences. This effort pilots a program
to recruit students from under-represented backgrounds into mentored,
collaborative research teams with long-term committed apprenticeships. Along the
way, we will develop the “Visible Cell”, a comprehensive teaching and research
resource consisting of fluorescent cellular probes expressed in engineered cell-
lines and made available to the broader research community. This collection will
include cells that express fluorescently-tagged proteins spotlighting specific
organelles, membrane systems, and cytoskeletal components which can be studied
in both the laboratory and the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
focuses on the Broadened Cortical Domain (BCD)1 gene, which when disabled,
results in the assembly of multiple mouths and supernumerary excretory pores.
Sequence analysis of this gene reveals that its product resembles a protein
involved in membrane trafficking. Experiments are designed to test the
hypothesis that the Bcd1 protein promotes endocytosis (retrieval of excess
surface materials) through localized kinase activation. These experiments
include pharmacological and genetic manipulation of membrane trafficking and
cell signaling pathways to elucidate how homeostasis of these pathways leads to
proper assembly of cell surface organelles. Finally, we will identify and
characterize the gene that causes the janusA phenotype, a mirror-image
duplication of the entire ventral organelle pattern. Together, these studies of
BCD1 and janusA will provide understanding of mechanisms that determine both the
localization and dimensions of major cell surface structures and global cell
patterning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.