* 1947845
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impairment, Resilience, and Social Networks Among Disabled Women
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Chikako Ozawa-de Silva, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 24,477.00

Scientists of disability have long noted that with age, everyone eventually
becomes disabled. As medical technologies improve, innovative treatments for
numerous impairments increase the number of disabled Americans. Amid this
accelerated growth, there is an increased need to understand what factors
enhance or limit the accommodations and resources that are made to disabled
individuals. This doctoral research project investigates the everyday
experiences and social networks of a population of disabled women in the U.S. In
addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in
anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, findings will be shared with governmental and non-governmental
organizations, doctors, and others with the aim of improving the care of
disabled individuals. The project also endeavors to enhance the public's
understanding of science and the scientific method with regard to disabled
Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research project
examines the relationship between experiences of disability and gender, and what
support networks improve or worsen these experiences. The project explores the
experiences of individuals with Turner Syndrome (TS), a chromosome and hormone
disorder that impacts one in every 2,000 live female births. TS frequently
causes delayed or incomplete maturation and infertility, making it a unique case
study for examining the relationship between gender and disability. Research
will be conducted in North Carolina, an ideal locale given the clustering of
individuals with this disorder: a number of nonprofits and a dedicated TS clinic
offer access to this population and their resources. Interviews, observation of
daily activities, along with experimental methods in collaborative ethnography
will afford insight into the everyday experiences of individuals with TS,
including what struggles they face, what resilience they demonstrate, and what
resources they rely on and need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.