* 1947214
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Death and Survival in a Pandemic: A Bioarchaeological Investigation of Frailty and Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Jane Buikstra, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,953.00

This dissertation explores how human biological variation influenced the risk of
death and survival in a major influenza pandemic. The researchers examine human
skeletal remains of people who died during an influenza pandemic to understand
how frailty (defined as the increased likelihood of disease and death) and
resilience impacted the risk of mortality. In addition to increasing scientific
knowledge of biological vulnerability, this project will help researchers
understand how social norms create inequalities that directly impact health and
mortality. The researchers will collect public health data on underrepresented
groups, creating valuable information on how influenza incidence and severity
may vary in marginalized populations. This project will therefore contribute to
the goals of Healthy People 2020, a government initiative to improve the health
of all Americans. This project will identify risk factors that increased a
personâ€™s risk of dying in a past influenza pandemic, helping scientists predict
how a future influenza outbreak may affect modern populations. This research
will provide a female first-generation college student with training in a STEM
field, laboratory methods, and statistics, as well as additional opportunities
for her to collaborate with scholars in other fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
seems obvious that a person who is frail should always be more likely to die
than someone who is healthy and resilient. However, during the Spanish Influenza
pandemic of 1918, young adults between the ages of 20-40 were among the most
likely to die. There are many theories as to why seemingly healthy young adults
died in record numbers during this pandemic, however no one has questioned
whether the young people were actually healthy. Was there some underlying
frailty in these individuals or was the pandemic truly killing resilient people?
This project will explore the factors that influenced mortality and survival in
the 1918 pandemic by answering the following questions: 1) Were frail
individuals more likely to die during the Spanish Influenza pandemic? 2) Were
more resilient individuals more likely to survive the Spanish Influenza
pandemic? 3) Do demographic factors such as age, sex, and race influence frailty
and resilience? Human skeletal remains from the Hamann-Todd collection, an
assemblage of individuals who died in Cleveland, Ohio, during the 1918 pandemic
will be examined for skeletal markers of frailty and resilience. These data will
be analyzed using a type of statistical analyses called hazards analysis that
shows how the risk of death changes over time in response to certain
circumstances. The results will show how the risk of death varied during the
pandemic in individuals who were frail versus those who were
resilient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.