* 1947040
* EAGER: Origin and Physiological Consequences of a Neoplasm Outbreak in Antarctic Fish
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Arvind Varsani, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 05/31/2022
* USD 254,782.00

Antarctica’s native animals face increasing stressors from warming oceans. A key
unanswered question is how Antarctic life will respond. If warmer waters
contribute to fish disease susceptibility, then iconic Antarctic predators they
support, including penguins, seals, and killer whales, will suffer. A recent
scientific cruise on the Antarctic peninsula encountered a population of crowned
notothen fish that were plagued by pink, wart-like tumors that covered 10% to
30% of the body surface on about a third of the animals. Similar tumors had not
previously been reported, suggesting that this might be a new disease that
threatens Antarctic fish. The goal of proposed work is to identify the
biological origins of the tumor and how it affects cell function and organismal
physiology. The work is potentially transformative because it studies what might
be a harbinger of Antarctic fish responses to global climate change. The project
has several Broader Impacts. First, it will publicize the tumors. Because
Antarctic researchers have never reported a tumor epidemic, the community must
become aware of the outbreak and the tumor’s distinct diagnostic features.
Second, dissemination of project results will stir further research to determine
if this is an isolated event or is becoming a general phenomenon, and thus a
broad concern for Antarctic ecosystems. Third, assays the project develops to
detect the disease will enhance research infrastructure. Finally, work will
broaden the nation’s scientific workforce by providing authentic research
experiences for high school students and undergraduates from groups
underrepresented in scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of proposed work is to identify the biological origins of the neoplasia and how
it affects cell function and physiology. Aim 1 is to identify the pathogenic
agent. Aim 1a is to test the hypothesis that a virus causes the neoplasia by
isolating and sequencing viral nucleic acids from neoplasias and from animals
that are not visibly affected. Aim 1b is to test neoplasias for bacteria, fungi,
protozoa, or invertebrate parasites not present in healthy skin. Aim 2 is to
learn how the disease alters the biology of affected cells. Aim 2a is to examine
histological sections of affected and control tissues to see if the neoplasias
are similar to previously reported skin diseases in temperate water fishes. Aim
2b is to examine the function of neoplastic cells by RNA-seq transcriptomics to
identify genes that are differentially expressed in neoplasias and normal skin.
Achieving these Aims will advance knowledge by identifying the causes and
consequences of an outbreak of neoplasias in Antarctic fish. Proposed work is
significant because it is the first to investigate a neoplasia cluster in
Antarctic fish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.