* 1947713
* Collaborative Research: Behavior and structure on and around the megathrust revealed by the Alaska Amphibious Seismic Community Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Emily Roland, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 04/30/2021
* USD 219,975.00

The planet’s largest earthquakes take place on subduction plate boundaries.
These “megathrust” earthquakes, and the tsunamis they sometimes trigger, can
cause extreme damage and loss of life in local and far-field communities. The
Alaska Peninsula segment in particular hosted the second largest earthquake
recorded anywhere and has been identified as a high-risk tsunami source for the
west coast of North America. The Alaska megathrust also generates the most
recorded earthquakes of any fault system in the U.S. In 2018-2019, the
geophysical community deployed the first major shoreline-crossing seismic array
off Alaska, placing 75 high-quality seismometers on the sea floor to complement
several onshore synchronized deployments. This dataset, now openly available,
provides the first comprehensive nearby sampling of signals from small to
moderate earthquakes along the megathrust in Alaska. This project will analyze a
range of earthquake-generated signals from this new dataset, to address
questions such as: why are earthquakes more common in some places than others
despite similar geology? where are the active faults in the region? and what is
the nature of fault materials that allows earthquakes to be generated? The
results will greatly improve the working models by which we understand the
physics of earthquakes, of tsunami generation, and other related hazards. This
project supports the training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the best-known examples of
along-strike variability of a megathrust is observed along the Alaska Peninsula.
In a few hundred km, the plate interface varies from fully locked and capable of
generating M9.2 earthquakes near Kodiak, to fully creeping near the Shumagin
Islands. The fundamental controls on the rupture variability of megathrusts are
poorly known, relevant to both along-strike variations as seen in Alaska, as
well as updip/downdip changes that are seen along all subduction zones. A major
new publicly available community seismic dataset has just been acquired along
this segment of the Aleutian megathrust. The 15-month broadband dataset, termed
the Alaska Amphibious Seismic Experiment, AACSE, provides extensive coverage far
offshore and onshore of seismicity and structure, with uniform sampling. This
project focuses on the megathrust sampled by the AACSE by characterizing and
understanding the earthquake sources on it, the tremor produced along it, and by
imaging the fine-scale structure using local-earthquake and teleseismic signals.
Specifically, waveform-based methods will be used to greatly increase the
quantity and precision of earthquake hypocenters along the megathrust, enabling
characterization of along-strike variability. These will be complemented by
studies of earthquake source properties to better understand spatial variation
in rupture behavior, and to separate megathrust earthquakes showing upper plate
and lower plate deformation. Modern tremor detection methods will be applied to
the full dataset, to characterize any regions of downdip and potential updip
tremor, and their along-strike variation. High-frequency mode-converted signals
and autocorrelation of local-earthquake coda will be used to image the
megathrust targeting spatial variations in its reflectivity strength and
thickness; these analyses will be integrated with collocated receiver functions
to generate a wide-band image of the plate boundary. This research will address
several fundamental questions: Where is the plate boundary (as opposed to nearby
regions in the upper and lower plate) seismogenic? How does the slip behavior
and earthquake dynamics vary down-dip, and between locked and creeping sections?
Do sharp boundaries in coupling correlate with strong variations in seismic
behavior? How do earthquakes on the plate boundary relate to structure, and how
does structure relate to dehydration or lithology? What explains the along-
strike variability between locked and creeping sections? Do major potentially
seismogenic splay faults exist in the upper plate? How is non-volcanic tremor
related to regular earthquakes? The extensive amphibious array here allows an
unprecedented opportunity to accurately resolve seismicity, tremor and structure
in exactly the same place, with a variety of techniques, and in doing so
provides an excellent opportunity to make progress on these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.