* 1947053
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and commercialization of organic photocatalysts for light-driven C-N cross-coupling reaction
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Chern-Hooi Lim, New Iridium
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2021
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop special metal-free catalysts to
dramatically reduce chemical manufacturing costs. In addition, these catalysts
significantly expand the range of light-driven reactions, leading to profound
advancements in pharmaceuticals, healthcare, agriculture, biology, material
science, and other industries. Because light-driven chemical technology
predominantly relies on scarce and expensive precious metal catalysts, it is
limited today to small-scale R&D applications only. At scale, light-driven
technology using metal-free catalysts can greatly reduce chemical manufacturing
costs by replacing conventional reactions that rely on expensive precious
metals, which are also limited to specific classes of reactions. This new
chemistry will significantly expand the possibilities for applications of light-
driven chemical technology, leading to novel products and greater consumer
access through lower costs.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the suitability of metal-free (organic) photoredox catalysts (PCs)
in challenging and important pharmaceutical reactions. Organic PCs are key
enablers of photoredox catalysis, an emerging field of chemistry gaining
significant traction in drug development. Driven by light absorption, photoredox
catalysis offers significant advantages over conventional heat-driven methods
(e.g. Pd catalysis), including cost, ease of use, and broadened fields-of-use.
Importantly, organic PCs are sustainable and scalable alternatives to
predominantly used precious metal PCs, allowing photoredox catalysis to extend
to full industrial use, including drug manufacturing. To spur industrial
adoption of photoredox catalysis, research objectives include proving
feasibility of organic PCs in medicinally important reactions, while expanding
substrate scope to include biologically relevant and highly functionalized
substrates typically used in drug designs. Photoredox-catalyzed reactions
powered by organic PCs will access new chemistries beyond capabilities of
conventional heat-driven catalysis. In addition, guided by quantum simulations,
new high-performance organic PCs will be developed with unique properties beyond
those reported in the literature, unlocking new transformations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.