* 1947546
* CRII: AF: Pseudorandomness in Computer Science
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Pooya Hatami, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 12/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Randomness is a powerful tool with frequent utility in various branches of
computer science such as algorithm design, cryptography, computational
complexity, and distributed computing. Some of the fastest, simplest and most
elegant algorithms for several fundamental problems, such as primality testing,
polynomial factorization, polynomial identity testing, and graph connectivity
rely heavily on randomness. This was a motivation for the formation and
cultivation of the field of probabilistic computation, which emerged in 1970's
as a subfield of complexity theory. After decades of research, there is an
abundance of problems with efficient randomized algorithms, for which no
efficient deterministic algorithms are known. A fundamental goal in theory of
pseudorandomness in complexity theory is to understand the extent to which
randomness is necessary for efficient computation. It is conjectured that every
polynomial time randomized algorithm has a polynomial time deterministic
counterpart, and every log-space randomized algorithm has a log-space
deterministic counterpart. Even though the area of pseudorandomness has
witnessed several breakthroughs over the recent years, these fundamental
conjectures seem far out of reach, and several intermediate open problems remain
to be resolved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to reduce or remove the use of
randomness, one often faces the problem of constructing explicit or weakly
explicit mathematical objects that share useful properties with purely random
objects. For example, in order to derandomize all log-space randomized
algorithms with only a constant factor loss in space complexity, it is
sufficient to efficiently construct pseudorandom distributions (called
pseudorandom generators) that use a short random string to generate a much
longer ``pseudorandom'' string that looks random to log-space algorithms. Other
examples of useful pseudorandom objects are hitting set generators, samplers,
error correcting codes, expander graphs, and randomness extractors. Finding
explicit constructions of these objects, have immediate applications that go
beyond derandomization of algorithms. The goal of this project is to design
efficient such pseudorandom objects that help answer fundamental questions about
the role of randomness in efficient computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.