* 1947297
* Human Adaptation to New Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert Kelly, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 225,814.00

University of Wyoming Professor Todd Surovell and colleagues will examine
aspects of the subsistence practices and social organization of Ice Age
inhabitants of North America. How would the first humans to inhabit a region
make a living? How would they organize themselves socially? In a place and time
where there are few constraints on how people might behave other than those
imposed by the natural environment, what would human societies look like? The
first Americans, entered ecosystems that were home to mammoths, mastodons,
horses, camels, and ground sloths. Since no similar environments remain today,
archaeology is the only field that provides a window into human lives in such
contexts. Although similar stories played out through prehistory as the human
species expanded across the globe, this research will provide insight into human
social organization in one such case, the colonization of North
America.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers will contribute to ongoing
debates concerning the subsistence practices of the first Americans. Did early
Paleoindians preferentially target large mammal species, or did they have a
broad diet breadth? They will also examine aspects of cooperation in butchery of
megafauna as well as questions aggregation and dispersal of hunter-gatherer
households. These opportunities are afforded by additional excavation of the La
Prele Mammoth site in Converse County, Wyoming. This site preserves the remains
of a killed or scavenged subadult Columbian mammoth and an associated camp
occupied during butchery. Multiple hearth-centered activity areas associated
with and encircling the mammoth provide the opportunity to examine aspects of
social organization using detailed lithic, faunal, and spatial analysis. This
work will not only provide opportunities to train and support graduate and
undergraduate students, but it will provide opportunities to train members of
the Northern Arapaho tribe in archaeological field methods. During excavations
avocational archaeological groups and members of the public will be welcomed to
visit the site to learn about archaeological research and promote awareness of
cultural resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.