* 1947591
* Collaborative Research: The Geography of Information: Testing the Effects of Unequal Information in the Market for Rental Housing
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Ariela Schachter, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 01/31/2023
* USD 290,714.00

There is considerable urban residential segregation in the United States by
race, ethnicity, and social class, with implications for community formation and
inequality, as well as school segregation. We know that the majority of urban
home-seekers in the United States now use the internet as their primary source
to find new places to live. Despite this development, we know relatively little
regarding how renters select their housing at a time when information about
available housing is increasingly moving online. While this technological
transformation has largely gone unexamined, some prior research shows that
advertisements for rental housing are not all the same; rather, they differ
systematically depending on the demographics of the neighborhood where the
housing being advertised is located. This project analyzes rental housing
advertisements posted online to investigate if these differences matter for
people during their housing search. Understanding how individuals interpret the
information they see in the online housing market is key to explaining why
people move to certain places and not others, which has implications for the
future of residential inequality and racial/ethnic segregation. The findings
will advance understanding of residential selection processes and aid policy
makers looking to expand and equalize access to information for home-seekers,
with implications for improved social and economic well-being in urban areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the role that online rental advertisement plays in
promoting neighborhood composition, it is notable that we know so little
regarding how individuals interpret this information. Using natural language
processing to analyze millions of advertisements for rental housing in the 50
largest U.S. cities posted on Craigslist, prior work has identified patterns in
the distribution of different types of information in neighborhoods that vary by
race/ethnicity and poverty rate. This proposal will use this information to test
the causal effects of these real-world differences in the ways units are
advertised on individuals’ housing and neighborhood preferences in five large
urban areas: Los Angeles, SF-Bay Area, New York City, Chicago, and Houston. The
project will implement three survey experiments in each area to test how online
advertisements shape housing decisions and residents’ perceptions of local
neighborhoods. The project will compare the effects of information in housing
ads and perceptions of neighborhoods to the effects of other kinds of
information, including neighborhood demographic data, on individuals’ interest
in housing units. Selection of these five large areas allows the project to
oversample Black, Latino and Asian minority respondents. Each survey experiment
will first be constructed to be representative of the urban area (n=1,000/area),
but will then collect additional respondents from specific minority
population(s) within each area: oversamples of 100-300 additional Asian
respondents in the SF Bay Area; Black respondents in New York and Chicago; and
Latino respondents (including Spanish-speakers) in Los Angeles, Chicago, and
Houston. By using representative surveys of specific urban areas with
oversamples of minority residents, the project will analyze—through a
combination of difference of means tests and multiple regression models—how
reactions to housing advertisements vary across ethno-racial groups. The project
will contribute to sociological theory regarding neighborhood and unit selection
processes, residential sorting, the formation of place reputations, and how
prospective tenants form impressions of their residential contexts. The project
also will help to transform how survey experiments are developed and implemented
across the social sciences by demonstrating the utility of big data sources and
computational techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.