* 1947147
* Collaborative Research: Joint Paleontological and Archeological Investigations of Modern Human Origins
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* J. Michael Plavcan, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2024
* USD 211,064.00

The origin of modern humans is one of the central issues in the anthropological
sciences. This project investigates an extraordinary new fossil site yielding
novel information about this critical time-period in human evolutionary history,
including remains of immediate ancestors, the tools they made, and the
environments in which they lived. The project brings together an international
collaborative team to employ the latest methods in collecting and analyzing
fossil and archaeological data. The team will strengthen scientific
collaborations by training students in analytical and field methods. The results
of the project will be shared publicly through school visits and science fairs.
All data and results will be shared digitally with the international community,
both scientific and public, allowing people from around the world access to
evidence of our shared origins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent discoveries suggest
that modern human origins are more complex than originally thought, but the
limited fossil and archaeological record has obscured exactly when, where, how,
and why modern humans appeared. A newly discovered site is unique in both the
number of human remains recovered to date and the extraordinary data on the past
environments it preserves. So far, this site has yielded complete skull and
partial skeleton of an early modern human, remains of several other individuals,
and a large number of tools. The site also preserves an abundance of fossils of
animals that lived alongside these early humans, providing key data on their
environment and ecology. This site is geologically correlated with other famous
hominin sites permitting an extraordinary opportunity to compare early modern
human behavior across different environments of the same past ecosystem during
the same geological time-period. The investigators plan on several field seasons
to collect and analyze human and other fossils, gather and study the abundant
tools, and document the geology of the site. Some fossils will be reconstructed
digitally, and the resulting 3D models will be shared publicly along with data
on archaeological and animal remains. After fieldwork is complete, an
international team of investigators will be brought together to analyze the
anatomical, environmental, geological, and archaeological data to provide
integrated analyses and further advance knowledge about the origins of modern
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.