* 1947009
* Collaborative Research: Engineered Water Repellency to Mitigate Frost Susceptibility: Decoupling Osmotic and Matric Potential
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2019,07/31/2024
* Bora Cetin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 459,713.00

Frost heaving has a significant effect on civil infrastructure such as
buildings, roads, and bridges. It causes excessive settlement, foundation
instability, and even structural failure. This research will investigate the
extent to which water repellent additives (e.g., organo silanes) mitigate frost
heaving while identifying the controlling physical and chemical mechanisms. This
research has the potential to dramatically extend the service life of civil
infrastructure while introducing a new approach to soil and foundation
improvement. This research provides a basis to extend the concept of engineered
water repellency to other areas of geotechnical engineering, including
applications in slope stability, road construction, and solid/hazardous waste
management. More broadly, this research may enhance our understanding of carbon
dioxide emissions from permafrost as it thaws during climate change. The
research may also inform our understanding of frost formation on the Earth's
Moon, Mars, and other extraterrestrial bodies. This project supports a unique
experience for Cadets from the U.S. Military Academy, to be paired with Veterans
from both collaborating institutions for an experience at these organizations as
well as at the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Engineer Research and Development
Center Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory (ERDC-CRREL) Laboratory
in Hanover, New Hampshire. The research team, inclusive of the Principal
Investigators, Cadets, Veterans, and Graduate Students will also complete an
active-learning based seminar entitled "Leading at the Speed of Trust." This
training emphasizes trust and character development; both of which have emerged
as critical attributes as the work of engineers intersects the public with mass
produced products and mega-sized projects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary
focus of this research is the relative contribution of osmotic and matric
potential on ice lens formation and growth, with and without engineered water
repellency. This represents a critical link in the dynamic thermo-hydro-
mechanical (THM) system. A secondary focus evaluates the net effect of osmotic
and matric potential on these two soil systems (with and without water
repellency) as interpreted from direct physical measurements (in the lab and in
the field). Multi-physics modeling will supplement this work via parametric and
related analyses. The research plan is conceived to follow three phases (1)
characterization, (2) performance and (3) model application and field testing.
Data from the characterization phase will quantify osmotic/matric potential as a
function of water repellency. Experiments in the performance phase will evaluate
how varied potential and water repellency affect frost heave and the
relationship between frozen and unfrozen water content. The parameters which
describe the frozen/unfrozen water content relationship will be modified to
reflect the relative contribution of osmotic and matric potential and will then
be used in models to predict behavior under a wider set of climatic conditions.
These predictions will be compared with field data from four sites (Michigan,
New Hampshire, North Carolina, and Alaska) whose frost exposure varies by three
orders of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.