* 1947512
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploring the Influence of Social Networks on Small Farmers' Perceptions of Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Joan Gross, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 17,029.00

Agricultural production across the United States is impacted by environmental
variability and there is a critical need for farmers to adapt at the local level
to ensure food security, rural livelihoods, and a sustainable food system.
Small-scale farms, those that make less than $350,000 per year in gross cash
farm income, comprise 90% of farms in the U.S. and half of all farmland. They
are a critical part of a sustainable food system since they are often more
biodiverse, support local food systems, and use resources more efficiently than
large-scale farms. However, farmers' decisions and ability to adapt practices
are influenced by many social, economic, political and environmental factors,
including their beliefs about environmental change, perceptions of weather
variability and risk, information sources, and farm characteristics. There is
currently a limited understanding of small farmers' on-the-ground perceptions of
and responses to environmental change in the U.S., and data on the various
factors shaping their adaptation are needed. In addition to providing funding
for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project would enhance
scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to organizations
invested in discovering more effective methods for communicating science to the
public. The results will be disseminated to various governmental entities and
farming organizations to inform outreach strategies and policies which help
farmers adapt by indicating the most prevalent issues they are dealing with and
how best to communicate with them via their existing social networks.

This research will be conducted with food-producing small farmers in the state
of Oregon. Oregon is well-suited for this research because it is diverse both
ecologically and agriculturally. As a region, the Northwest has already been
experiencing the effects of a changing environment. Most notably, decreases in
snowpack have increased competition for water resources and large wildfires
continue to negatively affect farmers. Using interviews and a survey, the
researchers will document small farmers' experiences with weather extremes and
variability across Oregon and examine how they are responding to these
challenges. They will also document the social networks farmers rely on for
information about the weather, environment and farming practices, including
other farmers, farming organizations, governmental entities, and media outlets.
By spending extensive time with a subsample of farmers and having them take
photographs of the weather-related challenges they experience throughout the
year, researchers will also document the specific ecologies of their farms, such
as what crops, weeds, pests, and animals are present. Using social network
analysis, a statistical method for assessing the influence of social networks on
individual outcomes, in a novel way, they will examine how these ecologies
influence the challenges farmers are experiencing as well as how their social
networks influence the information they receive and how they choose to adapt.
The findings will indicate how various factors work together to influence small
farmers' responses to environmental change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.