* 1947478
* Travel Grant for Algorithmic Principles of Computer Systems (APOCS) Conference: Salt Lake City, Utah - January 2020
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Martin Farach-Colton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 11/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports student and qualified postdoctoral fellow attendance at the
inaugural SIAM Symposium on Algorithmic Principles of Computer Systems (APOCS)in
Salt Lake City, Utah on January 8, 2020, co-located with the SIAM Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms (SODA), the premier conference of the algorithms community,
from January 5 to January 8, 2020. This award will provide partial support to
about 30 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer Systems is the branch of
computer science that concerns itself with the building and evaluation of
systems, such as networks, database, computer chips, file systems, operating
systems and the like. Theory of Computing is the branch that concerns itself, in
part, with the theoretical analysis of the performance of algorithms. There is
strong evidence that cross-disciplinary research between the two communities is
beneficial to both fields and to the world at large. The SIAM Symposium on
Algorithmic Principles of Computer Systems (APOCS) is a new conference which has
been started to help promote this fertilization. This travel award supports
much-needed student participation, including students from underrepresented
groups, in this effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.