* 1947017
* Collaborative Research:  Sociotechnical Imaginaries, Infrastructure Publics, and Electricity
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Marla Perez-Lugo, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 527,704.00

This award supports a collaborative research effort between social science
scholars from Northeastern University and the University of Puerto Rico. The
goal of the project is to compare sociotechnical imaginaries, which are imagined
forms of social order that center on the development of an innovative
technological project; in this case, the project of interest is the electric
power system in Puerto Rico (an unincorporated territory of the US). The project
will map over time how different imaginaries have been encoded within the
material and social outlines of electric power on the island, and it will
reflect on how a disastrous event, Hurricane Maria, served to create
opportunities for different imaginaries to circulate. The results of this
research will contribute to important, evolving public discussions about Puerto
Rico's energy future. The dissemination plan includes bringing marginalized
voices into the mainstream political conversations including contributing to
policy briefs that address needs identified by stakeholders in the stakeholder
forum. Capacity-building activities will also include collaborative fieldwork
between Northeastern PhD students and undergraduate students at the University
of Puerto Rico, a workshop series concerning power and infrastructure
development, the development of an annual residential Northeastern Resilience
Fellowship program to facilitate the exchange of ideas between scholars in
Puerto Rico and Northeastern, and an interdisciplinary on-line energy justice
course co-taught by faculty at University of Puerto Rico and Northeastern.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project collects new data that
serves to build on an existing dataset developed by the Co-PIs previously NSF-
funded work prior to Hurricane Maria. The project focuses on two core
objectives, to investigate how sociotechnical imaginaries of electric power were
built into and evolved with the electric power system in Puerto Rico throughout
the 20th century, and to compare different visions of energy futures before and
after the devastating disruption of Hurricane Maria. The research team will use
a mixed-methods approach that integrates archival and policy research with
interviews. The results of this research will provide impactful empirical
insights with relevance to decision-making, and it will provide theoretical
advances for social studies of infrastructure and sociotechnical transitions. In
addition, these results promise to have transformative potential to advance and
link the literatures on infrastructure systems and sociotechnical transitions.
They will also provide an important corrective to existing interdisciplinary
social studies of the U.S. electric power system by expanding its analytic lens
to consider the case of Puerto Rico; they will shed light on how the development
of the bulk electric power system (the power grid) in the contiguous United
States at once shapes and is at odds with the trajectory of electric power in
Puerto Rico. It also presents a unique opportunity to build a comparative
dataset of pre-disaster (generated through prior NSF-supported work) and post-
disaster visions of transitions in the electricity sector, which will enable
this project to advance and support a nuanced analysis of how disasters can
support infrastructure reordering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.