* 1947049
* Conference: Historical Memory: A Puget Sound Symposium on American Movements that Advocated Applying Selective Breeding Science to Humans
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Peter Wimberger, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 11,886.00

This award supports a symposium on American movements that have advocated for
the controversial and often grossly abusive practice of applying selective
breeding science to human rather than animal populations. Such movements have
been susceptible to gross abuses such as those that occurred during WW2. The
focus of the symposium is on one such movement. It is to be held on March 28,
2020 at the University of Puget Sound. The symposium is inspired by a recent
discovery by one of the university’s students that the namesake of its Slater
Museum of Natural History Museum, James R. Slater, taught a course that focused
positively on the selective breeding of humans from 1920-1951. The symposium
organizers have invited some of the foremost historians in this issue to Puget
Sound to facilitate the development of an historical perspective on the
controversial movement with particular attention to the biology curricula of
liberal arts colleges. The symposium has tremendous potential for specific
beneficial societal outcomes through providing a venue for thoughtful,
historically-informed discussions of difficult histories and issues that are
very timely. The organizers will share the results of the symposium via an
educational website and museum exhibit; the symposium discussions will provide a
foundation for the creation of a both a physical and online exhibit on the
history of American movements that have advocated selective breeding of humans
in biology curricula at the local, national and international level to be hosted
by the Slater Museum of Natural History. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The symposium,
"American Movements that Advocated Applying Selective Breeding Science to
Humans," will advance knowledge by bringing together established scholars, up-
and-coming scholars, and a new generation of undergraduate biology students keen
to draw on history in their efforts to ensure attention to social justice as
they pursue lives in science. The symposium will serve to provide a venue for
complex, difficult conversations regarding the history of selective breeding of
humans and American biology, the problems of historical memory, and who is
commemorated in the history of American science and why. Within the history of
science, the history of the selective breeding of humans has been a highly
productive field over the past few generations. The symposium will bring
together scholars from a range of disciplines, including historians and
biologists, to examine the history of selective breeding of humans as well as
more general problems concerning commemoration and historical memory on college
campuses. The potential of these interdisciplinary conversations to create new
insights and connections is large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.