* 1947805
* Collaborative Research: Robust Inference for Kernel Smoothing and Related Problems
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Matias Cattaneo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2023
* USD 284,851.00

Research in economics, public policy, and other related disciplines, as well as
evidence-based policy-making decisions require accurate and efficient
measurements. Efficient measurements require accurate, simple, and flexible
statistical methods that can be easily implemented to draw conclusions from
data. These methods are becoming increasingly important in the modern era of big
data, high-speed computing and machine learning. New statistical methods for
analyzing economic problems, including modern machine learning and similar data
science approaches, are popular in economic theory because they usually offer a
good compromise between flexibility and simplicity in measurement, but they are
not always trusted because the results often depend on how these methods are
implemented. This research will develop new methods that account for how the
choices made in implementation affect the results obtained by the researcher.
The proposed research offers new, modern statistical and econometric methods for
analyzing large and complex data sets. These methods will produce results that
do not depend on the specific details underlying how the models are implemented.
This research will lead to more credible empirical findings and hence improve
policy-making recommendations. This research tackles a fundamental question in
the methodology of economic analyses and makes important contribution to
economic science, enhancing US global leadership in economic science. The
results of this research project will lead to better methods for policy
research, hence enhance economic policy making. The research therefore has the
potential to enhance US economic growth because of better
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on a class of non-
or semi-parametric estimators known as smoothed pairwise estimators, as well as
generalizations thereof, and seeks to develop new large-sample approximations
that produce statistical procedures that are more robust to the specifics of
their implementation than existing estimators. These more general distributional
approximations for smoothed pairwise estimators explicitly capture the effect of
tuning parameter choices, offering improvements over standard results because
they encompass findings currently available in the literature while also
highlighting new features and problems previously assumed away. The research
project has three main parts: (i) generalized distributional approximations for
smoothed pairwise estimators, leading to both Gaussian and non-Gaussian limiting
distributions, (ii) analytic and bootstrap-based inference methods with
demonstrable superior robustness properties, and (iii) valid higher-order
expansions showing formally that the proposed generalized distributional
approximations and related robust inference methods give demonstrable
improvements over existing methods. The results of this research project will
lead to better methods for policy research, hence enhance economic policy
making. The research therefore has the potential to enhance US economic growth
because of better policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.