* 1947271
* EAGER: Can artificial intelligence (AI) invent? And if so, so what?
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Jose Lobo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 12/31/2023
* USD 276,599.00

Sustained economic development depends upon the intensity and productivity of
efforts devoted to inventive activity. There is a growing concern that the
productivity of human inventive activity (as measured by the number of patent
applications per patent author) is declining, and that this decline may reflect
the growing volume and complexity of technical knowledge and the increasing
effort needed to identify intellectual novelty. Computer scientists and
proponents of Artificial Intelligence (AI) suggest that, because of AI’s ability
to execute combinatorial search effectively and rapidly, AI might be helpful in
the search for new inventions. This proposition begets two research questions:
can AI invent and, if so, will AI invention augment or displace human inventors?
The project examines the current and potential inventive capabilities of AI by
tapping into insights accumulated from the study, across many disciplines, of
how humans have invented throughout our history. This deep historical
perspective, coupled with detailed empirical investigations on the nature of
invention, has generated a robust narrative about the salient characteristics of
the processes underlying human invention. The project brings these insights on
the nature of human invention together with assessments by leading AI experts
about the type of inventive activity AI can perform now and the type of
inventive activity AI could be expected to perform in the foreseeable future.
These insights and assessments will inform consideration of whether AI can help
mitigate the difficulties encountered by researchers as they search for new
knowledge and create new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort
includes: (1) convening a meeting of experts on human invention (drawn from
industry and academia in fields such as computer science, engineering,
economics, anthropology, psychology, and other disciplines) about the inventive
capabilities of AI to assess AI’s current inventive capacities and consider what
would constitute signals that AI’s inventive capacities are increasing; (2)
developing a deeper understanding of combinatorial invention using patent
records to classify the types of inventive novelty generated by the
recombination of existing knowledge; (3) assessing which AI capabilities match
the different types of combinatorial invention revealed in patents. The research
will be reviewed at the end of each year by a subset of the experts who will
advise on priorities for research in the subsequent period. The research and
insights gathered about how AI invention can offset the decline in human
inventive productivity will be summarized in “white papers” to be accessible to
the general public online; full versions of the papers will be submitted for
publication in peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.