* 1947262
* 2019 Global Symposium on Waste Plastic
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Jeffrey Seay, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 10/31/2020
* USD 15,820.00

This award will provide support for a symposium titled "2019 Global Symposium on
Waste Plastic" scheduled for September 19-20, 2019 in Lexington, KY at the
University of Kentucky Gatton Student Center. The proposal will provide partial
support for attendees, including a significant number of students. The symposium
will focus on developing effective strategies for the management of waste
plastic accumulation, which is an important and timely challenge facing not only
the US but other countries, especially those in the developing world. The
magnitude of the problem is exemplified by waste plastic that currently
circulates in oceans, which is especially challenging to remediate. A variety of
remediation strategies have been implemented to reduce or otherwise control the
accumulation of waste plastic, but, they have not been optimized and have
negative environmental effects of their own. The symposium will review recent
achievements in academia, government, non-profits, and industry to reduce,
recover, reuse, recycle, and remanufacture for the waste plastic supply
chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will provide opportunities for
academic, government, industrial, and non-profit researchers to interact with
each other through a series of presentations and informal meetings. Participants
will reflect diverse fields of research, including biology, chemistry, and
engineering disciplines. The symposium will engage a significant number of young
researchers, including graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. Support
will be provided for students, especially those from underrepresented groups in
engineering, including persons with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.