* 1947319
* CISE EAGER: Developing a Collective Impact Model with and for Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander Girls to Persist in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Sharon Nelson-Barber, Hawaii Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 349,793.00

While there are many computer science initiatives for girls of color (Native
Hawaiian, Alaskan Native, African American, Latinx), they often share a
constraint. Specifically, many of these programs use culturally responsive
activities, which encourage community activism and have been shown to inspire
girls to see themselves as entering computer-related fields, they often employ
highly-general theoretical frameworks that are designed to apply to several
cultural communities in a multitude of geographic regions. But in practice,
cultures, needs, and assets differ in important ways across communities and
regions, so activities that work for African American girls in the US Southeast
might not also work for Native Hawaiians, for instance. Without empirically
validated theories and frameworks focused on specific regions and cultures,
program developers, researchers, and funding agencies cannot make informed
decisions as to how computer science can be for all. Particularly for Native
Hawaiian and other Indigenous communities, few solutions have been offered or
framed in any substantive way. Instead, theories such as Indigenous Knowledge
Systems and Culturally Responsive Computing remain detached from computer
science endeavors. A collective impact model for programs focused on specific
communities and cultures is needed, yet there is limited understanding of what
this means for computer science, girls of color, and Native Hawaiian girls, in
particular. This two-year project aims to explore what is needed to identify
which elements can be used to bridge that gap. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A research
team that spans disciplines and geographic regions will apply two theories
(Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Culturally Responsive Computing) and create a
series of research opportunities to explore which features can constitute a
collective impact model. Scholars from Hawai'i Pacific University, Arizona State
University, and WestEd will use a particular methodology, Critical Indigenous
Research Methodologies (CIRM). Along with a cultural liaison and advisory board,
adolescent (13 to 18) Native Hawaiian, Alaskan Native, African American, and
Latina girls will play critical roles as researchers. The approach uses systems
mapping as a tool that allows the girls to assess the system, identifying
interactions and connections that both promote and prevent existing and future
opportunities for success in computer science and technology. The tool
establishes an opportunity for intergenerational discussions, goals, and
strategies to be developed based on these findings and enables real time
adaptation, learning, and action to support collective impact. &lt;br/&gt;The
potential for this project is significant. If successful, findings will advance
theoretical and pedagogical development of curriculum and activities that
intersect technology experiences with girls' of color cultural
identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.