* 1947789
* CRII: AF: RUI: Verifiable Computation Outsourcing: A Non-Cooperative Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shikha Singh, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2024
* USD 154,597.00

With the growing popularity of cloud computing, most computation today is not
done locally but rather outsourced to third-party service providers (SPs).
Outsourcing computation brings up the following research problem: how can the
client outsourcing the computation verify that it has been performed correctly,
without having to redo it? Most previous work has studied this problem from a
security standpoint, assuming that the SPs are malicious or adversarial. This
assumption does not capture the nature of SPs on internet marketplaces, who are
often profit-driven, performing computation for money. This project approaches
the problem of verifying outsourced computation from an economic perspective. In
particular, this project focuses on SPs that want to maximize their payment,
with the goal of designing payment schemes that directly incentivize
correctness. The advantage of this approach is that is leads to verification
protocols that are simple and practical, and require extremely small
verification overhead on the part of the client. This project will advance
understanding of the role of incentives in algorithms, which has wide
applications to areas such as crowdsourcing, cloud computing and social
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactive proofs (IP) are a
fundamental theoretical framework used to study verifiable computation
outsourcing. In an IP, the weak client (or verifier) interacts with powerful
service providers (or provers) to determine the truthfulness of their claim.
Existing IP protocols largely fall into two categories: the cooperative-prover
model such as classical IPs or the competing-prover model such as refereed
games. In computation-outsourcing applications, the nature of SPs is arguably in
the middle of these two extremes, neither cooperative or competitive, but
rational---acting to maximize their own payment. The model of non-cooperative
rational interactive proofs was introduced recently to capture this middle
ground. This project aims to take advantage of this new model to design
extremely efficient interactive proofs tailored for computation outsourcing. As
part of this work, new insights and techniques from game theory and mechanism
design will be used to design protocols that: (a) achieve extremely small
verification overhead compared to existing rational-proof and refereed-games
protocols, (b) guarantee robustness against deviating provers (measured by the
notion of utility gap), and (c) do not rely on private channels of communication
between the verifier and provers. The project is divided into two parts. The
first focuses on improving the verification overhead of existing non-cooperative
rational proofs exponentially while simultaneously achieving large utility gap.
The second focuses on improving the state-of-the-art delegation schemes based on
refereed games by removing the requirement that at least one prover is honest
and leveraging incentives of non-cooperative provers to improve the verification
overhead asymptotically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.