* 1947447
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Narrative in Music Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Elizabeth Margulis, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2022
* USD 140,237.00

Music and language are both modes of human communication that convey meaning.
Although there are many studies of how language acquires meaning, little is
known about how music becomes meaningful. One hypothesis is that music acquires
meaning in part because listeners impose narrative significance to musical
events, translating abstract musical sequences into a story line as the notes
unfold (a process known as narrative listening). A series of parallel
experiments will be conducted that vary both the structural features of musical
excerpts and the cultural background of the listener in order to disentangle
questions about the role of nature and experience in the formation of musical
meaning. Learning more about the mechanisms that underpin musical meaning
fundamentally adds to our understanding of human communication and artistic
expression, with the broader potential to lead to improved intercultural
exchange. The work will also contribute new methodologies to probe the musical
experiences of lay listeners across cultures, who often lack the musical
vocabulary to describe their perceptions. By bridging science and the
humanities, the project will provide STEM-based research training to students in
the humanities and, in turn, expose students in the sciences to questions in the
humanities that would benefit from development of novel scientific
methodologies. The project's reach will be expanded by the development and
dissemination of a new app for collecting crowd-sourced data via cell phone.
Embedded GPS technology will allow the researchers to map patterns and
variations in narrative listening across geography and
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a theory-driven and cross-
cultural approach to investigate the core factors that shape narrative listening
to music. The investigators will obtain a normative set of cross-cultural data
on narrative listening for a large sample of Western and Chinese musical
excerpts from both American listeners with little exposure to Chinese music and
from Chinese listeners will little exposure to Western music. If narrative
listening arises from a fundamental tendency to make abstract stimuli concrete,
then listeners will tend to ascribe agency to points in the music that violate
their expectations in order to make sense of what they hear. If narrative
listening arises from enculturation, people should be more likely to perceive
narratives in music from their own culture than from a different culture. Within
a culture, people should be more likely to perceive narratives for high topical-
association music than for low topical-association music. Lastly, the
investigators will examine the relationship between narrative listening and
other well-studied aspects of music perception, providing novel insights about
established phenomena and opening up new avenues of investigation.