* 1947155
* Standard Research Grant: A Novel Philosophical Analysis of How Modern Gauge Symmetries Can Have Empirical Content
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Nicholas Teh, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 382,728.00

This award supports a research project that will develop a new philosophy of
symmetry. The project diagnoses the challenge of the Galilean paradigm (in which
symmetries have empirical content) for gauge symmetry; this is the key symmetry
of our best physical theories, but it does not seem to have any empirical
content. The researchers will put forward a novel conception of symmetry that
can account for the empirical content of gauge symmetry. The project will place
this novel account of symmetry in historical perspective by exploring its
connection to deep conceptual issues raised by Emmy Noether, Albert Einstein,
and Felix Klein. The project will also examine the consequences of the new
account for two important topics in the foundations of physics. These results
will be incorporated into educational programs at graduate, undergraduate, and
K-12 levels; they will be incorporated in undergraduate and graduate courses in
the philosophy of science, and in the creation of outreach events for the South
Bend School System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new philosophy
of symmetry. The researchers will analyze how and why physicists' present
conception of the empirical content of symmetries outstrips the naive Galilean
paradigm. They will use the results of this analysis to develop a new account of
how gauge symmetry (the key symmetry of our best physical theories) can be
empirical. They will then connect their notion of empirical content to an
important episode in the history of symmetry, the Noether-Klein-Einstein
correspondence about energy conservation in General Relativity. Noether and
Klein famously charged that the conservation laws derived by Einstein for
General Relativity were trivial; they do not bear any physical significance. The
researchers will show that Noether and Klein's concerns were precisely about the
failure of the Galilean paradigm, and that Einstein's rejoinders (though not
entirely successful) were important clues towards the project's novel account of
symmetry. The researchers will also apply their notion of empirical content to
two important topics in the foundations of physics; they will use it to shed
light on the possible of existence of boundary observables in Newtonian gravity,
and on the phenomena of the quantum Hall effect&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.