* 1947592
* Global Internal Tide Model from Satellite Altimetry by Resolving Multiconstituent Multimodal Multidirectional Waves
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Zhongxiang Zhao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 596,068.00

The global internal tide field is a superposition of waves with multiple tidal
frequencies, directions, and modes. To fully understand internal tides, it is
necessary to decompose their complex wave field into a series of simpler
monochromatic plane waves. The principal investigator has developed a wave
decomposition technique suitable for use with data from both satellite sea
surface elevation (altimetry) data and numerical simulations that enables the
discovery of unprecedented features hidden in the raw internal wave field. This
project will further develop the technique and apply it to satellite altimetry
covering the global ocean. The results will be used to construct global maps of
internal wave tidal components, provide estimates of their seasonal and
interannual variability and their contribution to ocean mixing. The accuracy of
the satellite observed decomposed internal tides will be evaluated using
existing data from field measurements and numerical simulations. The product of
this research will be useful for the design of field experiments and modeling of
internal tides. In addition, it will benefit research on other ocean processes
influenced by internal tides (e.g., primary productivity, ocean acoustics, coral
reef bleaching, ocean mixing etc.). A series of animations of internal tide
products will be created and shared to the public via YouTube. Some of the
animations will also be used to teach children about the ocean and satellite
technology. This project will support a full-time graduate student at the
University of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internal tides are ubiquitous in
the world oceans but still poorly understood due to the scarcity of field
observations with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution. Satellite
altimetry is the only practical technique for observing internal tides on the
global scale. A previously developed technique applicable to both satellite
altimeter data and numerical simulations and capable of decomposing a given
internal tide field into multimodal multidirectional waves will be further
expanded and applied on a global scale with the aim to: (1) construct global
maps of mode-1â€“3 M2, S2, O1 and K1 internal tides from satellite altimetry; (2)
quantify their seasonal and interannual variations; and (3) calculate along-beam
decay rates and internal tide driven ocean mixing. The new global internal tide
model will consist of separately resolved waves of different frequencies,
different baroclinic modes and different horizontal propagation directions. The
satellite observed internal tides will be validated against in-situ observations
and MITgcm global circulation model simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.