* 1947674
* Teacher Effectiveness and Policy Designs on Teachers' Labor Market
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Chao Fu, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 438,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effectiveness of teachers has been a focal
point of many educational policies, such as teacher accountability policies,
teacher performance pay schemes, and measures to recruit and retain effective
teachers in schools with more disadvantaged students. A major complication for
successfully implementing these policies is the fact that teacher effectiveness
is not easily observable. This project first examines how providing more
transparent information about teacher effectiveness may affect teacher-school
sorting patterns and the achievement of students from different backgrounds.
Then, the project investigates how to improve the design of policies, such as
teacher performance pay schemes, when teacher effectiveness becomes transparent
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploiting the differential implementation
timing of a rigorous teacher evaluation system and a merit pay system in a large
school district, as well as changes in specific components of each policy over
time, this project first analyzes how teacher sorting across schools, teacher
effort, and student outcomes responds to these policy changes. Reducing
information friction may, on the one hand, enhance assortative teacher-school
sorting and widen the achievement gap across schools with different compositions
of students. On the other hand, it may induce teachers to exert more effort and
encourage effective teachers to enter the market. Therefore, it is possible to
improve both overall student achievement and educational equality with well-
designed policy interventions. The second part of this project builds and
estimates an equilibrium model of the teachersâ€™ labor market with information
friction, exploiting policy variation for identification. The estimated model is
used to study counterfactual policy interventions that are supplemented with
teacher evaluation programs, such as the design of a cost-effective merit pay
system that rewards teachers for being effective and for teaching in
disadvantaged schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.