* 1947411
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Planning Flood Resilient Infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Nataya Friedan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 18,182.00

Planners and engineers in municipalities and localities around the United States
are increasingly challenged to develop more efficient and technologically sound
methods for contending with severe disasters, such as wildfires, floods and
natural disasters. In Houston, five 500-year floods have hit in the last five
years according to current Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) flood
risk designations. Every government from local to federal is challenged with
building cities and communities resilient to changing environmental
circumstances. This project investigates how local engineers, developers,
industry representatives, and public officials involved in infrastructure
development navigate these changing conditions in the development of flood
mitigation plans. In addition to providing funding for the training of a
graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, the project would enhance scientific understanding by
broadly disseminating its findings to organizations invested in developing more
effective methods for communicating science and the scientific method in
disaster and flood mitigation planning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
project investigates environmental impact and response at a central node in the
oil and gas industry, Houston, Texas. The major metropolitan city and its
industrial infrastructure is uniquely vulnerable to sea level rise, coastal
erosion, and increasingly devastating storms. The National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) measures current sea level rise at the mouth
of the Houston Ship Channel as higher than almost anywhere else in the world.
The research will include twelve months of ethnographic fieldwork (including
participant-observation and semi-structured interviews as well as mapping
exercises) in Houston examining public and private sector stakeholders roles in
flood infrastructure planning. As threats of intensified flooding loom, how do
these stakeholders negotiate entangled fears of social, economic, and
environmental disasters? Through qualitative and spatial analysis of
ethnographic and archival evidence of flood infrastructure preparations, this
research explores the dichotomy between symbolism and expertise where scientific
knowledge, public narrative, and vested interest may influence sharply different
approaches in infrastructural planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.