* 1947025
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Integrative Approaches to the Turtle Body Plan: Evolutionary Origins of Structural Complexity in an Enigmatic Lineage
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Tyler Lyson, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 12/31/2023
* USD 206,961.00

The turtle shell is truly a wonder of structural and evolutionary biology. It is
a compound feature that includes a series of bones known only in turtles, but it
also integrates a large number of vertebrae, ribs, and shoulder girdle elements.
That the turtle scapula (shoulder blade) lies inside of the rib cage, whereas
all other reptiles and mammals have the scapula on the outside of the ribs, is a
clear indication that turtles represent a challenge to understand how such
apparently dramatic evolutionary change occurs. Exactly how and why turtles
acquired such a peculiar body plan is one of the longest standing problems in
the history of comparative biology, and one that remains very much unresolved.
The largest impediment to clarifying the origin of turtles has been the lack of
transitional fossils linking turtles to other known reptile groups. This absence
of direct evidence regarding turtle ancestry has resulted in strikingly
disparate hypotheses as to where turtles sit within the reptile tree of life,
what features of the modern turtle body plan evolved first, and what selective
advantages these features provided turtle ancestors. This project will address
these problems by coordinating novel anatomical data from recently discovered
fossils, a more detailed understanding of the developmental mechanisms that
regulate the production of turtle-specific traits, and the patterns of genetic
sequences from a wide diversity of reptiles. The end product will be a highly
refined model of turtle evolution that will not only facilitate our
understanding of turtle origins but will serve as a guide for how to tackle
difficult evolutionary problems across deep time. The broad appeal of turtles,
and especially fossil turtles, also ensures that this project will deliver
exciting educational opportunities for people of all ages and backgrounds
through museum exhibits and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
relative ease with which genomic data can now be acquired and analyzed provides
unprecedented opportunities for inferring the evolution of developmental systems
and their resultant phenotypes. This paradigm faces its greatest challenge where
crown clades are separated by extremely long stem lineages, with one of the more
famous examples being the origin of turtles and their shelled body plan. Our
project builds on recent discoveries in development, systematics, and the fossil
record to advance our understanding of early turtle evolution and its relevance
for broad-based questions in comparative biology. The goals of the project can
be summarized under four objectives: (1) use high-resolution imaging and
evolutionary analyses to establish the identity, functionality, and evolutionary
dynamics of character transformations in the skeletal phenotype of the turtle
stem lineage based on the fossil record; (2) use densely sampled ontogenetic
series of modern turtles and amniote outgroups, integrated with experimental
approaches in development, to establish ancestral patterns of morphogenesis,
regulation, and growth for the turtle crown and total group; (3) use diverse
analytical approaches to address the phylogenetic position of Pan-Testudines
among both extant and extinct amniotes and to articulate a time-calibrated
evolutionary model that integrates morphological, developmental, and genetic
data in describing the emergence of turtles and their characteristic features.
In its pursuit to understand the basic principles that underlie the vertebrate
body plan and the mechanisms through which large changes to this plan can occur,
this project is highly congruent with one of NSF’s 10 Big Ideas — “Understanding
the Rules of Life: Predicting Phenotype from
Genotype.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.