* 1947438
* The Williams College SMALL REU Program
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Steven Miller, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 416,100.00

In the Williams College SMALL REU program, for ten weeks each summer (nine in
residence at Williams and one at home), 25 to 40 undergraduates work on research
projects under the direction of a faculty member in mathematics or statistics.
There are usually between 4 and 7 groups each summer of various sizes. The
summer culminates with presentations (at Williams and often at conferences), and
most groups write up their work for submission to a research journal. There are
weekly talks by faculty and students, both in mathematics and in related fields.
Students are part of a vibrant scientific community; over 100 students do
original research in mathematics and the sciences at Williams each summer, and
there are a variety of academic and social activities bringing all the summer
students and faculty together. Now in its fourth decade, participants are
connected with alumni of the program who are able to provide excellent
perspective, advice, and mentorship.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this REU
is to introduce undergraduates to the excitement and challenge of doing original
research in mathematics. Topics will be drawn from a variety of fields. Possible
areas include algebraic geometry, Bayesian statistics, combinatorics,
commutative algebra, computational geometry, CR structures, discrete geometry,
dynamics and ergodic theory, graph theory, hyperbolic manifolds, knot theory,
mathematical biology, mathematical physics, measure theory, minimal surfaces,
number theory, probability, random matrix theory, representation theory,
Riemannian geometry, symmetry groups, and tropical geometry. In the process,
students learn lots of background material. They typically work in groups,
meeting with advisors as needed, and are encouraged to present as well as
publish their work, all valuable skills for graduate school as well as non-
academic pursuits. A variety of mathematical activities and topics provides a
rich intellectual environment; students live together and are constantly
discussing their work, and attend weekly talks by the faculty so they learn the
basics of all the different areas being investigated that summer. Our nation
needs a wider appreciation and understanding of mathematics, and cannot afford
to leave anyone out. We have increased the numbers of students from
traditionally under-represented groups participating in the program over the
last five years, as well as from community college backgrounds, and we are
continuing to look for new and better ways to encourage applications from women,
minorities, first generation college students, and other underrepresented
groups. Students, faculty and the broader mathematics community will benefit
from the presentation and publication of original research. Students will
develop a lifetime network of peers and mentors, and many of them will pursue
graduate studies, partially because of their REU experience. Almost all students
publish papers in research journals and many present their results at national
and international research conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.