* 1947274
* Role of miR156-targeted SQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE transcription factors in floral transition
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Mingli Xu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 04/30/2024
* USD 710,168.00

Flowering is one of the major decisions in a plant’s life cycle and is required
for producing the seeds and fruits that support life on earth. It is important
to understand the mechanism of this process so that ways can be found to respond
to the challenges of climate change and to the pressures on agriculture from an
ever-increasing population. In many species, plants make a unique type of leaf
before making flowers. This phase is the initial stage of reproductive
development, and may be quite short in an annual plant, but is extended in long-
lived perennial plants, many of which are of considerable ecological and
economic importance. This project will investigate how a group of proteins,
known as SPB box transcription factors, specify this initial stage of
reproductive development in the model genetic system, Arabidopsis thaliana.
Discoveries in model systems can provide key information that can be translated
to crop plants in the future. In addition to providing new insights into the
mechanism of flowering, this project will provide training opportunities for a
postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student, and undergraduate students. Some of
the mutants studied in this project have visible phenotypes and could be used to
study genetics and plant development in K-12 classrooms. One to two K-12
schoolteachers from South Carolina will be engaged in this project each summer,
with guidance on how to apply some materials from the project in their
classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a plant grows, the shoot apical meristem
produces lateral organs (leaves and axillary buds) with different developmental
identities—juvenile leaves, adult leaves, cauline leaves and flowers. In
Arabidopsis, the transition between the juvenile vegetative (V1) and adult
vegetative (V2) phase is regulated by miR156 and its targets, SQUAMOSA PROMOTER
BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE (SPL) transcription factors, whereas the transition between
the cauline leaf (V3) and floral (R) phase is regulated by the floral meristem
identity genes, LEAFY and APETALA1. Flowering-time genes regulate the V2 to V3
transition (floral induction), but genes that specify the identity of V3 organs
(cauline leaves, secondary inflorescences) are still largely unknown. Mutations
in SPL2/SPL9/SPL13/SPL15 produce rosette-like cauline leaves, suggesting that
these miR156-targeted SPLs play a key role in promoting the V2 to V3 transition
by specifying the V3 organ identity. This project will use a combination of
molecular, genetic and biochemical approaches to identify the upstream
regulators and downstream targets of these SPLs involved in specifying V3 organ
identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Plant,
Fungal and Microbial Developmental Mechanisms Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.