* 1947560
* Diffusing Colloidal Probe Microscopy of Zwitterionic Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 05/28/2019,12/31/2021
* Margarita Herrera-Alonso, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2021
* USD 294,395.00

Part I: Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Recent attempts to mimic the anti-
biofouling properties of the external membrane of mammalian cells on synthetic
substrates are increasingly relying on the use of zwitterionic-based materials,
i.e., those bearing positively and negatively charged groups. In the context of
biomaterials intended for drug delivery applications, surface modification
methods that preclude aggregation, precipitation or clearance of diagnostic or
therapeutic nanoparticles are particularly important to extend their circulation
time in the body, and allow them to accumulate at specific sites through active
targeting. Despite the tremendous potential of zwitterionic-based materials,
little is known regarding weak interactions between particles and cells due to
the limited sensitivity of existing techniques. In this work, the PIs will
measure nanometer scale interactions between cells and zwitterionic-decorated
particles using non-intrusive microscopy measurements of particle trajectories
and analyses that reveal weak interactions. The PIs will use this method to
evaluate interactions between nanoparticles functionalized with zwitterionic
polymers with well-defined molecular architectures and cell surfaces. Outreach
efforts will involve participation of undergraduate students in research, and
community involvement through an education-based Latino outreach program and
STEM Achievement in Baltimore Elementary Schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II:
Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide fundamental and
technological insights into the molecular and processing parameters that produce
zwitterionic (ZI) particles having the desired combination of specific and non-
specific kT-scale interactions with various biomaterials. Non-specific repulsion
between zwitterionic species and biomaterials will be understood, designed,
optimized by controlling molecular architecture and structure, which will be
quantitatively connected to direct sensitive measurements and models. Specific
interactions to be investigated include sigma receptor-anisamide and
CD44-hyaluronic acid interactions. The work proposed is divided into four tasks.
The first deals with ZI polymer design, synthesis and characterization. The goal
is to produce a library of materials with increasing architectural complexity
that should translate into distinct surface properties. The second task is to
examine ZI particle formation through either copolymer adsorption onto silica
particles or self-assembly of highly branched amphiphilic macromolecules using
processing conditions to affect ZI particle surface properties. The third task
is to carry out diffusing probe measurements of ZI particles with model
synthetic substrates, to ultimately establish the combination of polymer
architecture and adsorption/self-assembly conditions that will result in desired
non-specific repulsion. Having established this, the last task of this proposal
is to use this knowledge to carry out diffusing probe measurements of specific
interactions between ZI particles decorated with specific moieties and cancer
cells. Such measurements will be performed for breast cancer cells to study
interactions between hyaluronic acid and CD44 receptors, as well as, anisamide
and sigma receptors. Each of the four tasks is part of an overarching plan to
measure and interpret how particle-cell interactions are influenced by covalent
attachment, orientation, and organization on synthetic and cell surfaces in
nanobiotechnological applications.