* 1947003
* I-Corps: Enhanced light detection and ranging imaging by advanced signal processing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Andreas Velten, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is related to
the wide range of applications of light detection and ranging (LiDAR). LiDAR
sensors mounted on robots and vehicles are a key component in sensing their
environment. With initial applications in automated vehicles, advanced driver
assistant systems and fully automated vehicles in the future can potentially
reduce the number of accidents caused by inattentive drivers or avoid accidents
altogether. Airborne LiDAR allows for 3D mapping of the earth's surface as well
as canopy and buildings. This information can be used in insurance, mining,
construction planning and other industries. There are also homeland security and
defense applications which can benefit from improved models of the environment
when operating in hostile. The overall domestic LiDAR market is currently
growing rapidly with greater demand for both general and advanced LiDAR signal
processing.

This I-Corps project aims at harnessing the properties of light particles
(photons) for more accurate light detection and ranging (LiDAR) detection. LiDAR
sensors use short laser pulses and record the travel time of photons upon
reflection by objects. This travel time is proportional to the distance traveled
and therefore allows for 3D imaging of the surroundings. Effects such as ambient
light, scene reflectivity, and complex inter-reflections in the scene can
significantly degrade the quality of the derived images. New signal processing
algorithms model these effects on the received photon stream and therefore allow
for higher quality scene estimation. Depth information is fused with another
property of photons, the wavelength, which encodes the color of the reflected
object. Both color and depth information allow for a realistic image of the
environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.