* 1947685
* The Influence of Semantic Granularity in the Neural Reactivation of Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Marc Coutanche, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 480,113.00

People can recognize objects and concepts at different semantic levels, such as
knowing that a pet is an animal, a dog, a German shepherd, and “Fido”. These
levels can be remembered or forgotten differently. When people first learn a
concept, the brain encodes the relevant information at each of these levels into
memory. Each time a memory is retrieved, its underlying neural patterns are
reactivated, including its multiple semantic levels. Yet, the neural
representation of these levels of memories and reactivations are poorly
understood. This project will examine the human brain mechanisms that support
memory for concepts, and the ways in which learning and retrieval affect their
neural representations. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiments
and advanced analytical methods will investigate the brain activity of healthy
adults as they encode and retrieve new concepts. The research will examine how
processing different semantic levels during encoding and retrieval influences a
concept's neural representations and a person’s memory. The findings may apply
to learning, including for formal education and for behavioral interventions.
The project will include workshops for college freshmen on cognitive
neuroscience of learning and retrieval applied to study skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two objectives: 1) to test how the level
of semantic granularity, processed during encoding and retrieval, impacts neural
representation and memory; 2) to test how training protocols strengthen
different levels of neural representations for concepts. The first set of
experiments will examine how the degree of semantic granularity, invoked during
learning and retrieval, determines the specificity of neural reactivation and
final memory. They will also test whether consistency in the levels of semantic
granularity in encoding and retrieval influences neural patterns and memory. The
second set of experiments will examine how testing, re-exposure, and sleep play
a role in this influence. Throughout, studies will employ fMRI to record
patterns of brain activity as participants encode new pairings between words and
images. The encoding and retrieval procedures will be manipulated to emphasize
the item, category, or theme of presented concepts. Data analysis methods will
include representational similarity analysis and machine learning. These will
test alternative neural models for how semantic granularity can be represented
in neural activity patterns within, and across, brain regions. These experiments
will increase understanding of how neural representations of new concepts are
molded by the manner in which they are encoded and
reactivated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.