* 1947306
* RUI: The long-term consequences of anthropogenic activity: a comparative analysis of human-mediated evolution and the origins of rural commensalism
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Elizabeth Scordato, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2024
* USD 732,477.00

This project uses Oceanic swallows, a group of birds native to southeast Asia
and the Pacific, to determine how species inhabit and flourish in human
environments over long periods of time. As humans reshape the global
environment, a critical component of effective conservation strategies is
understanding and predicting how plants and animals will respond to human
landscape alterations. Plants and animals in urban environments can evolve
rapidly, indicating that some species may be able to thrive in close proximity
to humans. Small agricultural villages have persisted for over 12,000 years;
species that successfully inhabit these environments offer a unique window into
the long-term effects of human activity on evolutionary processes. Oceanic
swallows build their nests on human structures and forage over agricultural
fields. The spread of rural environments has thus created extensive new habitat
for these species. This project will rigorously test hypotheses about the role
of human landscape modification in shaping the evolutionary history of Oceanic
swallows over the last 10,000 years. This novel approach is broadly applicable
to other species and will shed new light on how species respond and adapt to
human environments. The project is based at a Hispanic-Serving Institution, and
will involve extensive research experiences for undergraduate students. It also
includes the development of a hands-on, high school- level teaching module on
urban evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage extensive new
geographic sampling, museum specimens, large geospatial datasets, and cutting-
edge genomic approaches to examine how swallows have adapted to living in close
proximity to humans (human commensalism). As different Oceanic swallow lineages
have been commensal for different lengths of time, it is possible to examine the
origins and spread of commensalism across multiple temporal scales and within a
comparative framework comprised of two commensal and two non-commensal lineages.
One lineage of each type has had an extended association with humans, and the
others have had more recent association. This project will 1) use species
distribution modeling to assess the relative roles of climate variation and
post-Neolithic human landscape modification in shaping demographic history,
particularly range expansions and population divergence; 2) use high-resolution
whole-genome sequence data to determine whether commensal behavior arose via
phenotypic plasticity, evolved independently among lineages, or spread via
introgression from a single origin; and 3) evaluate evidence for contemporary
human-mediated hybridization and erosion of reproductive barriers between
previously allopatric groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.