* 1947609
* RESEARCH-PGR: Characterizing the Genomic Basis of Weedy Rice Competitiveness
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Ana Caicedo, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/29/2024
* USD 2,560,467.00

Weeds that infest crop fields are a primary factor limiting global agricultural
productivity in the United States and globally. One of the most problematic
weeds for rice production is weedy rice (Oryza sativa), a close relative of
cultivated rice that infests rice fields and aggressively outcompetes crop
cultivars. This research seeks to understand and characterize the genetic basis
and origins of the traits that allow weedy rice to invade rice fields, reduce
yields and contaminate harvests. Three key features of weedy rice growth and
reproduction will be characterized: patterns of root system growth that allow
the weed to outcompete rice for soil nutrients; the genetic and developmental
basis of seed dispersal mechanisms that allow the weed to rapidly invade and
proliferate in rice fields; and the differential resilience shown by the weed
against rice blast, a common fungal disease of rice fields. In addition to
providing key insights into the basis of competitiveness in weedy rice, the
project will provide genetic resources to the rice research community, training
opportunities for K-12 science teachers, and educational training experiences
for students including hearing-disabled students, a minority group that is
underrepresented in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weedy rice (Oryza sativa)
is an aggressive weed of rice production areas worldwide. It has evolved
multiple times independently through a process of 'de-domestication'
(feralization) from cultivated rice. As such, this system provides a natural
replicated experiment for studying the genetic mechanisms that underlie
weediness traits and the extent to which these are constrained by genetic
background. Prior work by the collaborating research team has established that
weedy rice aggressively outcompetes its cultivated relatives due, in part, to
three key features: altered root system architecture (critical for below-ground
resource acquisition), highly shattering seed (conferring differential
reproductive success and dispersal ability), and differential pathogen
resistance (permitting a competitive advantage in US crop fields). This project
will characterize each of these features of weedy rice competitiveness, with the
following specific goals: 1) to determine the genetic basis of the root system
architecture (RSA) that has evolved convergently with repeated origins of weedy
rice, and establish the connection between weedy rice RSA and weed competition
via differential nutrient uptake; 2) to identify the genetic basis of seed
shattering in independently-evolved populations of weedy rice, and establish the
mechanisms underlying the evolutionary lability of this trait; and, 3) to
determine the genetic and biochemical bases underlying the differential
resilience of US weedy rice to rice blast disease, a major fungal pathogen of
rice. Beyond providing insights for the research community, the project will
also benefit stakeholders, STEM educators and students through the production
and dissemination of genetic and educational resources targeting groups
underrepresented in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.