* 1947290
* Wind-driven Variability in Heat Storage and the Meridional Overturning Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 596,446.00

Observations and climate models show that winds are responsible for much of the
seasonal to interannual variability in ocean heat content and the meridional
overturning circulation (MOC). This study is focused on gaining a better
understanding of how the ocean adjusts to variable winds, with particular focus
on climatically important quantities such as ocean heat content and the MOC
strength and pathways. A theoretical framework will be developed to better
understand how these quantities depend on the controlling parameters, including
mean stratification; region, structure, and frequency of wind variability;
bottom topography; and mean state (including wind-driven gyres and a mean
overturning circulation). The idealized approach adopted will allow for a
general understanding of the controlling physics, including how they will vary
in different oceans around the world, and in a future climate where the mean
state and forcing variability might be different than at present. The results of
this study will be incorporated into graduate level classes and lectures at the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Summer
School, and participation will be sought from undergraduate students through the
WHOI Summer Student Fellow Program. This will provide training in numerical
methods, applied mathematics, climate, and data analysis. Results from this work
will be made available through the peer-reviewed literature, national and
international meetings, and web page content.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite its
known importance for climate, there is currently no analytic theory for how
transients in wind-forcing modify ocean heat storage and transport by the
overturning circulation. This work will combine known features of the large-
scale, low frequency ocean circulation, such as geostrophy, wave transients, and
eddy fluxes, in a simple and compact way to represent climatically important
integrated quantities such as ocean heat content and mass transports. The
primary intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in developing a theoretical
framework to connect regions of variable wind stress to remote ocean currents.
This inevitably involves understanding how heat is stored and transported on
both gyre- and global-scales in the ocean. The starting point is a linear theory
based on isopycnal mass budgets in the interior subject to Sverdrup dynamics and
Rossby and boundary wave transients. The predictions from the theory, and the
importance of such nonlinear processes as outcropping, eddy fluxes, closed
potential vorticity contours, and inertial western boundary currents, will be
assessed with the use of idealized numerical models and published ocean state
estimates from the ECCO (Estimating the Circulation and Climate of the Ocean)
consortium. Diagnostics from these more complete models will also be used to
guide revisions to the linear theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.