* 1947826
* CRII: SHF: Efficiency-Aware Robust Implementation of Neural Networks with Algorithm-Hardware Co-design
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Priyadarshini Panda, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

With the advent of Internet-of-Things and the necessity to enable intelligence
in embedded devices like mobile phones, wearables etc., low-power and secure
hardware implementation of neural networks is vital. Despite achieving high
performance and unprecedented classification accuracies on a variety of
perception tasks, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been shown to be
adversarially vulnerable. For example, a DNN can be easily fooled into mis-
classifying an input with slight changes of image-pixel intensities. This
vulnerability severely limits the deployment and its use in safety-critical
real-world tasks such as self-driving cars, malware detection, healthcare
monitoring systems etc. This project investigates hardware aware techniques to
resolve or resist software vulnerabilities (specifically, adversarial attacks)
by exploring the design space of energy-accuracy-robustness trade-off cohesively
with algorithm-hardware co-design to create functional intelligent systems.
Thus, the project seeks to develop robustness-aware algorithms broadly
applicable to the energy-efficient and secure implementation of DNN engines on
both current CMOS accelerator platforms and emerging memory technologies.
Furthermore, the research will support the interdisciplinary development of a
diverse cohort of PhD and undergraduate students, and the development of a
graduate-level course at Yale University on neural network architectures and
learning algorithms tied with robustness from circuit and system design
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of this project are divided
into two thrusts. The first thrust develops robustness centred algorithms in
DNNs where techniques such as quantization, pruning among others are used to
improve the adversarial resilience of models while yielding energy-efficiency
benefits. This part also identifies a new form of noise stability for DNNs,
i.e., the sensitivity of each layer’s computation to adversarial noise. This
allows for a principled way of applying layer-specific algorithmic modifications
that incurs adversarial robustness as well as energy-efficiency with minimal
loss in accuracy. The second thrust benchmarks and implements the proposed
robust computing models on emerging technology-based memristor crossbar-array
platforms to investigate the hardware-level benefits (while comparing with
standard CMOS accelerator baselines). In particular, design issues and
complexities for implementing variable precision, stochastic and combined
stochastic-deterministic neuronal activity will be investigated. The two thrusts
offer a fundamental co-design infrastructure where algorithmic innovations will
be used to optimize robust and efficient hardware implementations for neural
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.