* 1947887
* CRII: AF: RUI: Engineering and Experiments with Geometric Spanner Construction Algorithms for Massive Point Sets
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Anirban Ghosh, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 04/30/2023
* USD 174,895.00

Geometric spanners, having their roots in classic graph theory, are fascinating
mathematical structures in computational geometry with numerous applications in
computing such as robotics, computer networks, and distributed systems. Spanners
also find applications in urban planning, transport network design, and in many
other areas where efficient network design is a necessity. The last few decades
saw a plethora of new geometric-spanner construction algorithms and a multitude
of structural results. Despite such monumental work, there remains a gap between
theory and practice of geometric spanners. The investigator and a team of
student researchers will aim to narrow down this gap through algorithm
engineering and experiments. An important collection of spanner construction
algorithms will be engineered and experimented using massive point sets
(synthetic and real-world) to determine their practical efficacy. The
collaborative research activities in this project will prepare the participating
students, primarily undergraduates, for the future of theory and practice of
geometric computing. Engineering and experiments with such algorithms will serve
as a unique learning experience for these students to deal with practical issues
of algorithmic efficiency. The scientific outcomes of this project will be
leveraged to create new course material on algorithm engineering and
experiments, where students will apply their theoretical knowledge of computer
algorithms to practice. This project will implement two specific initiatives for
outreach: (i) organization of summer coding camps for local high school
students, and (ii) organization of high-school programming competition. Minority
and underrepresented students will be highly encouraged to join this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric spanners are mainly of theoretical
interest to geometers. The main limitation of the theoretical approach is the
lack of specificity. A pencil-and-paper geometric-spanner construction algorithm
is a far cry from a working program, and considerable effort is required to fill
in the details to get from the former to the latter. Without engineering and
experiments, these state-of-the-art algorithms may remain confined forever in
the theoretical arena. In this project, the geometric spanner construction
algorithms will be treated as laboratory subjects, akin to natural sciences and
much different from traditional theoretical analysis. This will likely open up
new directions in the field. In the era of Big Data, geometric datasets are
abundant and are being generated at an unprecedented rate. Without rigorous and
systematic experimentation, it remains unknown which of these construction
algorithms are practical, especially for massive point sets (having millions of
points). The design of new practical heuristics will increase their real-world
performance, in terms of speed, memory, and quality of the generated spanners. A
renewed focus on these algorithms will provide new insights regarding their
practical uses for massive point sets, which otherwise cannot be obtained from
their theoretical analyses. Parallel adaptations of the practical algorithms (to
be determined using rigorous and systematic experiments) and the design of new
provably efficient practical hybrid algorithms will be beneficial in this age of
Big Data. Theoretical analyses will be obtained to support the experimental
observations, which will provide a holistic view of their practical performance.
New theoretical results are likely to be obtained from the algorithm experiments
to be conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.