* 1947750
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Cybersecurity Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Clemente Izurieta, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/29/2024
* USD 404,702.00

This funding renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
Montana State University. A team of experienced faculty mentors will guide
undergraduate students in summer research projects focused on cybersecurity
algorithms, particularly algorithms to defend against cyber-attacks. They will
use a unique environment called the Software Factory that helps them apply sound
software engineering and development techniques as they develop and test their
algorithms. The site will recruit a cohort of 10 students each summer with a
focus on students from non-research-intensive institutions as well as students
from groups traditionally under-represented in the computing fields. The
students will also participate in other professional development that will help
prepare them for graduate studies and other careers in computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
intellectual focus on cybersecurity algorithms and the strong faculty group
guiding the research as well as the state-of-the art facilities the students
will use. The research focuses on the important area of cybersecurity attacks,
in particular: source code analysis and detection of software weaknesses and
vulnerabilities, attack pattern detection through machine learning, anomaly
detection, and blockchain based reporting of threats. The objectives of the site
are to expose undergraduate students to real-world and innovative cybersecurity
algorithms research grounded in modern software engineering environments, to
encourage more undergraduates to continue their academic careers and seek
graduate degrees in computer science and related disciplines, to develop
research skills and improve communication and collaborative skills, and to
foster collaboration and entrepreneurship in the development of demonstrable
prototype software through the Software Factory environment. This site has the
potential to contribute to the body of knowledge of cybersecurity research and
to help develop the future cybersecurity workforce, an area of critical need
within the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.