* 1947464
* RUI: In-Kind Giving: Motives, Beliefs, and Behaviors
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sarah Jacobson, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 205,072.00

Charities receive significant amounts of non-cash donations (in-kind donations)
even though cash donations would be more efficient since non-cash donations
involve significant inventory and storage cost, and possibly damages and loss in
value over time. Relatively little is known about why people give, and charities
accept in-kind donations. This research project will use economic theory and
experimental methods to study the motives, beliefs, and behavior as to why
donors give and charities accept in-kind donations. Understanding the motives
and beliefs behind in-kind giving is important because a significant amount of
giving occurs as in-kind donations. Second, understanding why people give, and
charities accept in-kind giving will allow inefficiencies in in-kind giving to
be addressed with well-designed interventions. The results of this research will
contribute to improve efficiency in charitable giving and increase the
prosperity and welfare of the country by providing inputs into policies to
increase efficiency in charitable donations. By benefiting charities, the
research results further benefit donors, recipients of charity services, and
local communities. The results will also help establish the US as the global
leader in improving the efficiency of charitable
giving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a theoretical framework to
study charity and donor behavior. It proposes a two-part study to investigate
charity and donor motivation, beliefs, and behavior regarding in-kind gifts: a
telephone survey of charities, and a suite of laboratory human subject
experiments to learn about donors. The theoretical model, charity survey, and
laboratory experiments will identify factors associated with in-kind giving and
advance understanding of the micro-foundations of behavior and the science of
generosity. The theoretical model and experiment include a charity with multiple
inputs compared to past studies that either omit a charity or focus only on
overhead cost. The charity survey will provide insights into charities’
production functions and how charities assess and influence donor behavior. The
laboratory experiments will test whether the ability to give in kind affects
overall giving as well as test four key explanations for the prevalence of in
kind gifts: preferences, information, and beliefs, overhead and waste, and
mistrust combined with moral wiggle room. The results will provide new insights
into the complex interacting effects of preferences, beliefs, and information on
generosity. The results will also have direct implications for theoretically
related phenomena, including social preferences and individual decision making,
volunteering, restricted cash gifts, and donor demand for control. The results
of this research will also help establish the US as the global leader in
improving the efficiency of charitable giving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.