* 1947074
* Collaborative Research: An Alaskan perspective on middle Paleozoic terrane translation, contraction, and subduction initiation in northwestern Laurentia
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Justin Strauss, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 04/30/2024
* USD 249,582.00

A fundamental concept in plate tectonics is that ancient continental margins
undergo a conversion process from “passive” zones of sediment accumulation to
“active” zones dominated by subduction, volcanism, and mountain building. The
process by which this transition occurs is through subduction initiation along
continental margins. However, modern examples and numerical models of subduction
initiation remain highly contentious. The late Paleozoic (ca. 450–300 million
years ago) conversion of northwestern North America from a passive to an active
margin is often cited as a classic example of this fundamental plate tectonic
process, but very little is known about the nature and timing of key events in
northern Alaska and Yukon, Canada, that led to this subduction initiation event.
This study promotes collaboration between academic researchers at three U.S.
institutions and government researchers at the United States Geological Survey
(USGS) to better inform our understanding of late Paleozoic tectonic events in a
remote and understudied region of North America. A diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students will participate in research initiatives at
each institution. In addition, the research team will collaborate with the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service and the USGS to disseminate geologic
knowledge of Arctic Alaska to the public, to enhance the economic
competitiveness of the U.S. and facilitate the training of the next generation
of Arctic Earth scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent models for the middle
Paleozoic tectonic evolution of North America (Laurentia) highlight margin-
parallel transport of circum-Arctic terranes followed by widespread continental
subduction initiation from the Yukon to Nevada. However, the timing, nature, and
duration of middle Paleozoic orogenic events remain ambiguous. This project will
focus on key structural relationships and unique Devonian–Carboniferous
synorogenic sedimentary and magmatic rocks within the Arctic Alaska terrane of
northern Alaska. The research consists of three major components: 1) the
examination of synorogenic rocks coupled with the development of a regional
provenance dataset; 2) a petrological, geochemical, and geochronological
examination of regional Middle to Upper Devonian igneous rocks; and 3) a field-
based structural study integrated with regional seismic datasets to reconstruct
the style of Devonian–Carboniferous deformation in Arctic Alaska. This work will
provide critical new insights into the Paleozoic tectonic evolution of
northwestern North America and the greater circum-Arctic region to assess the
viability of several subduction initiation mechanisms. In addition, this project
will provide new piercing points for Mesozoic tectonic reconstructions of the
Arctic, with relevance to several subdisciplines of the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.