* 1947391
* CAREER: Large Scale Manufacturing of Metasurfaces Using Microsphere Photolithography
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Edward Kinzel, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 02/28/2023
* USD 364,358.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to generate the fundamental manufacturing science necessary to economically
create metasurfaces at large scales. Metasurfaces are microscale-to-nanoscale
structured surfaces that are engineered to produce electromagnetic properties
beyond what is available in nature, and have many potential fundamental
applications applications including enhancing heat transfer, increasing the
detection limits of gas sensors, and ultrathin optical devices. Using
conventional lithography-based approaches, metasurfaces are very expensive, and
as a result are generally produced only at the centimeter scale for laboratory
demonstrations. This project will create new manufacturing techniques
emphasizing Microsphere Photolithography (MPL), which uses self-assembled
microspheres to focus photonic jets into a photoresist layer, generating
indentations in the surface. The spheres are subsequently removed to reveal the
pattern. The project will rigorously determine the process-structure-metasurface
performance relationships for MPL and establish pathways to scale-up to mass
production, including roll-to-roll printing and electroforming. The integrated
education program will engage students by allowing them to design/build/test
devices that demonstrate the improved performance associated with sub-micron
structures but at scales that they can handle. A particular emphasis is placed
on increasing the involvement of first generation, rural, college students and
underrepresented minorities in engineering as well as developing a trained
workforce for the rapidly emerging advanced optics sector.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will create a framework for manufacturing using
Microsphere Photolithography (MPL). The project entails four research objectives
(1) generation of complex metasurfaces using MPL, (2) improving the yield of the
process through improved self-assembly and metrology, (3) scaling the process
using reusable masks including a roll-to-roll configuration and (4) integrating
the MPL approach with electrodeposition The research will also generate accurate
physics based models for the process, including the effects of normal and off-
axis illumination. This will facilitate better metasurface performance and
address the critical problem of scalable low-cost manufacturing of micro-to-
nanostructures in the context of representative test-beds including enhanced
radiative cooling of buildings, and planar optics. The research outcomes will be
new knowledge about the material/photonic jet interaction, significantly
improving the manufacturing platform for the fabrication of metasurfaces and
similar structures.