* 1947675
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Evaluating Calcification on a Hawaiian Coral Reef Using a Novel, Solid-State Total Alkalinity and pH Sensor
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Todd Martz, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,479.00

Changing environmental conditions, including ocean warming and ocean
acidification, are having a profound impact on the chemistry of the ocean and on
marine ecosystems, particularly coral reefs. Net Ecosystem Calcification (NEC)
rate is a strong indicator of stress in coral reef systems, but the lack of
sensors that can make autonomous measurements at appropriate time and space
scales has limited the scientific community's ability to fully examine the
factors that drive NEC changes in coral reef environments. This project
addresses the sensor limitation by furthering the development of a novel
technology that can measure both total alkalinity and pH every 60 seconds. The
solid-state sensor design does not rely on chemical reagents that need to be
replaced or pollute the environment. The utility of this novel sensor will be
proven in Kaneohe Bay Hawaii, one of the most well instrumented and studied
coral reef ecosystems in the world. The successful completion of this project
will not only improve our understanding of the drivers of NEC variability, but
will also provide the community with a new ocean acidification sensor package
that could be used to characterize the ocean carbon system under a wide variety
of circumstances. The improvements and documentation produced on how to build
these sensors will take the community one step closer to having a commercially
viable system that could be transitioned to industry. This work will help inform
Hawaiian managers as well as those from other Pacific Islands with substantial
coral reef structures on how to evaluate the health and growth of their reef
systems. This project will also help train the next generation of ocean
scientists through support of a postdoctoral associate and graduate student who
will learn to apply the sensor to field measurements and ocean carbon research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solid-state, reagentless sensor package is
based on an ISFET coulometric diffusion titration. The investigators propose to
build four systems to test key calcification hypotheses that can best be
addressed with these new sensors. They will deploy one stationary sensor on a
mooring inside Kaneohe Bay Hawaii, in close proximity to an actively growing
coral reef, and one stationary sensor on a mooring outside of Kaneohe Bay that
is largely representative of the waters entering the reef system. Two additional
sensor packages will be mounted in a low profile surface drifter for Lagrangian
studies over the reef flat between the moorings. These sensors will provide
measurements of seawater carbon chemistry at a resolution and precision not
previously possible. The simultaneous characterization of waters entering the
reef and leaving the reef will allow the investigators to study the drivers of
reef calcification over a wide range of time-scales from minutes to
seasons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.