* 1947050
* Mid-scale RI-2: Grid-Connected Testing Infrastructure for Networked Control of Distributed Energy Resources
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2025
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/2025
* USD 33,037,250.00

The current power grid faces the long-term challenge of efficiently integrating
renewables and distributed energy resources (DERs) due to demand inflexibility,
legacy grid operations, and uncertainties caused by human behavior. This
challenge becomes more acute as energy generation becomes ‘greener’ and more
distributed, and as electric vehicles proliferate. The Distributed Energy
Resources Connect (DERConnect) infrastructure project envisions a unique open-
access and remote access national testbed facility that will accelerate the
development of methods and tools that incorporate real-time data analytics,
machine learning, and distributed control algorithms into future grid
architectures under dynamic conditions. DERConnect represents a first-of-its-
kind complete integrated grid system, enabling the exploration of joint
optimization of grid operations and communications infrastructure in both normal
and adversarial operating conditions. The project aligns well with the nation's
high-priority goals of clean and efficient energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As noted
in 2017 and 2019 National Renewable Energy Laboratory workshops, the major
limitation in developing new power grid technologies is the lack of large-scale
environments to test and validate effective control algorithms. The DERConnect
testbed being created in this project will integrate a combination of DERs,
including photovoltaics, battery energy storage, electric vehicles, hardware
emulators (to emulate solar and wind energy sources), and controllable building
subsystems such as lighting and heating, ventilation and air conditioning
subsystems using a combination of simulation, emulation, and physical hardware.
The DERConnect will permit researchers to explore innovative distributed control
algorithms and tools for complex, accessible, and trustworthy cyber-physical
systems, and to study the interplay between humans, technology, access to
information and incentives. The infrastructure facility addresses a high
national need and offers stakeholders the ability to conduct research on the
control and operation of multiple and diverse DERs in a realistic and cyber-
secured environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DERConnect facility will be a
platform for new opportunities to train and develop the next generation of
students, teachers, and workforce critical for the successful modernization of
the U.S. power grid. By leveraging University of California, San Diego education
programs, the DERConnect team will implement extensive education and outreach
activities for K-12 students and teachers, and partner with local STEM programs
such as the California State Summer School for Mathematics and Science, called
COSMOS, and the Santa Fe Community College. The DERConnect project is an ideal
training basis for microgrid design and construction with unparalleled benefits
to the California Native American tribes who rely on microgrid infrastructures
for energy security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.