* 1947176
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Neurophysiological Basis of the Light-Dependent Magnetic Compass in Birds
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Timothy Gentner, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 220,000.00

The ability to detect the earth's magnetic field and use this information for
orientation is widespread among animals. Recent evidence supports a chemical,
light-dependent, radical-pair magnetoreception mechanism in night-time migratory
songbirds. The goal of the proposed work is to test the hypothesis that
Cluster-N, a sub-region of the avian visual Wulst analogous to the mammalian
visual cortex, processes light-mediated magnetic compass information, and to
explore the magnetic map of space encoded in the spiking patterns of Cluster-N
neurons. Better understanding of a wider range of sensory processing beyond the
"textbook" five senses provides a venue for broad educational impacts that cut
across multiple academic levels. The research objectives of the project will
provide interdisciplinary training to two graduate students at the interface of
physics, behavioral and neuro-biology. One of the PIs is a Director of the UCSD
Neurosciences Graduate Program. which oversees an established and successful
K-12 education outreach program, with the broad goal of sharing knowledge of the
brain and neuroscience research with San Diego students and community members.
Graduate students and PIs will work directly with high school students and
teachers from San Diego Unified and other nearby school districts to develop
interactive science teaching modules provided (and presented) to each school and
lead a Teacher Training Program. The program currently offers four neuroscience
modules, that can be led by either a UCSD researcher or high school teacher that
has been trained by the group. Current modules introduce Comparative
Neuroanatomy, Brain Dissection, Electrophysiology, and Histology. The PIs are
currently creating a fifth module built around sensory systems, and plan to
include magneto-reception in this new module.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Converging
evidence supports the involvement of an avian forebrain visual area, cluster-N,
in processing information for the light-dependent magnetic compass that night-
migratory songbirds use to navigate. The electrophysiological responses of
Cluster-N neurons to well-controlled magnetic field and visual stimuli have not
been examined, leaving a deep gap in our understanding of the biology of this
novel sensory system. To fill this gap, the PIs exploit the interdisciplinary
expertise of two research groups: the Ritz lab, focused on the biophysics of
cryptochrome (Cry) photo-magnetoreception, and the Gentner lab, focused on the
sensory electrophysiology of Cluster-N neurons. Building on a modelling
framework provided by the Ritz group, the Gentner group will test explicit
predictions of the Cry-hypothesis for electrophysiological light-mediated
magnetic responses of Cluster-N neurons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.