* 1947561
* Heteropolymeric Semi-Autonomous Repeat Proteins: Coupling Energetics, Structure, and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Douglas Barrick, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2024
* USD 914,000.00

Proteins are large molecules that play many critical roles in the body. In this
research project, experiments will be performed to learn how protein molecules
interact with each other. Proteins often stick together or bind to other
proteins of the same type, or of different types, and these types of
interactions are critical to protein structure, function, and stability. Though
it is fairly easy to "see" these interactions by determining structures of
protein complexes, the rules by which the different parts of proteins bind are
not known. Here, a series of proteins have been identified in which the protein
subunits that bind are all in a single protein chain, making studies of their
interactions quite simple to study. Studies will take advantage of the
architecture of these "tandem repeat proteins" to learn the rules by which
protein subunits stick together. These rules will reveal not only why tandem
repeats stick together, but also why separate protein chains stick together.
Thus these rules will provide an understanding of protein structure and function
in complexes ranging from pairs of protein chains all the way up to the very
large protein assemblies that give cells and tissues their shapes and mechanical
properties and allow cells to communicate with each other. This research will
help train students, both at the undergraduate and graduate level, in the
methods of cutting-edge biophysics and biochemistry, both in the laboratory and
through the use of computer simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will
use experimental and computational methods. Fragments of five different proteins
will be prepared in the lab, and their structures will be studied with x-ray
diffraction and magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Fragment stabilities will be
determined using optical techniques like fluorescence and circular dichroism
spectroscopy. Computer simulations will also be used to learn what types of
interactions promote interaction between protein subunits. A key aspect of this
research project is that the repeating structure of proteins studied here can be
analyzed with a model called an "Ising" model. This model allows the precise
measurement of the strength of interaction between protein subunits. The rules
that are learned from this analysis will apply not only to other repeat
proteins, but to non-repeating protein assemblies, which use the same types of
interactions (packing, charge interactions, and hydrogen bonding) as repeat
proteins do.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.