* 1947077
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Study of Patient-Activism and an Emerging Illness
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Emily Rogers, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 14,654.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation research project to conduct a
sociological study of people with chronic fatigue syndrome. The researcher will
attempt to understand how people with this syndrome seek legitimation of their
bodily experience, and in the process attempt to put into practice the syndrome
as a disease in and beyond biomedicine. The project will build on three years of
preliminary research, and it will be the first study to examine the syndrome
using participant-observation as its primary research strategy. The researcher
will inquire into the forms of sociality that are possible in the face of
exhausted bodies, the distribution of biomedical knowledge, and the stratified
nature of contemporary US healthcare. She will also explore networks of
knowledge exchange among patients, doctors, researchers, and institutions that
form around the diagnostic term and shape its medicalization. Results of this
research are to be presented at conferences and published in academic journals.
The researcher will also disseminate findings to the patient community, deliver
a policy paper to policymakers, and continue to work with the patient community
to develop further policy solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ethnographic
research project on chronic fatigue syndrome promises to make substantial
contributions to Science and Technology Studies, Anthropology, and related
disciplines. The researcher will systematically record in real-time the process
by which symptoms are transformed into disease. The results of the study will
serve to advance theories of the role of symptoms in sustaining biosociality by
presenting a case study in which patient socialities emerge without known
biomarkers in common. It promises to meaningfully advance understandings of the
role of patient activism in the formation of novel diagnoses and new diseases
within the taxonomies of Western biomedicine, and of the reasons that patient
movements either succeed or fail. It will also contribute to ongoing
reconsideration of the body in disability studies by theorizing impairment as a
resource for collective action. Finally, it may enhance phenomenological
approaches to anthropology in ways that may generate new theories of disease
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.