* 1947287
* Effects of Victimization on Engagement and Expression
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Carlson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 379,975.00

This project examines the effect of severe crime victimization on the
mobilization of friends and family. Specifically, it investigates why some of
these individuals mobilize and others do not and for those who do, why they
mobilize in the way that they do. Prior research shows that victimization of a
friend or family member affects public activity. In this project, interviews
with such individuals are used to research how these events have affected their
psychological, social, and public lives. Findings will be useful to social
service agencies, decision makers, and others seeking to improve outcomes in
this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypotheses that the forms of victimization will
affect responses, conditional on demographic characteristics, will be
investigated by identifying 36 cases of victimization and interviewing 5 to 15
individuals per case. These interviews will be spread across three different
categories of victimization in two locations with different cultures. The
interviews will be analyzed to engage questions regarding why people participate
in the movements they do, the social psychological precursors to and
consequences of public engagement, and the relationship between public culture
and public outcomes. In doing so, the project will lay intellectual groundwork
for scholars interested in analyzing the import of victimization, including but
extending beyond the victimization investigated here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.