* 1947065
* EAGER:  Malicious Behavior Detection in Hybrid Dynamic Spectrum Access
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Linke Guo, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 10/31/2020
* USD 56,664.00

To tackle the ever-increasing spectrum scarcity issue, dynamic spectrum access
is envisioned as a set of promising new spectrum management paradigms. Although
it has enabled the opportunistic access of underutilized licensed bands, various
practical factors, such as environmental dynamics, intentional interference, and
unauthorized transmission, hinder it from wide deployment. The recently released
FCC rules suggest participatory real-time spectrum sensing can greatly improve
the spectrum utilization efficiency for database-driven spectrum sharing, which
forms a new paradigm, hybrid dynamic spectrum sharing. However, the frequent
information exchanged between secondary users and spectrum database can be
easily intercepted and manipulated by malicious users, which not only downgrades
the spectrum efficiency but also incurs severe security breaches to the hybrid
dynamic spectrum access system. This project will explore new paradigms of
safeguarding the future cognitive radio system with focus on non-compliance
behavior detection. The success of this project will serve as a key enabler to
provide reliable wireless communication in the near future.

This project will investigate several fundamental security challenges in the
newly defined hybrid dynamic spectrum access. This first research task will
identify new attack models that compromise the spectrum efficiency and then
provide countermeasures adapted to future wireless systems. Due to the inherent
nature of database-driven spectrum access, primary user emulation (PUE)
attackers can retrieve the spectrum availability information to either perform
as the incumbent user (IU) when it is not present, or try to increase secondary
users' transmission power to interfere with present IUs. Featuring the sensing
results stored in the database, novel detection schemes will be designed to
mitigate the influence brought by the attack. The second research task leverages
physical-layer approaches to detect unauthorized access under different channel
models. To address this issue, channel availability information will be used to
detect malicious secondary users. Meanwhile, the detection mechanisms will be
developed with joint consideration on practicality and efficiency. Additionally,
the project includes strong validation component that combines simulation study,
prototyping, and experimentation. It will thus provide an effective training
ground for interdisciplinary subjects including wireless networks, wireless
communication, and cybersecurity, all of which are critical to diversified
professionals for future national work force.