* 1947614
* The effect of rotational evolution on the surface and interior of the early Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Among the unsolved mysteries of Earth’s history are the age of the first
continental crust and whether processes akin to the modern plate tectonic cycle
are required to form continental crust. The oldest preserved minerals found on
Earth are zircons up to 4.4 billion years old, which is only a few tens of
million years younger than the Earth itself. Some geochemists interpret these
zircons as evidence that there was already, at that time, crust similar to
continents, but it is very unclear how and whether plate tectonics could have
started so early. In this work the investigators will explore an alternative
series of processes that operated only in this early era of Earth history and
determine whether these processes could have led to the formation of continental
crust and could explain the zircon evidence. The process to be studied is rapid
changes in the Earth’s rotation rate, or length of day. This is motivated by the
most successful theories of the origin of the Moon, which all involve a giant
impact, perhaps with a Mars-sized object, that left the Earth molten and rapidly
spinning and ejected debris that condensed to form a very close-in Moon. It only
takes about a million years for the outer shell of the Earth to freeze and
become rigid, forming a crust and lithosphere (a crust that would be, at this
stage, nothing like continents). It is well-understood that, over the next ten
million years or so (and continuing at an ever-decreasing rate all the way to
the present), the enormous tides raised by such a close moon cause a
gravitational interaction that slows the Earth’s rotation and boosts the Moon to
a higher orbit. What has not been studied in detail is the consequence of this
for the shape of the Earth itself and for the deformation experienced by the
rocky outer shell of the Earth as it changes shape. A rapidly spinning planet
flattens significantly into a shape with a large equatorial bulge so that just
after the Moon formed, the radius of the Earth through the equator may have been
twice as large as that through the poles. As the length of day increases and the
equatorial diameter decreases, this puts the entire equatorial region into a
state of compressive stress that will thicken the lithosphere, driving possibly
water-bearing material (that has interacted with the steam-rich early
atmosphere) to depths where it undergoes another stage of melting, the products
of which should resemble continental crust. In order to study these phenomena in
detail, investigators will create a series of computer codes necessary to
describe rapidly rotating planets and the melting and crystallization processes
they experience. The team will document and release these codes to the
scientific community for use in numerous other studies. They also intend to
develop educational and outreach resources based on the unique and dramatic
series of events that our planet experienced at its birth. This work will
involve advanced scientific and professional training for a postdoctoral scholar
as well as undergraduate research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
numerical models that will be used to explore the consequences of rotational
evolution on the early Earth include HERCULES, alphaMELTS, Perple_X, and custom
advection-diffusion codes. HERCULES solves the hydrostatic equations of
planetary structure in a frame that does not assume spherical symmetry or small
perturbations thereto. It is able to accurately describe pressure, density, and
gravity in a planet with arbitrarily fast rotation rate up to its stability
limit (where angular acceleration at the equator exactly cancels gravity).
HERCULES will be improved for this project to incorporate a wider range of
equations of state. Extents of melting as a function of latitude and the
composition and thickness of proto-crust will then be computed in the structures
predicted by HERCULES using the pMELTS calibration, implemented in alphaMELTS
for MATLAB or Python (tools developed with NSF geoinformatics support). The next
stage is to move from statics to dynamics and calculate deformation rates and
mechanisms using tectonophysics codes that incorporate elastic-plastic
rheologies, brittle failure and viscous flow. Knowing the type of faults that
are predicted and the amplitude of motion, the investigators can describe the
pressure-temperature paths that protocrustal material will experience using
advection-diffusion models. Finally, along those P-T paths Perplex_X
pseudosections will be utilized to predict where felsic melts will form and
whether the resulting crust will be buoyantly stable and likely to survive long
enough to be eroded at the surface and create detrital
zircons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.