* 1947152
* RUI: Disposition: The Army Corps of Engineers and the Reimagining of the Upper Mississippi River
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Roopali Phadke, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 142,973.00

This award provides funds for a two-year project that aims to study a large
study that is currently being conducted by the Army Corps of Engineers (ACE). In
2018, ACE officially began its process of reimagining the Upper Mississippi
River when Congress charged the agency to conduct a disposition study to examine
the costs and benefits of continuing to operate three federal projects which no
longer serve their authorized purposes. ACE’s multiyear study will ask what
value the American public derives from the federal government’s operation of
these projects. The aim of the two-year project that is being funded by this
award aims to both inform and shape the ACE’s engagement and decision-making
process in real time. The research will document, interpret and experiment with
public engagement processes around the ACE’s Upper Mississippi River disposition
study. The research will increase the societal understandings of these
challenges through its public facing efforts, including a project website and
presentations of local seminars. The findings will be shared with downriver
Mississippi research groups in St. Louis and New Orleans. In addition, the team
will work with artists to create a multimedia, immersive night-time public art
installation called “Illuminate the Lock” that seeks to open new conversations
about the river’s future. The project also provides intensive undergraduate
training opportunities through a suite of course-based modules and summer
research fellowships. Students will be mentored by an interdisciplinary academic
group who are deeply invested in community-based research and publicly engaged
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project asks three main questions: How is
the ACE engaging diverse publics in considering what value locks and dams
provide in the upper basin? Which modes of engagement open up or close down
imaginings of a future river? How might alternative forms of participation aid
policymaking by engaging more inclusive forms of deliberation? The project
pursues three stages of qualitative research to address these questions. The
research team will review the public processes and outcomes of recent, smaller
ACE disposition studies in Kentucky, Georgia and Maine. They also plan to
observe, record and analyze the format and testimony delivered at ACE
disposition hearings in 2020-2021. Finally, the team will design a series of
focus groups that serve to perpendicularly record public opinion through a
series of Upper Mississippi walking, biking and Paddleboat excursions led by
expert guides in Minneapolis and St. Paul. This research project synergizes two
exciting areas of STS scholarship: critical infrastructural theory and public
engagement studies. In the context of river engineering, and ACE disposition
studies, the research will examine both the limitations of conventional
administrative practice and how STS interventions can steer agencies toward more
inclusive, reflexive and creative public engagement. The research team will
publish peer reviewed articles in journals such as Science as Culture and
Environmental Planning, as well as a special issue of the open access journal
Open Rivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.