* 1947965
* Linking eco-evolutionary dynamics of thermal adaptation and grazing in copepods from highly seasonal environments
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Hans Dam, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 606,868.00

Many parts of the ocean are warming rapidly, but it is still unknown how this
warming will affect marine food webs. Copepods, small crustaceans, are the most
abundant animals in the ocean; consequently, they play crucial roles in plankton
marine food webs and in the transfer of energy to fishes. Many species of
copepods are able to choose between prey such as microscopic plants and single-
celled animals. The choice affects how energy moves through marine food webs.
Past work suggests that increasing temperature should favor herbivory over
carnivory. This project is investigating whether this prediction holds in the
face of genetic adaptation to warming in highly seasonal systems such as coastal
temperate zones. Results from this study are contributing to understanding and
predicting the response of marine ecosystems to future climate conditions, as
well as for planning and implementing sustainable fisheries management plans.
Other broader impacts include the development of learning modules for high
school and college students. Hands-on science exhibits for K-6 students and
public presentations at established lecture series focus on the role of copepods
in marine food webs in coastal habitats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting
responses of the oceanic biota to climate change is limited not only by an
incomplete understanding of how warming affects ecological interactions and
evolutionary dynamics individually, but also by how these two factors interact.
Copepods are both grazers of phytoplankton and predators of microzooplankton in
marine systems. Increasing temperatures may drive a large-scale shift in the
diet of omnivorous copepods towards stronger herbivory, with significant
consequences for the structure of marine food webs and the control of primary
productivity. However, thermal adaptation may moderate or even nullify these
shifts. This project examines the interactive role ecological and evolutionary
dynamics plays in shaping grazing and individual fitness in a warming ocean. The
main goals of the project are to: 1) quantify seasonal variation in thermal
performance curves in dominant coastal copepod species; 2) determine whether
observed seasonal variation in thermal performance is caused by genetic
differentiation or phenotypic plasticity; 3) assess how temperature affects
respiration and protein synthesis rates, selective feeding, and individual
fitness; and 4) determine how changes in the thermal performance curve, via both
genetic differentiation and phenotypic plasticity, affect the relationship
between temperature and food preference. Selective feeding experiments are being
paired with measurements of egg production and hatching success across a wide
range of temperatures to measure thermal effects on feeding selectivity and
individual fitness. Finally, genetic differentiation and phenotypic plasticity
on temperature sensitivity is being investigated across populations from
environments that differ in their thermal regime. The outcomes of this project
contribute to the parameterization of models that forecast fisheries dynamics in
response to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.