* 1947304
* Examining the Rainfall Distribution and Asymmetries during the Landfalling Process of Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Haiyan Jiang, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 238,720.00

Inland freshwater flooding induced by heavy rainfall has been one of the most
deadly and costly disasters produced by landfalling hurricanes or tropical
cyclones (TCs). In contrast to the great progress in understanding and
predicting TC tracks and moderate progress in TC intensity changes, quantitative
rainfall forecast of TCs is still a challenge issue, and little progress has
been made. This project seeks to advance our understanding of TC rainfall
distribution by focusing on interactions between landfalling TCs and the
atmospheric environment and to improve quantitative rainfall forecast of TCs
during TC landfall. The principal investigator will foster involvement of a
graduate student with particularly consideration of women and underrepresented
minority students in carrying out this research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most challenging aspect of predicting rainfall in
landfalling TCs is not only the intensity and the extent but also the spatial
distribution of precipitation especially the heaviest rainfall area. The
distribution and asymmetries of TC rainfall are important features inherently
linked to TC-induced inland flooding and TC size changes. The overall goal of
the work is to understand distribution, evolution, and asymmetries of rainfall
during landfalling processes of TCs through statistical analyses of long-term
satellite observations. This project will examine physical processes that
influence changes of rainfall patterns for landfalling TCs in before, during,
and after landfall stages, and for landfalling versus over-ocean TCs. Factors to
be considered in these processes include diurnal variation, extratropical
transition, and other environmental conditions such as vertical wind shear,
total available moisture, and sea surface temperatures. The research will fill a
critical gap in our scientific understanding of TC rainfall evolution by
focusing on physical processes of precipitation changes during landfalling TCs
and environmental impacts on landfalling TCs. A better understanding of these TC
features is essential for improving landfalling TC
forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.