* 1947865
* Collaborative research: Implementation of Tensor Visualization guide (TVguide), an interactive visualization, analysis and database tool for seismic anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Sarah Brownlee, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 84,636.00

This project will develop a web-based tool that allows for easy visualization of
seismic wave propagation through the earth. By offering instant access to
analysis, visualization, and rock-based data, this tool will foster cross-
disciplinary research and lower the threshold for scientists from several
communities to engage with seismic wave studies, particularly for students and
early career scientists. The web tool will also provide easy classroom use. The
project will organize two workshops on seismic anisotropy using the tool,
focusing on support for student and early career investigators, as well as
development of a teaching module that will be made available through the
Carleton College Science Education Resource Center (SERC) repository. The
project will fund an undergraduate research assistant and a female scientific
team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic anisotropy is of increasing interest to
researchers from several Earth science communities because it offers a rare
avenue to imaging present-day and past deformation processes at depth.
Deformation in the deep crust and mantle leads to the development of mineral
fabric which produces seismic anisotropy. This team of researchers hold a
database of crustal rock-based elasticity tensors. This project will develop a
web-based tool that ties to the database and offers the following capabilities:
1. Interactive calculation and visualization with rotation of seismic parameters
for tensors in the database within a deformation reference frame, as well as of
any elasticity tensor pasted in by the user; 2. Tensor decomposition into
symmetry components and visualization of results, allowing the user to answer
questions such as how well the tensor is represented by a simplified symmetry
such as hexagonal or orthorhombic, and in the former case by a fast or slow
symmetry axis; 3. Averaging of bulk elasticity over several rock compositions or
folded geometries. Given that there are several ongoing efforts funded by
programs such as EarthCube to bring field structural geology and microstructural
analysis into the big data domain (e.g., MacroStrat, Strabo), including results
such as electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) maps of samples, a future effort
could tie the web tool to be developed to such projects in order to provide
elasticity tensor analysis based on data held in these
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.