* 1947435
* Paired Electrolyzers for Efficient Conversion of Furanic Compounds to Valuable Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Wenzhen Li, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2023
* USD 332,668.00

Currently, most of the commodity and specialty chemicals used to manufacture
many of the nation’s commercial and industrial products are made with fossil
fuel feedstocks of crude oil and natural gas using thermochemical reactors. In
the nation’s electricity generation grid, renewable electricity from wind and
sun has been quickly adopted; for example, Iowa generates 34% of its electricity
from wind power. These renewable electricity generators are also promising for
providing energy to decarbonize the chemical industry. Integration of renewable
electricity and renewable carbon (biomass) for distributed production of
chemicals in electrolytic reactors, can store renewable electrons in chemical
bonds of valuable organics, the long-term storable form, thus addressing urgent
needs for power resilience. However, most commercial electro-syntheses of
organics only utilize one of the two electrodes of an electrolyzer for
generation of desired products. This project aims to design an innovative flow
electrolyzer for pairing electrocatalytic hydrogenation and oxidation of
biorenewable feedstock to simultaneously produce valuable chemicals from both
cathode and anode, while suppressing the evolution of less valuable byproducts
of hydrogen and oxygen gases. Education activities offered by this project focus
on training a large body of students across Iowa and the Midwest with
electrochemistry and electrochemical engineering topics. Research outcomes will
be incorporated into a newly developed course: Electrochemical Engineering, as
well as independent research projects for diverse undergraduate students. The
team will also participate in Iowa State University’s existing education and
outreach programs to train local high school students each summer. The long-term
education goal is to produce a new generation of researchers in the fields of
electrochemical systems, facing the global competition in advanced chemical
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental engineering science
research project addresses the design of flow electrolyzers that pair the
electrocatalytic hydrogenation and oxidation of biomass-derived feedstock at the
cathode and anode, while suppressing the evolution of less valuable hydrogen and
oxygen gases. The research tasks are: 1) Understand important mechanisms of
electrochemical transformations using model catalysts for 2) accurate synthesis
of advanced catalysts, so as to 3) rationally design an efficient electrolysis
cell to achieve continuous production of valuable furanic chemicals and monomers
at ambient temperature, pressure, aqueous electrolyte with mild pH. The project
will take as model biomass feedstock molecules furfural and
5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF).&lt;br/&gt;The research will acquire new insights
into the mechanisms of the electrocatalytic hydrogenation and oxidation of
biorenewable furanic compounds, along with advanced understanding of the role of
catalyst composition and structure, electrode potential, and electrolyte pH in
these electrochemical transformations. It will also provide needed knowledge for
rational design of paired electrolyzers for cogeneration of two valuable
chemicals from both anode and cathode and develop new approaches for combining
electroanalytic methods and online chemical collection and analysis for better
understanding and design of electrolytic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.