* 1947753
* Photochemically Induced, Polymer-Assisted Deposition for 3D Printing of Micrometer-Wide and Nanometer-Thin Silver Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Yu Yao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2023
* USD 501,487.00

This award supports research that will contribute new knowledge related to
additive manufacturing (AM) of metallic (silver) structures, promoting both the
progress of new manufacturing technologies and advancing a broad range of
scientific applications. AM is the process of making a three-dimensional object
of virtually any shape from a digital computer model. The technique, often
called 3D printing, has the potential to revolutionize the way things are made.
Currently, there are many additive manufacturing processes to make metal parts.
However, almost all additive manufacturing processes currently available require
high-temperature processes, which can often cause damage to the products to be
printed and deteriorate the product performance. Additionally, many of these
processes are limited to macroscale components, with dimensions at the
millimeter scale or above, due to size limitations for metal powder. This award
supports fundamental research to help develop a room-temperature AM process that
enables high-resolution printing without thermal damage. The new process will
utilize solution-based layer-by-layer deposition to produce highly reflective
and highly conductive metal microstructures directly from soluble metal salts.
The metallic microstructures produced by this process have wide applications in
semiconductor electronics, energy, healthcare, biomedical, aerospace, soft
robotics, and automotive industries. Therefore, results from this research will
benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves several disciplines
including manufacturing, photochemistry, photonics, and materials science. The
multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prevalent AM metal manufacturing mainly relies
on thermal or laser assisted metal fusion or ink-jet printing of metal powders
and nanoparticles, and has serious limitations, including large feature sizes,
rough surfaces, high optical/electrical loss, and incompatibility with soft
materials. This research will fill this knowledge gap by exploring a new
solution-based photochemically-induced polymer-assisted deposition process to
allow scalable production of metal microstructures. The research team will
introduce a three-dimensional molecular precursor, consisting of an interlaid
network of polymers, metal salt, and reductants, that can turn into continuous
metal films and structures upon ultraviolet illumination. The research team will
build a model to study the fundamental chemical and physical aspects of the
growth mechanism, design a series of experiments to verify the model, explore
the fundamental limits of the critical dimensions of the printed structures,
combine theoretical and experimental studies, and characterize the structural,
optical, and electrical performance of the printed films. Further, we will apply
this technique to a variety of substrate materials, including non-flat surfaces,
to construct three-dimensional structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.