* 1947936
* Specific Ion Separations by Controlling the Molecular Environment of Hydrated Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Geoffrey Geise, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 04/30/2024
* USD 330,922.00

The investigators aim to tackle the difficult challenge of separating ions
(charged atoms or molecules) by type from a solution of mixed ion types that
have the same charge, similar size and similar chemistry. The investigators
propose to use a property called polarizability to achieve this challenging
separation. Polarizability is the capacity for electrons to move and shift
around a molecule. These electrons are negatively charged, causing areas of a
molecule with a greater number of electrons to be more negatively charged,
leaving areas of the molecule with fewer electrons positively charged. This
capacity for shifting charges around a molecule, or polarizability, is a key
property that influences how ions interact with other molecules. By changing the
number and type of polarizable molecules within the separation membrane, the
investigators will learn what fundamental effects this property has on
separating ions from a mixture. The ability to design membranes with precise
separation performance, especially for these challenging separations of similar
ions, will contribute to improving waste-water treatment, reducing environmental
contamination, and recycling and recovery processes in the nuclear power
industry. The investigators plan to share their research results through an
interactive module, offered during the Open House event, which will introduce a
wide audience to issues related to food, water, and energy resource
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to investigate ion sorption
driven by polarizable functional groups in a polymer membrane. The investigators
hypothesize that increasing the polarizability of the functional groups on the
polymer backbone will favor sorption of less polarizable ions. To test this
hypothesis the investigators will synthesize two series polysulfone-based
membranes, one with a fixed number of increasingly polarizable functional groups
and the other with varying hydrogen bond-donating functional groups. The
investigators will also test the hypothesis that the polarizability of a
hydrated polymer can be increased by clustering functional groups closer
together on the polymer backbone, by comparing the side-chain functionalized
polymers with block copolymers, where only one block contains the polarizable
functionality. The block copolymer architecture allows the polarizable
functionality to be localized into segregated regions of the material. The
degree of polarizable functionalization will be confirmed via nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy and titration. The resulting membranes will be
characterized for the dielectric permittivity, which measures the dielectric
constant, and their ion sorption and selectivity properties. The outcome of the
proposed activities will be a fundamental understanding of thermodynamically-
driven separation processes, which are less thoroughly investigated when
compared to size- or diffusivity-driven processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.