* 1947741
* Defining the regulatory role of protein O-fucosylation during pollen-pistil communication
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jeffrey Harper, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 06/30/2024
* USD 529,512.00

Plant reproduction is responsible for the generation of new plant embryos with
their surrounding starch or oil rich tissues (seeds/fruits) which are used
worldwide as important food and energy sources. Additionally, it is becoming
increasingly important to reproductively isolate plants growing in a field
setting to prevent gene flow between transgenic and non-transgenic variants. The
Wallace lab has recently demonstrated that a group of proteins called Protein
O-FucosylTransferases (POFTs), which attach sugars onto target proteins to
regulate their behavior, play a role in this plant reproduction process. The
Wallace lab will use advanced biochemical and genetic methods to dissect the
contribution of POFTs in plant reproduction and identify the proteins that are
being regulated by these enzymes to elucidate how POFTs contribute to plant
reproduction and how these enzymes could be manipulated to optimize this
process. Additionally, this project will support the research training of
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students from diverse and under-
represented backgrounds. This project will also support the development of web-
based video protocols that communicate the advanced methods used to approach
this research in a freely available manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
goal is to mechanistically understand the enzymes that catalyze protein
O-fucosylation, their protein targets, and the extent of this modification in
plant systems. The central hypothesis guiding this research is that POFTs
fucosylate target proteins that govern cell wall polysaccharide biosynthesis,
cell adhesion, and cell-cell communication in plants. Specific Aim 1 seeks to
understand the enzymology and sugar nucleotide substrate specificity of
Arabidopsis putative POFTs by employing sugar nucleotide hydrolysis assays to
understand which sugar nucleotides are substrates for putative POFTs. Specific
Aim 2 will employ biotin proximity labeling and advanced quantitative proteomic
analysis to identify putative protein glycosylation substrates of these POFTs.
Specific Aim 3 will utilize affinity capture methods and advanced proteomic
analysis to broadly identify proteins in the Arabidopsis proteome that are
subject to post-translational protein O-fucosylation, thus providing a catalog
of proteins that are modified in this manner. The unifying goal of this research
is to elucidate the role of protein O-fucosylation in plant systems, with a
particular focus on plant sexual reproduction, and to understand how these post-
translational modifications actuate diverse processes, such as cell adhesion and
cell-cell communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.