* 1947633
* SBIR Phase I:  Deep Learning Classifier Using Hyper Spectral Imaging for Automated Processing of Fish Fillets
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* KRISTJAN INGVARSSON, OCELAND LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2021
* USD 224,727.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to advance the development of solutions
for the fish processing industry. Current fish fillet preparation depends highly
on visual inspection and manual trimming by trained technicians to identify and
remove blemishes and food-borne parasites, which remain a significant cost of
seafood preparation. Preparation of seafood by hand also poses significant
health risks for consumers. The presence of human technicians means significant
portions of seafood processing must be performed at room temperature, increasing
the risk of bacterial infection and enzymatic degradation. This decreases the
freshness and quality of the final product, while increasing chances of
foodborne illness. Additionally, the manual detection rate for nematode
infections can be as low as 50% under industrial conditions due to the small
size of the infections and the potential depth in the fish. The proposed
automated hyperspectral imaging (HSI)-based platform addresses these issues by
(1) fully automating the complete fish processing supply/value chain, (2)
obviating industry dependence on manual inspection and (3) being much less
error-prone and more precise than manual inspection and trimming, reducing lost
yield and promoting safer products for consumers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance the
development of a hyperspectral imaging (HSI) system for the automatic processing
and remediation of fish fillets. HSI has already been validated in the detection
of anatomical features of fish fillets and detection of harmful parasites like
nematodes. However, its use has not been validated on an industrial scale. The
proposed research will focus on: (1) compilation and annotation of a fish fillet
data set, (2) training and validation of deep learning algorithms to detect fish
fillet center line and nematode infestations, and (3) assessing the feasibility
of using a state-of-the-art robotic actuator and customizing it for automatic
nematode removal with the company's novel algorithms. The result will be a
computer vision platform capable of recognizing nematodes/other foodborne
parasites, detecting blemishes, blood spots, and other undesirable cosmetic
marks, as well as conducting precision removal of identified parasites and
blemishes without excess loss of fish meat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.