* 1947489
* Characterization of aragonite and calcite solubility products in seawater using modern CO2 system measurement techniques
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Robert Byrne, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2024
* USD 405,933.00

Calcium carbonate is a mineral (solid) produced by economically and
environmentally important types of marine organisms (including clams and
oysters) for structural support and protection from predation. Calcium
carbonate, the structural mineral of coral reefs, is becoming increasingly
susceptible to dissolution (chemically-induced decomposition) due to the ocean’s
uptake of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. This project is devoted to
improving the accuracy of predictions and interpretations of the stability of
different forms of calcium carbonate that are uniquely important to the oceanic
ecosystem. The stability or instability of solid calcium carbonate in seawater
is routinely evaluated from (a) measurements of the concentrations of dissolved
chemical components in collected seawater samples and (b) calculations
(mathematical models) of the amounts of dissolved calcium and dissolved
carbonate in seawater that are required to prevent solid calcium carbonate from
dissolving. The necessary calculations for modeling calcium carbonate stability
are generated from experiments in which solid calcium carbonate particles are
added to seawater samples and the particles are allowed to dissolve until
dissolution ends and no further changes in the particles are observed
thereafter. The models of calcium carbonate stability in seawater produced
through such experiments are important to the shellfish industry and are
important to understanding the natural chemical cycles of carbonate-bearing
organisms that serve as food for economically-important marine organisms. Over
the past decade, the economic interests of the shellfish industry have
stimulated monitoring efforts to assess day-to-day changes in the stability of
calcium carbonate in hatchery waters. It is also recognized that models of
calcium carbonate stability are important to understanding the availability of
very small organisms in the surface ocean that serve as an essential food for
early-life-stage salmon. Current models of the stability of solid calcium
carbonate in seawater are more than thirty-five years old and were generated
using measurement techniques that are considered antiquated by modern standards.
Modern state-of-the-art methods will be used in this project to determine the
chemical conditions required for stability of solid calcium carbonate in
seawater, and these measurements will then be used to create quantitative models
of calcium carbonate stability over a wide range of salinities and temperatures.
For outreach activities, the scientist plans to communicate results from the
study to the public via interactive modules at the St. Petersburg Science
Festival and the Oceanography Camp for Girls, as well as prepare a presentation
for the St. Petersburg SciCafe series about this project and how it relates to
ocean acidification. This research will support the dissertation research of one
graduate student and an undergraduate summer intern. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a state-of-the-art investigation of the solubility of calcium
carbonate (CaCO3), a uniquely important mineral in the global ocean. Weathering
of terrestrial CaCO3 minerals adds alkalinity to seawater in the form of
bicarbonate (HCO3-) and carbonate &lt;br/&gt;[CO3(2-)]. Marine calcifiers at the
ocean surface precipitate solid CaCO3 for structural support and protection from
predation. The biogenic CaCO3 produced by marine calcifiers settles into and
dissolves within deeper waters. These processes, sometimes called the calcium
carbonate pump, are important for transferring carbon from the surface ocean to
depth. As such, calcium carbonate, in both its solid form and dissolved
components, plays an integral role in the global carbon cycle. Assessments of
marine CaCO3 solubility are essential for a quantitative understanding and
interpretation of transformations between solid CaCO3 and its dissolved
components. CaCO3 solubility is quantitatively expressed in terms of the product
(Ksp) of the dissolved Ca2+ and CO3(2-)concentrations (mol/kg seawater) in
seawater at equilibrium with a specified crystalline polymorph of CaCO3. Ksp is
influenced by seawater temperature (T), salinity (S), and pressure (P) and is
used to quantify saturation state (Ω), the degree to which seawater is under- or
over-saturated with dissolved Ca2+ and CO3(2-). In view of the decreasing
saturation states of CaCO3 in the global ocean, a consequence of ocean
acidification, accurate quantitative assessments of Ksp are essential. In
addition to the importance of Ksp characterizations in models of oceanic carbon
cycling, Ksp parameterizations are essential to assessments of water chemistry
in the shellfish industry. Over the past decade, the economic interests of
shellfish growers have stimulated research into the effects of Ω on shellfish
health. CaCO3 solubility is also important to assessing the economics of certain
fisheries. Models of calcium carbonate stability are important to understanding
the availability of carbonate-bearing organisms in the surface ocean that serve
as an essential food for early-life-stage salmon. Current models of the
stability of solid calcium carbonate in seawater are more than thirty-five years
old and were generated using measurement techniques that are considered
antiquated by modern standards. In this project, Ksp will be determined using
modern state-of-the-art procedures for measurements of pH, alkalinity, and
carbonate ion concentrations. These measurements will then be used to create
quantitative models of Ksp over a wide range of salinities and
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.