* 1947972
* The Brain Basis of Emotion: A Category Construction Problem
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Lisa Feldman Barrett, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 799,998.00

Emotions play a central role in human life, yet their neural basis remains
poorly understood. Within the science of emotion, it is currently debated
whether there is a common brain pattern for a specific emotion category, such as
anger, sadness, or fear, or whether there is meaningful variation in the
patterns within each category and similarity across categories. An
interdisciplinary research team will develop innovative modeling algorithms to
learn, rather than stipulate, the number of categories justified by the brain
data of each participant. This innovative approach will yield fundamental
insights into the nature of emotion in the brain. More broadly, the modeling
techniques will provide a means for the human neuroscience community to flexibly
investigate psychological categories, without imposing theory-laden assumptions
on their data as to the nature of the categories. This work will also help lay
the groundwork for a more context-sensitive, personalized approach for relating
neural activity with psychological categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standard
classification approaches to analysis of neuroscience data assume that fixed,
experimenter-assigned labels are representative of the ground truth. The present
research will question these assumptions and investigate a novel hypothesis that
understanding the brain basis of emotion is a category construction problem, not
a classification problem. A classification problem assumes that the brain
already represents the categories in question, whereas a category construction
problem tests this assumption. This project will involve fMRI scanning as
participants view emotional videos and subsequently rate their subjective
experiences. The research will extensively sample multiple instances of the same
emotion category within an individual. The investigators will model the data as
a category construction problem by flexibly testing and discovering latent
constructs using unsupervised machine learning algorithms combined with
empirical model order selection analyses. This research will allow for future
researchers to more flexibly and reliably analyze fMRI data, opening up new
intellectual schema for understanding how such data reflects brain organization
and mental experience in the science of emotion and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.