* 1947293
* I-Corps:  Spectral Computed Tomography for Material Identification and Threat Detection
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Dan Freeman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the ability
to perform material characterization using X-ray illumination at lower costs
than conventional spectral computed tomography (CT) systems. Spectral CT aids in
applications ranging from bomb detection to identification of cancerous tissue
by identifying the chemical composition of the internal structure of objects.
The approach that is proposed is based on the newly introduced concept of
colored X-ray filters. Particularly, it relies on X-ray coded projections and
computational algorithms to circumvent many of the current limitations of
spectral CT systems, such as high costs and sensing complexity. Rather than
measuring objects by the attenuated X-rays, the X-rays are first coded in
amplitude and spectra by blocking or unblocking a known pattern, effectively
creating a coded aperture on the path of the X-ray measurements. Coded apertures
create lower-dose structured X-ray bundles without compromising the image
reconstruction quality. The aim is to provide a cost-effective solution using
conventional X-ray imaging systems with the addition of the colored X-ray
filters and computational algorithms to obtain material-specific images. Lower
cost systems for spectral CT images would allow a broader deployment of such
systems in cost-sensitive venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project uses
structured illumination across time, space, and spectra to interrogate the
underlying objects and attain coded projections. Computational algorithms then
combine the coded measurements to reconstruct material-based images useful for
diagnosis and analysis in security and medical applications. Extensive
simulations of the proposed spectral CT system and explored optimal
architectures for structured illumination patterns have been performed. For the
simulation of the CT system, the software was used to simulate the X-ray source
spectrum with the proposed colored X-ray filters and included the NIST database.
Simulations using diverse materials have been performed to study the feasibility
and performance of the proposed systems. The results have been published in
multiple peer-reviewed publications by the EL and TL. Additionally, an X-ray
imaging test-bed was designed to do experimental validation of the proposed
spectral CT architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.