* 1947656
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Volunteer Domestic Care, Sociality, and Austerity
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2021
* Michele Friedner, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2021
* USD 25,200.00

Cuts to social benefit programs have become increasingly common since the 1980s
and have intensified since the 2006 global financial crisis. Some social
scientists, policy experts, and journalists, have described how such cuts
adversely affect marginalized populations and can push individuals further into
poverty and deepen social isolation. But as new and diverse forms of
volunteerism and charitable social care have appeared in response to these cuts,
there remains some question as to whether austerity politics might have the
counterintuitive effect of encouraging some entrenched and personalized forms of
sociality and connectedness. This project studies one aspect of social and
personal life after austerity by investigating the structures, impacts, and
experiences of volunteer social care programs. In addition to providing funding
for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project would enhance
scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to organizations
invested in developing more effective methods for communicating science and the
scientific method to the public. Findings from this research will enhance
understanding the impacts of austerity and benefit dissolution through an
exploration of the experiences of community members, volunteers, charity staff,
and local authorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in a
regional context where funding for local governments has been cut by over 50
percent since 2010 when austerity measures were put in place. Along with strong
negative impacts of austerity this region has also seen a bolstering of
volunteerism and growth of the charity sector. Volunteers are recruited to staff
day centers, drive the elderly to doctorâ€™s appointments, and provide in-home
companionship to home-bound adults and people with disabilities. This research
will investigate a form of volunteer domestic care program commissioned by local
authorities called homesharing in which an able-bodied young person lives with
and provides 10 hours of volunteer care and companionship for an older home
owner in exchange for reduced rent. This project combines participant-
observation of volunteer sites, domestic homeshare spaces, charitable and
bureaucratic organizations, semi-structured and in-depth interviews with
organizational and bureaucratic actors, and volunteer participants to answer
three interlocking research questions: 1) When strong social assistance systems
are eroded, do new forms of social relatedness take their place? 2) What
motivates individuals to become volunteer domestic caregivers, and what factors
contribute to the trajectory of these relationships? 3) What are contemporary
British notions of self-help and obligation towards strangers and what factors
have contributed to the formation of these beliefs and practices? This research
aims to illuminate and map the full range of social, material, and financial
outcomes within volunteer domestic care. It will also provide insight into the
factors that perpetuate social isolation as well as the potential arrangements
that may ameliorate vulnerable social conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.