* 1947102
* Being Human in STEM 2020 Conference
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Sheila Jaswal, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 01/31/2022
* USD 48,829.00

This project aims to support the national need for increased student success in
undergraduate STEM education. It will do so by organizing a conference on Being
Human in STEM (HSTEM). HSTEM began at Amherst College in response to student
calls for greater inclusion and sense of belonging in their academic
experiences. Students at the participating institutions, especially students
from underrepresented groups, have described the many challenges they face as
they pursue a pathway in STEM. In response, the institutions developed and
refined the HSTEM model for inclusive STEM curriculum. The HSTEM model
incorporates specific teaching practices, together with a course about inclusion
and diversity research, and student-led projects focused on STEM education.
HSTEM teams investigate the experiences of diverse students in STEM courses and
labs, seeking to understand challenges and best practices on their own campus
and in other educational environments. Since it was developed in 2016, the HSTEM
program has been adopted by seven other institutions. More than a dozen
additional colleges have asked about how to establish HSTEM initiatives on their
campuses. The 2020 HSTEM conference will help the HSTEM program leaders to
develop shareable HSTEM program resources, develop new partnerships and
implementation models, design plans to evaluate HSTEM impacts on students and
faculty across institutions, and explore strategies for sustaining the
initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As their student populations become
increasingly more diverse, colleges and universities are interested in
strategies and interventions that can increase the success of all students.
HSTEM initiatives have the potential to engage a critical mass of students,
faculty, and staff in seeding inclusion principles throughout higher education
institutions. Because they promote the ability of faculty, students, and staff
to learn together and share experiences, HSTEM courses and pedagogical practices
enable conversations about diversity and inclusion across traditional
boundaries. Students become co-creators of knowledge alongside their instructors
and institutional changes can be aligned with student needs and experiences. The
2020 HSTEM Conference will convene HSTEM leaders and student partners from Yale
and Brown Universities, Amherst and Williams Colleges, and the University of
Utah. Conference sessions will refine and standardize strategies for assessing
the success of HSTEM programs, determine how to best implement the program
across different institutional settings, and lay the groundwork for sustaining
the program and expanding it to other institutions. After the conference,
participants will collaborate to increase access to HSTEM resources by
establishing systems and tools for national dissemination and contributing to a
publicly available online repository. Conference participants will also
formulate guidelines for other institutions to adopt the model and work to
develop a more formal network of HSTEM institutions. The conference structure is
designed to accomplish these goals via the following components: workshop
sessions to engage in analysis of shared and unique features of HSTEM models
across partner campuses; panels of student HSTEM partners to reflect on future
opportunities to enhance the HSTEM model to better serve student success needs;
an external keynote speaker who is a nationally recognized STEM inclusive
pedagogy expert to ground and expand the conversation; and visioning sessions
with regional diversity and inclusion experts to consider how to sustain,
assess, and expand the HSTEM initiative. This project is funded by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.