* 1947309
* RUI: Marine Vampire microbiome Project (MVP): Blood-feeding marine invertebrates, and their bacterial accomplices
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Shana Goffredi, Occidental College
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 213,809.00

Symbiotic partnerships involving two or more species are widespread in nature.
One type of symbiosis is between an animal and its microbiome. It is clear that
microbes are supremely important to the success of most animals, including
humans, and that many dietary strategies would not be possible without these
symbiotic bacteria. Blood-feeding marine invertebrates contend with numerous
obstacles associated with feeding on the blood of fish and sharks. Blood is a
difficult meal to breakdown. It is toxic, and it provides a nutritionally-
deficient diet. Bacteria in the digestive systems of nearly all animals examined
play critical roles in the exchange of nutrients and digestion of food, and thus
contribute to success and survival of the host. However, virtually nothing is
known about the role of internal bacteria on the successful survival of blood-
feeding marine invertebrates. The research combines a variety of molecular,
imaging, and experimental approaches to examine whether internal bacteria
positively influence the success of this unusual group of marine parasites.
Blood-feeding animals are not only important to study because of their potential
symbiotic relationships with microbes, but because of their ability to act as
vectors for pathogens, and the harm they cause to fish stocks. Integrated with
this project are research opportunities for undergraduates, and the expansion of
a college-level course that incorporates active exploration, including
contemporary molecular and imaging techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
discovery and elucidation of the role of symbiotic microorganisms to animal
success is an important area of research. Persistent bacterial presence is
believed to play an essential role in host adaptation to specific niches that
would otherwise be unavailable, including the exclusive consumption of blood as
a source of nutrition by invertebrate parasites. This project will examine the
prevalence of bacteria in all categories of known blood-feeding marine
invertebrates, the colonization and residence by bacteria of specific animal
tissues, and the possible nutritional role fulfilled by the bacteria.
Preliminary evidence suggests an association between marine ‘vampires’ and
Vibrio bacteria, and a possible evolutionary convergence of this particular
marine bacterium as an essential abettor for a diet based solely on blood, by
either diet breakdown, nutrient supplementation and/or heme detoxification.
Marine blood-feeders will be collected from southern California coastal waters,
with subsequent live animal manipulations, high throughput DNA and RNA
sequencing analysis combined with fluorescence, electron and laser capture
microscopy, to elucidate previously under-appreciated alliances between blood-
feeding marine invertebrates and beneficial bacteria. This project will
facilitate understanding of the role of internal bacteria on adaptation to
specific diets, and will contribute to the growing knowledge base of the field
of symbiosis – from cellular biology (symbiotic integration with host cell
metabolism) to ecology (interactions between genetically distinct organisms and
niche expansion for both).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.