* 1947394
* I-Corps:  Nutritional and health risk assessment pre-screening tool based on 3D optical scanning
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Steven Heysmfield, Pennington Biomedical Research Ctr
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be that it
can save hundreds of thousands of dollars in health assessment costs by reducing
costs associated with manual labor for the individualized care required at
biometric screenings and the amount of time spent by medical experts. It will
allow practitioners to "triage" their screenings by identifying people who are
at high risk of developing metabolic and cardiovascular diseases for further in-
depth evaluations. Moreover, this I-Corps project can reduce legal liability and
risk associated with biometric screenings as the technology relies on 3D optical
scanning technology, which is non-invasive and non-
intrusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will be one of the first to
commercialize a non-invasive, non-intrusive, and fully automated health pre-
screening tool based on 3D optical scanning. It is a web application that
analyzes a 3D optical scan of a human subject and provides a detailed report on
the subject's fitness and wellness status. A unique feature of the web
application is that it can accommodate data from most currently available 3D
optical scanners whose current system outputs are machine-specific and whose
outputs are now very limited in their contents. More specifically, the
technology quantifies a subject's body size and shape by applying geometrical
mathematics on the subject's 3D optical scan and then uses machine learning
approaches to estimate the subject's fitness and wellness status including the
subject's body composition and risk of chronic diseases such as diabetes and
heart disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.