* 1947418
* CRII: CPS: A Self-Learning Intelligent Control Framework for Networked Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/19/2019,02/28/2023
* Xiangnan Zhong, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 02/28/2023
* USD 174,365.00

The goal of this project is to addresses challenges in machine learning for
intelligent physical systems that interact with one another. The approach is to
explore Reinforcement Learning (RL) strategies, where systems are rewarded when
behaving correctly, for interacting physical systems when the systems with which
they interact may react in inconsistent ways. The results are expected to
contribute to a new self-learning intelligent control framework, where the
systems under design can decide how to interact with their inconsistent
neighbors in a way that will improve how they learn. This will advance
reinforcement learning for networked cyber-physical systems (CPS) which can have
emergent behaviors when they interact (for example, unmanned aerial systems) and
are frequently inconsistent due to uncertainties in their distributed nature
(for example, the smart grid).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three major fundamental
contributions to the scientific field are expected. First, a new distributed RL
algorithm will learn suitable reward functions automatically without requiring
external supervisions. This work will relax human efforts and scale RL
algorithms to more complex environment. Second, novel transfer learning-based RL
architectures will be designed by reusing past knowledge from multiple sources.
This design will further accelerate learning process in networked CPS. Third,
this proposed method will be implemented on a multi-robot testbed to advance the
learning in robot applications. Outreach and dissemination plans cultivate the
scientific curiosity of K-12 students, and students from underrepresented
groups, and motivate their interests in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math (STEM) programs. Furthermore, the integration of the project's cutting-edge
research results into new courses will aid retention of current STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.