* 1947522
* Positive Effects of Coral Biodiversity on Coral Performance: Patterns, Processes, and Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Mark Hay, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,319,678.00

Coral reefs are extremely diverse, supply critical ecosystem services, and are
collapsing at an alarming rate, with 80% coral loss in the Caribbean and &gt;50%
in the Pacific in recent decades. Previous studies emphasized negative
interactions (competition, predation) as structuring reef systems, but positive
interactions in such species-rich systems could be of equal importance in
maintaining ecosystem function. If foundation species like corals depend on
positive interactions, then their fitness may decline with the loss of
surrounding species, creating a biodiversity meltdown where loss of one coral
causes losses of others. This project conducts manipulative field experiments to
understand the role of coral biodiversity in facilitating coral growth,
survival, resilience, and retention of these foundation species and the critical
ecosystem services they provide in shallow tropical seas. This project is
committed to: 1) Educating and exciting influential business and civic leaders
about conservation and restoration of coastal marine systems before these
systems lose ecological function and value. This will involve influential Rotary
clubs within North Georgia/Atlanta (the major economic engine of the
southeastern US) as an initial focus. 2) Using the Research News and Institute
Communications Office at Georgia Tech and well-developed contacts with science
writers to produce popular press pieces on important ocean ecology discoveries
emerging from these studies. (3) Organizing a public workshop of internationally
prominent scientists focused on Maintaining Marine Biodiversity as a Strategy to
Sustain Ecosystem Services and Coastal Cultures and Economies. A previous effort
like this, organized by the investigators, attracted about 200 attendees and was
webcast to numerous high schools in Georgia and to foreign investigators in less
developed countries that could not attend. Speakers also conducted in-person
video interviews with local high school classes. Due to that success, this model
will be repeated. 4) Working with an association of educators and cultural
leaders in French Polynesia to produce electronic format presentations on our
work and on reef conservation that are appropriate for use by both teachers and
leaders within Polynesian culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecologists have
excelled at demonstrating the importance of direct (often negative) interactions
among species pairs. However, when these interactions occur in a complex context
among thousands of other species in the field, the sum of the many, poorly-
known, indirect interactions can counterbalance, or even reverse, the better-
known direct interactions, generating diffuse mutualisms instead of agonistic
outcomes. In a proof-of-concept initial experiment, coral growth and
survivorship were greater in coral polycultures than monocultures, especially
during early stages of community development. Processes generating this outcome
are unclear but understanding these is of critical importance as diversity and
function of reefs decline and as humans need to predict and adapt to changing
environments. This interdisciplinary investigation merges expertise in
experimental field ecology, chemical ecology, and the ecology of microbiomes to
investigate the functional role of biodiversity in coral reef ecosystems.
Experiments use a novel coral transplantation method and field manipulations to
assess: 1) whether greater coral species diversity enhances coral community
performance, as well as growth and survivorship of individual corals, 2) whether
greater genotypic diversity enhances coral performance within a species, 3)
whether greater diversity of seaweed competitors further suppresses corals and
enhances seaweed performance, and 4) the processes driving the patterns
documented above, including the roles of disease, intraspecific versus
interspecific competition, predators, mutualists, and differential access to, or
use of, resources. The research investigates the relationship between
biodiversity and ecosystem function across dimensions of coral taxonomic
diversity, from species to genotypes, and creates a series of experiments
elucidating general principles underlying ecosystem dynamics. Filling these
knowledge gaps advances our fundamental understanding of how biodiversity
influences ecosystem function at multiple scales and provides insight into the
processes promoting coral coexistence in these species-rich ecosystems. Findings
will have practical implications for coral management and restoration and may
improve predictions regarding coral reef resilience and recovery in the face of
changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.