* 1947658
* Numerical and Observational Studies of UTLS Potential Vorticity Dipoles in Midlatitude and Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Matthew Hitchman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 729,945.00

Midlatitude cyclones (MCs) and tropical cyclones (TCs) account for the major
storms that greatly impact society. Their complex evolution can be influenced by
atmospheric mesoscale motion in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere
(UTLS). The investigator has found that strong convective updraft within these
cyclones can induce counter rotating air circulations, known as potential
vorticity (PV) dipoles, in the UTLS. Near the top of the storms, these dipoles
create horizontal flow enhancement (or "jetlets") and strong perturbations that
can significantly modify the storm evolution and precipitation amount. This
study aims to examine these ULTS features related to MCs and TCs. Emerging
results can improve our ability to forecast major storms, helping to minimize
their impacts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In particular, the negative anomaly of the
PV dipole is inertially unstable and can promote precipitation and alter the
evolution of mesoscale and synoptic systems. Coupled to the dipole orientation,
the jetlets appear to form as a result of the difference in horizontal speed in
the updraft compared to that of the surrounding UTLS air. The investigator
hypothesizes that, in MCs, the jetlet will oppose the ambient flow, with the
negative PV anomaly lying to the left of the flow. While in TCs, the jetlet will
be in the same sense as lower tropospheric cyclonic flow, with the inertially-
unstable member lying radially outward. To test this hypothesis, the proposal
will carry out numerical and observational studies of the PV dipoles in the UTLS
for a wide range of MC and TC cases, and will explore their dynamics,
occurrence, and relationship with severe weather. The investigation will focus
on four linked areas: (1) dynamics of PV dipoles, (2) climatological aspects of
PV dipoles, (3) UTLS PV and extreme flooding events in the Upper Midwest, and
(4) comparison of PV dipoles in mesoscale numerical simulations with auxiliary
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.