* 1947993
* Freeze or famine: do uncoupled temperature and light regimes drive unique seasonal production-demand relationships in arctic spring-stream ecosystems?
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Alexander Huryn, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 01/31/2024
* USD 990,040.00

The investigators will examine the interactions between seasonal light and
temperature and how these affect ecosystem processes by taking advantage of
spring-fed habitat that remains above freezing in winter during the otherwise
intensely seasonal Arctic. Streams with year round water flow and relatively
stable temperatures are widespread in Alaska and provide winter habitat for
species such as Dolly Varden (an important subsistence fish) that might
otherwise be unable to survive. These systems also provide a unique opportunity
to study the uncoupling of seasonal light and temperature patterns. This project
will examine how the energy costs associated with relatively warm temperatures
in winter, when not supported by high productivity that would typically
accompany warm and light-filled summer months, affect Arctic organisms,
populations, and food webs. The investigators will focus on ten sites in Alaska
with average winter temperatures ranging from 1 to 13 degrees C and sample these
in all seasons. Results will help evaluate habitat quality for important aquatic
species, and the investigators will share findings with federal and state
resource managers. In addition, the project will support an early career faculty
member and two graduate students, and four undergraduates will be involved with
summer fieldwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance fundamental
understanding in both Arctic sciences and the field of ecology. Data will be
collected at 10 spring-streams in Alaska across a thermal gradient and covering
all seasons. The overarching goal is to assess the interactive effects of light
and temperature on ecosystem processes (gross primary production, ecosystem
respiration, nutrient uptake, secondary production, food-web attributes) and
organismal growth rates, metabolism, and tissue stoichiometry in these habitats.
Spring-fed streams with perennial flow and stable temperatures with annual
fluctuations of only 3-4 degrees C are widespread in arctic Alaska, where other
stream types can freeze solid during winter. These ecosystems, characterized by
relatively warm thermal regimes embedded in an intensely seasonal arctic
landscape, are highly productive and provide critical winter habitat for key
species (e.g. Dolly Varden char, Salvelinus malma). They also provide a unique
research context, particularly with regard to the uncoupling of annual light and
temperature regimes, with subsequent effect on seasonal ecosystem processes.
Prior research at Ivishak Spring, Alaska, has shown that unlike most other
ecosystems where light-driven seasonal cycles of gross primary production (GPP)
and organic carbon (C) demand are closely coupled with high production and
demand during summer and low production and demand during winter, arctic spring-
streams have cycles that are seasonally uncoupled. In other words, warm winter
temperatures drive high rates of C demand by consumers during the season when
GPP is light-limited. Consequently, these springs impose significant
bioenergetic costs despite providing an essential winter refuge (a "freeze-or-
famine" scenario). Since mean winter temperatures among arctic spring-streams
range from ~1 to 13 degrees C, the range in severity of winter bioenergetic
costs is likely to be wide, with metabolic penalties in the warmest streams to
the point that some taxa may be unable to overwinter
successfully.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.