* 1947921
* 2020 Gordon Research Conference and Seminar - Research at High Pressure, Holderness, NH
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Gilbert Collins, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2023
* USD 7,870.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Conference funding provides support for registration
fees for U.S.-based post-doctoral scholars and graduate students to attend the
2020 Research at High Pressure Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research
Seminar. This is one of the longest-running GRCs; the first took place in 1955.
The 2020 meeting provides a forum to address the latest advances and discoveries
in high pressure research, with emphasis on the ways in which the combination of
theory, advanced computational methods and experiment are shaping the future of
high pressure research. The conference attracts many young researchers as well
as pioneers of the field. This meeting has a distinct place among high pressure
conferences for its unique format that maximizes scientific discussions. One of
the major goals is creating a highly interactive environment where new ideas are
presented and are brainstormed by exceptionally talented young researchers and
internationally recognized leaders in the field. The collegial atmosphere
motivates new directions and promotes mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The 2020 meeting covers the most recent discoveries in high pressure
research such as novel binary compounds under pressure (super-hydrides, He
compounds, N-rich compounds, and ices in planetary interiors). These discoveries
have led to remarkable achievements such as record superconducting temperatures
and capacities for storage of chemical energy. An upcoming challenge of the
field is to explore the stability of ternary and quaternary compounds, requiring
novel experimental and computational strategies. For this reason, a novelty of
the 2020 program is a prospective session focusing on first steps to tackle
complexity at extreme thermodynamic conditions, and on how big-data and machine-
learning based approaches may be adapted to the research strategy, both in
treating the big data output of large facilities and by optimizing the
exploration of the phase space of multicomponent
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.