* 1947838
* REU Site: Field and laboratory studies of coastal marine processes at the Shannon Point Marine Center
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Brian Bingham, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 01/31/2024
* USD 291,600.00

This award will support a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
Western Washington Universityâ€™s Shannon Point Marine Center (SPMC), which is
located in Anacortes, WA. The program will bring eight undergraduates to SPMC
each summer for a nine-week research experience. During the three years
(2020-2022), the project will provide summer internships for a total of twenty-
eight students. Students will conduct independent research projects with the
guidance of research mentors and will participate in a variety of professional
development activities, including workshops on scientific ethics, scientific
writing, the graduate school experience and career options, as well as field
trips and outreach events. The program conducts a national search for applicants
and seeks to engage students who are from community colleges and schools with
limited research opportunities. Most of the funding provided supports student
stipends, housing and travel to attend the program. This project supports the
national goals of developing the next generation of scientists and the
scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general theme of this REU Site
involves a process-oriented approach to estuarine dynamics, emphasizing primary
and secondary productivity, nutrient flux, biogeochemistry, microbial ecology,
water quality, ocean acidification, sediment and nutrient transport at estuarine
and boundary-layer scales, and chemical ecology, topics that articulate well
with the SPMC studies of invertebrate ecology and life histories. With his/her
adviser, each student develops and presents a project plan in a colloquium
setting during the second week, conducts the research under the appropriate
level of faculty supervision, and presents oral and written reports at the
conclusion of the program. Publication of results and presentation at scientific
meetings is strongly encouraged and supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.