* 1947696
* CRII: CHS: Exploring IoT Data Transparency in the Home through Creative Data Representations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Audrey Desjardins, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 173,618.00

This project for engaging with artists and other citizens to generate new ideas
for how network-connected devices can work in the home. These connected devices
are called the Internet of Things (IoT). From baby monitors to door locks, the
IoT connects computational and interactive artifacts to automate services like
involving temperature, lighting, and security, to support everyday activities.
This produces large amounts of data collected in the home. While home dwellers
may benefit from IoT services, citizens need better transparency regarding: what
data are collected, how and where they are stored, who they are shared with, and
how they are analyzed and used, in conjunction with privacy concerns. This
project holds promise for benefitting society by opening new avenues for
empowering home dwellers to understand and engage with their data, contributing
to making the IoT more open, responsible, ethical, and healthy. This has the
potential to broadly impact data transparency and privacy, at a time when these
concerns are paramount across human experiences of computing systems. By
combining Arts and STEM disciplines, this work is also expected to generate
interest in underrepresented communities, e.g., women and students in the Arts
and Humanities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use research through
design as a method to develop new techniques for privacy and transparency by
engaging people with their own IoT data, through creative representations. To go
beyond current data visualization practices, the researchers will collaborate
with artists to create representations translating domestic data logs into (a)
3D data materializations printed in ceramic, and (b) data narratives in the form
of short stories. Printed ceramics will build on the fact that touching and
manipulating data can be a generative sensemaking activity. Short stories will
capitalize on the ways people understand complex and abstract concepts through
data narratives. As home dwellers’ data are transformed into these new
representations, the research team will study how they provoke new
understandings and reflections around data in the home. Expected contributions
involve generating novel creative data representations and design implications
that contribute to transparency and privacy in people’s relationships with the
forms and functions of IoT data in the home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.