* 1947718
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating Youth Involvement in Environmental Movements
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Elizabeth Olson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2022
* USD 17,728.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines youth involvement in environmental
change movements in national and international settings. Specifically, this
research analyzes the ways in which young people between the ages of 11 and 30
involved in social and environmental organizations have influenced environmental
decision-making processes over the last quarter century. Youth environmental
movements have influenced governance institutions to take meaningful action to
ensure environmental sustainability. The doctoral student will evaluate the ways
in which generational attitudes and perceptions impact contemporary governance
practices and consequent change. This research will provide new insight into
young peopleâ€™s engagement in formal political processes. Educational and
outreach tools will be developed to communicate scientific findings on youth
perspectives and highlight societal perceptions related to environmental change.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide
support to enable a promising student from an underrepresented background to
establish an independent STEM research career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will use a comparative case study approach to examine how youth engagement
impacts the political geographies of environmental governance practices. The
research will examine 1) youth engagement in national and international arenas;
2) how youth movements impact environmental debates and governance; and 3) how
generational differences take on meaning in the context of environmental
politics and governance more broadly. Integrated qualitative methods
(ethnography, digital-archival, and interviews) will be used to capture youth
engagement in traditionally adult-dominated spaces of governance. Results will
be widely disseminated and include the creation of a publicly accessible digital
archive chronicling youth engagement in national and international environmental
governance. Although this research project will focus on youth engagement in
environmental governance, the findings will advance theoretical work related to
youth, political geography, and social movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.