* 1947130
* I-Corps: Thermoforming Radio Dishes
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Justin Hyatt, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project includes
building to efficiently manufacture high accuracy radio antennas. This would
enable economical fabrication of ground stations to enable wider adoption of
satellite communication and space defense. Shaped metal panels are used in
several industries including automotive and aerospace. The rapid manufacturing
process developed here uses significantly less energy than conventional sheet
forming processes. If applied to other aerospace and automotive applications, it
will potentially greatly reduce the energy consumption and cost of these
manufacturing processes. The agile abilities of the adjustable mold allow for
rapid conversion from a design to a physical product. This allows for lean
innovation that is not encumbered by high tooling and non-recurring engineering
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a new
technology for manufacturing high-accuracy curved metal panels. These panels can
be used for radio telescopes and communication dishes or automobile and aircraft
bodies. The technology uses induction heating to quickly and efficiently bring a
flat aluminum blank to high temperature. The induction coil presses the panel
into an adjustable mold using electromotive force. The mold shape can then
change quickly to form another panel of a different shape. Using an adjustable
mold saves the cost of machining a high precision mold for each unique reflector
segment. This enables the ideal, off-axis configuration for radio telescopes.
The adjustable mold also allows for easy correction of springback and other
systematic forming errors. It can also correct for mold wear and other effects
inherent in high volume production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.