* 1947822
* Collaborative Research: Measurement of tritium, helium isotopes, and noble gases on GO-SHIP line P18
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Scott Doney, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 70,608.00

The GO-SHIP program seeks to characterize the time-evolving global scale ocean
distributions of heat, freshwater, carbon, oxygen, nutrients and other chemical
tracers with a view to illuminating and quantifying important physical and
biogeochemical processes and to document global change. As part of this
international effort, the meridional section P18 was occupied in 2016 along
approximately 110°W in the eastern Pacific and Southern Ocean (from Baja
California to the ice edge off Antarctica). The grant will fund efforts to
measure ocean tracers – tritium, 3He/4He isotope ratio, and the full suite of
noble gases (He, Ne, Ar, Kr, and Xe) – on approximately 500 archived water
samples collected on the 2016 P18 section. The tracer samples will be processed
on specialized extraction systems and mass spectrometers at the WHOI Isotope
Geochemistry Facility. Evolving ocean-climate systems present us with challenges
that are never more important than now. Increased glacial and sea-ice melting,
increasing sea level, ocean acidification, and deoxygenation are a few of the
societally important effects that must be anticipated and if possible
quantitatively predicted using global ocean circulation and biogeochemical
models. Such models require a better understanding of the inherent processes,
and because they are necessarily complex, yet incomplete abstractions of
reality, they need observations for calibration, testing, and (if ever possible)
verification. Evaluation and documentation of the distributions of these tracers
and their evolution, within the context of many other observational data sets
and theories, will provide valuable constraints on global ocean-climate physical
and biogeochemical models that are key to understanding and dealing with global
change. The new P18 tritium–3He and noble gas data will be made publicly
available to any interested parties through the CLIVAR and Carbon Hydrographic
Office (CCHDO) site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project science objectives are
to: (1) Document the evolving tritium and 3He distributions in 2016 on the P18
section relative to the earlier 1994 and 2008 occupations to illuminate decadal-
scale patterns and possible climatic changes in ventilation and circulation in
the eastern Pacific; (2) Make the first high quality noble gas measurements in
the eastern Pacific and Southern Ocean to characterize air-sea exchange effects
and diapycnal mixing on dissolved gases in the Pacific, and glacial melt
contributions to the Circumpolar Deep Water. In the U.S. Global Ocean Carbon and
Repeat Hydrography Program, tritium–3He is a Level 2 (“highly desirable”) data
set that is funded separate from, but heavily leverages and adds to the
measurements and ship time conducted by the core GO-SHIP program. The new
tritium–3He and noble gas data will be interpreted in the context of the 2016
GO-SHIP P18 hydrographic and tracer observations (e.g., CFCs, SF6, O2),
tritium–3He data from previous P18 occupations in 1994 and 2008, and Pacific
basin-scale tritium–3He data from other GO-SHIP and GEOTRACES sections. The new
tracer data offer unique and valuable information on physical and biogeochemical
processes in the eastern Pacific and Southern Ocean: Tritium as a transient
tracer has a unique hemispheric asymmetry that can be used as a diagnostic
tracer of north vs south water mass provenance in the tropics. Tritium-helium
dating provides a unique and sensitive measure of shallow ventilation and
circulation on annual to decadal time-scales that is distinct from other tracers
such as CFCs and SF6, giving estimates of water mass origins, ages, and
modification in shallow waters. Helium Isotopes in the deep water provide
important information regarding hydrothermal plume provenance, dispersion and
dilution, and constraining deep-water circulation models. Noble gases are
sensitive and unambiguous tracers of air-sea exchange, water mass provenance,
ice-ocean interaction, upwelling, and in situ diapycnal
mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.