* 1947169
* Coordinated regulation of EMTs by cadherin proteolytic products
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Lisa Taneyhill, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Non-Technical Paragraph: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms frequently direct
stationary cells to become migratory in order to build various structures
throughout their body plan. One such migratory cell type, the neural crest,
gives rise to portions of the heart, components of the gut and sensory nervous
systems, skin pigment cells, and the head skeleton. The central question of this
research is to investigate the pathways controlling how neural crest cells
become migratory. To address this question, an innovative, multidisciplinary
approach will be taken that spans the single cell to whole embryo. Results from
these experiments will shed light on processes regulating neural crest cell
migration, providing immediate relevance with respect to the fundamental
mechanisms controlling the directed movement of cells during development and
maintenance of adult tissues. The broader impacts of this project will occur by
providing 1) experiential research opportunities for both underrepresented
groups at a local high school and college as well as University of Maryland
undergraduates as part of their teaching certification and 2) professional
development opportunities through the integration of research and teaching at
the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels. As such, this project will
help better prepare the next generation of scientists for careers in both
academic and non-academic settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Paragraph:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to uncover mechanisms
underlying epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions (EMTs) by studying the role of
cadherin proteolytic peptides, extracellular N-terminal fragments (NTFs) and
intracellular C-terminal fragment 2 (CTF2), using chick cranial neural crest
cells (NCCs). Cranial NCC EMT requires multiple cellular and molecular changes,
including Cadherin-6B proteolysis to decrease adhesion among NCCs as well as the
segregation of NCCs from the neural tube basement membrane. The Taneyhill lab’s
publications have demonstrated that Cadherin-6B NTFs and CTF2 promote NCC EMT
through distinct mechanisms. NTFs activate matrix metalloproteinase 2 and
enhance degradation of the extracellular matrix within the basement membrane
through which premigratory NCCs must emerge, while CTF2 binds to β-catenin and
interacts with chromatin to transcriptionally activate NCC EMT effector genes.
Through a novel mass spectrometry assay, the lab has now identified (and
confirmed) NTF interacting proteins. Moreover, the lab has recently discovered
and validated new targets of CTF2 during NCC EMT through RNA-sequencing.
Building on these results, the aims of the research are 1) to define the
function of Cadherin-6B NTFs in promoting EMT and 2) to determine the role, and
the mechanism(s) of regulation, of CTF2 target genes during NCC EMT. These aims
will be achieved using biochemistry; molecular perturbation and genomics assays;
and immunohistochemistry coupled with high-resolution confocal laser scanning
microscopy with Airyscan detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.