* 1947954
* Collaborative Research: Improving quantification of larval dispersal in the global coastal ocean to understand the genetic structure, biogeography, and spread of benthic organisms
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* James Pringle, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 482,128.00

The offspring or larvae of many marine species are carried or dispersed by ocean
currents. This dispersal impacts where species persist, their genetic
variability in space, and how they can spread to new locations as climate
changes. This project uses a modern model of global ocean currents to quantify
this dispersal and to explore how currents affect it. The novelty of this
approach comes from the high spatial resolution of the simulated currents and
their variability. The detailed estimates of dispersal are compared to observed
pathways traveled by drifters and against information of species distributions
and of their genetic variability. Most prior efforts ignored ocean currents to
estimate dispersal, using instead the time that offspring are floating in the
water. When the ocean currents were in fact considered, the delivery of larvae
to the coast from offshore was the main focus, rather than transport occurring
along the shore. This project addresses both deficiencies and enables
examination of the effect of dispersal on the distribution of coastal species
space at a global scale. The project includes the development of software tools
and data sets, along with training videos, that allow researchers, ecosystem
managers, environmental agencies, and other interested parties to model
dispersal for different dates and locations on their own. Two PhD and six
undergraduate students are being trained for scientific careers by having them
develop related inter-disciplinary investigations, spanning from marine ecology
to numerical modeling and physical oceanography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses a modern high-resolution global model to explain how larval
dispersal of coastal marine species quantitatively affects the biogeography,
phylogeography, and invasibility of coastal oceans globally. The project is
innovative in that oceanographically realistic estimates of alongshore
dispersal, including the magnitude and spatial variability of ocean currents,
are tested against existing large-scale datasets. Products include tools that
allow the research community to easily estimate the dispersal of larvae along
the coast of the global ocean, replacing the crude, and often incorrect,
estimates that have dominated approaches to date. Dispersal paths calculated
with currents from the Mercator 1/12 degree data-assimilative global circulation
model are validated against surface drifter data from the Global Drifter
Project. This new dispersal data is used to determine the role of alongshore
variation in larval dispersal on 1) the magnitude of genetic estimates of
connectivity, 2) the location of biogeographic boundaries, and 3) the variation
in susceptibility of open coastlines around the world to invasive species with
planktonic larvae. This study improves on previous studies by quantifying the
distance larvae are transported alongshore by ocean currents in the offshore
larval pool, allowing an examination of how dispersal affects spatial
structuring within and among species at a global scale. Global, place-based
quantification of the influence of oceanography on dispersal deepens the
understanding of the role currents play in species distributions. In turn,
understanding the regional differences in the importance of dispersal helps
predict regionally specific responses of species to changing
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.