* 1947663
* Somatosensory Feature Encoding and Attentional Modulation in Human Neocortex
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jeffrey Yau, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 626,656.00

As people search through their pockets to find items, they are able to
seamlessly toggle attention from their left hand to their right hand and back to
their left hand. Spatial attention enables the brain to effortlessly and
selectively perceive and understand what is in the left or right hand at any
given moment. Despite the obvious importance of attentional processing for
bimanual perception and the coordination of hand movements, how spatial
attention deployment to the hands modulates the encoding of touch information
remains poorly understood. This research investigates the effects of spatial
attention on touch. This project is expected to impact society by advancing
understanding of the brain mechanisms supporting touch and attentional selection
on the hands, which could enhance diagnosis and monitoring of sensorimotor
dysfunctions, and inform the design of advanced neuroprosthetics. The project
will promote the participation and education of community college students in
neuroscience and related STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using computational
neuroimaging methods and non-invasive brain stimulation, this research will
elucidate the effects of spatial attention on information encoding and signal
transmission in the human somatosensory cortex. A major research objective is to
characterize spatial attention effects on somatosensory stimulus encoding. This
objective will be achieved using novel fMRI encoding models that describe
population-level tuning for vibration frequency information. These models will
be used to establish where and how spatial attention signals – and their
potential interaction with limb position manipulations – modulate the encoded
vibration representations in the human brain. A second major research objective
is to characterize spatial attention effects on signal transmission in the
somatosensory cortical system. This objective will be achieved by combining
causal manipulations of brain activity, using transcranial magnetic stimulation,
with behavioral experiments and functional neuroimaging. These multimodal
approaches will be used to establish state-dependent processing principles in
the somatosensory system. Collectively, the research program will yield novel
insights into how spatial attention to the hands flexibly shapes somatosensory
feature encoding and network communication in human
neocortex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.