* 1947139
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A History of Oil Infrastructures: Commodity Production and Consumption
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Zachary Cuyler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 12,954.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation research project on the history of
infrastructures of oil, meaning the designate socio-technical assemblages
designed to transport oil, to enable the exchange of other commodities via
petroleum-powered transportation technologies, and to absorb and direct flows of
capital derived from oil. The project asks three core questions: How do oil
infrastructures produce and shape national space? How do infrastructures
redistribute agency and imbue political projects with momentum? And how do
infrastructures serve as contested sites of capital accumulation? Building on
recent contributions to Science and Technology Studies, this project attempts to
answer these questions using a diverse array of archival resources to examine
six oil infrastructure projects. The researcher plans to publish the results of
this project as peer-reviewed articles, and he will use his dissertation as the
initial draft of a book monograph for academics, policymakers, and members of
the general public. He also plans to use these results to reach out to policy
audiences at conferences and in peer-reviewed policy
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research on oil infrastructures promises to
make novel contributions to three distinct subfields of Science and Technology
Studies: History of Technology, Environmental History, and Infrastructure
Studies. It shifts from a conventional focus on commodity production and
consumption within environmental history and studies of extractive industries
toward an analysis of the flows of energy, commodities, and capital that tie
together the oil industry. It intentionally brings material and capital flows
into the same analytical frame in order to provide a more complete account of
the socio-technical networks that historically constituted the oil industry, and
to better understand the materiality of struggles over the distribution of oil
wealth. As decarbonization advances worldwide, spaces built around
infrastructures designed to transport and refine oil, facilitate petroleum-
powered trade, and absorb or direct flows of oil wealth will need to confront
the momentum and path dependency that such infrastructures have produced, as
well as looming prospects of infrastructural abandonment and capital flight.
This research will aid citizens and policymakers in making historically informed
decisions about energy policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.