* 1947134
* Dissertation Grant: The Seafloor and Society: How Technological Development on the Ocean Floor Transformed North America
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Mark Carey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 12,990.00

This award supports doctoral dissertation research that will lead to one of the
first histories of fixed seafloor infrastructure in the Northeast Pacific Ocean
during the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. The analysis will focus
specifically on the historical development of three types of seafloor industries
that have become indispensable to large sectors of modern society: offshore oil
drilling (provides about 30% of the globe’s supply of oil), undersea cables
(facilitates 95% of all Internet and international phone traffic), and seafloor
observatories (employs scientific instruments at the forefront of collecting
data that can help to prepare onshore society for earthquakes and tsunamis). The
researcher will use insights from STS, environmental history, and marine science
to rethink common perceptions of the ocean and illustrate news way that
technologies and societies are connected. The results of this project will
promote a better understanding of the extent to which seafloor infrastructures
support onshore societies and of the likely consequences of their loss due to
natural disasters, environmental collapse, or conflict. They will be
disseminated to both academic and public audiences, including the publication of
a peer-reviewed article in a STS journal, and the presentation of a conference
paper. The doctoral dissertation will be a first iteration of a book manuscript
to be published subsequently by a major academic press. The results of this
project will also be used to develop an art exhibit for the general public; and
they will be integrated into various university courses and public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project on the history of seafloor
infrastructures will bring together, engage with, and contribute to three key
areas of research: science and technology studies, marine environmental history,
and marine science. Each of these fields have previously correlated
technological innovation in the ocean with advancements in marine science. This
research project will show that the early development of fixed seafloor
technology was the result of the need to support the growth of onshore
infrastructure and not necessarily an outcome of scientific knowledge of the
seafloor, meaning that the development of cutting-edge technology preceded
scientific knowledge of the environment in which it was installed. It will also
explore the extent to which onshore society has become dependent on a complex
seafloor infrastructure, and vice versa; it promises to break down perceived
barriers between ocean and land and between unseen seafloor environments and the
development of modern communications, policies, government territories, and
natural resources. Finally, it will show that the seabed is one of the most
vital frontiers for technological and geopolitical development in the twenty-
first century; it is critical to global resource extraction, telecommunications,
and marine science. The results of this study will be of substantial interest to
industry, governmental personnel, and the general public, in addition to
academics in the three research areas indicated above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.