* 1947249
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reproductive Technologies and Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Dana-Ain Davis, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 25,200.00

Technological advancement in today’s world changes how human beings interact,
communicate, and obtain goods and services. Medical technologies in particular
can affect how doctors understand and treat illness, how patients access
healthcare, and how societies define healthy bodies. When technologies enter a
new context, their use and significance is shaped by the existing political,
economic, and cultural conditions in that locale. At the same time, the broader
global medical aims of the technology can also impact and change the local
culture. This study examines the introduction of a significant new
pharmaceutical treatment in reproductive healthcare to ask: how do biomedical
technologies affect cultural meanings about bodies, health, and reproduction?
Answering this question will provide important data about the interaction of
technologies and medical care in new cultural contexts globally. This research
will train a graduate student in scientific anthropology and science and
technology studies. Findings will be shared with medical professionals, public
health administration, and public policy experts in an effort to inform
healthcare implementation and policies.

The researchers will investigate the social, historical, and cultural
implications of the use of new medical technologies in women’s healthcare. The
research will be focus on populations experiencing recent changes in healthcare
law and practice to study how use of a new medical drug affects cultural beliefs
about health, reproduction, and healthcare. The researchers will focus on the
medical professionals, health and policy administrators, patients, and non-
medical social actors who are implementing or experiencing the use of the new
medicine. The researchers will visit hospitals and medical clinics, attend
meetings of policy and healthcare non-profits, and conduct qualitative
interviews across these populations to find out how this new technology is
changing the practice of medicine and the culture surrounding reproductive
healthcare.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.