* 1947149
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A History of Muscle-Powered Transportation Infrastructure Planning and the Broader Political Economy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Yujie Li, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 15,750.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation research project in the history of
technology that focuses on muscle-powered transportation and the political
economy of transportation technology infrastructure. The project involves
archival research and oral history interviews. The historical data promises to
illuminate socio-technological policies and practices. The results of this study
will be of interest to colleagues working on various disciplines including
Science and Technology Studies and Infrastructure Studies through workshops and
academic conferences, and they will be incorporated into university courses and
presented to broader audiences through public lectures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral dissertation researcher will spend five
months conducting research in three counties interviewing locals and consulting
archives. The research will triangulate the textual, visual and ethnographical
data collected to bring to light insights concerning transportation
infrastructure planning and the broader political economy of transportation
technology. The project will use the theoretical insights by incorporating
actor-network theory into the socio-political context in order to engage with a
scholarly tradition that critically reflects on the politics of technology,
which holds that the politics of technology embedded in man-machine relations is
not universal across time and space, but must be examined in its political,
social, and environmental system. By employing a framework of actor-network
theory in this way, the project will investigate the multi-layered, multi-
directional relations that transportation technologies foster between users and
other actors in the socio-politico-technological system. In so doing, it expands
the theoretical framework of ANT by reconceptualizing the actors and the network
in a broader context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.