* 1947272
* 'Patchy' Nanoparticles from Bottle-brush Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/28/2019,06/30/2020
* Margarita Herrera-Alonso, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2020
* USD 87,072.00

Particles with surface heterogeneity or surface 'patchiness' are of general
interest as building-blocks for the construction of hierarchical nanosystems. Of
these, polymer-based nanoparticles are particularly attractive for their softer,
more dynamic character, facilitating the construction process. Surface pattering
of polymer particles at the nanometer scale, while challenging, can be
accomplished through the use of assembling subunits with a molecular
architecture that will lead to a 'clustering' effect. This award allows the
exploration of the use of polymers with a bottle-brush architecture as subunits
for the formation of 'patchy' nanoparticles. Unlike the more traditional linear
polymers, considerably less is known about the assembly behavior of polymers
with a complex architecture, opening new routes for the formation of polymer-
based nanomaterials with unique functions. The research will examine solution
self- and co-assembly of these polymers and establish relationships between
polymer architecture, processing routes and aggregate morphology. Outreach
efforts supported under this award will involve participation of undergraduate
students in research, and community involvement through an education-based
Latino outreach program targeting K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this award is to explore the molecular and processing
determinants of assemblies from highly grafted polymers, with particular
emphasis on the construction of nanoparticles exhibiting surface and core
heterogeneity. Advances in controlled polymerization methods have enabled the
synthesis of macromolecules with increasing functional and architectural
complexity such as macromolecular brushes or bottle-brushes. In contrast to
linear diblock copolymers, little is known about the factors that influence
solution assembly of macromolecules. Furthermore, it has been previously shown
that kinetic pathways of polymer assembly are determining factors of assembly
morphologies from linear block copolymers, whereas the non-equilibrium behavior
of macromolecules with more complex architectures remains unexplored. This award
addresses two related objectives. First objective is to study nanoparticle
formation from amphiphilic macromolecular brush copolymers by a rapid assembly
process. This will allow to both elucidate the mechanism of brush copolymer
assembly into multi-molecular nanoparticles, and determine absolute timescales
of assembly. Second objective is to study the formation of complex heterogeneous
nanosystems from amphiphilic macromolecular brush building-blocks. This involves
co-assembly of families of macromolecular brushes with varying degrees of
chemical dissimilarity through kinetic trapping. While there are many reported
methods for fabricating composite nanoparticles exhibiting surface and/or core
heterogeneity, clustering of relatively soft and adaptive building-blocks could
provide the means for further intra-particle modifications.