* 1947516
* Community College Innovation Challenge Relaunch, 2020-2022
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Ellen Hause, American Association of Community Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,896,810.00

The U.S. workforce is rapidly changing. The new world of work will require
workers to acquire vital employability skills as well as engaging in life-long
learning to keep technological skills current. In its 2019 report "Charting a
Course for Success: America's Strategy for STEM Education" the National Science
and Technology Council of the White House discusses the need for entrepreneurial
education and opportunities to meet changing workforce demands. To respond to
these needs, the American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) will
cultivate innovation and entrepreneurship and support undergraduate research
experiences for community college students by leading the re-launch of the
Community College Innovation Challenge (CCIC). AACC successfully partnered with
the National Science Foundation to host the 2015-2018 CCIC competitions and has
worked to re-envision and strengthen this offering to garner greater numbers of
student team applications, provide professional and leadership development
opportunities for students and for faculty, and to raise awareness of the
valuable contributions of community colleges in STEM innovation. The proposed
activities will enable community college students to discover and demonstrate
their capacity to use STEM to make a difference in the world. CCIC participation
will prepare students with workplace skills; offer potential pathways to student
retention, completion, and employment; and provide an opportunity to create
STEM-based products and services of potential benefit to society. The CCIC
contributes to enabling the U.S. to remain a global leader in STEM literacy,
innovation, and employment by nurturing student/faculty collaborations on UREs
and providing a venue for leadership development and technical assistance. The
CCIC is also expected to have an impact on promoting the value and national
significance of community college leadership in STEM innovation,
entrepreneurship, and meeting the rising demand for a highly-skilled U.S.
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AACC proposes to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop a
national request for applications and launch an annual Community College
Innovation Challenge in 2020, 2021, and 2022. Teams of 2-4 community college
students, working alongside a faculty mentor, will be asked to craft innovative
STEM-based solutions for real world problems that are aligned with NSF's Ten Big
Ideas.&lt;br/&gt;2. Create and implement a strategic dissemination and outreach
plan designed to reach greater numbers of community college students and faculty
to raise awareness and encourage submissions.&lt;br/&gt;3. Host three CCIC Boot
Camps in 2020, 2021, and 2022 to convene the 10-13 finalist teams selected each
year through a national application process. The Boot Camp is a four-day event,
modeled on NSF's Innovation Corps (I-Corps) model, designed to provide hands-on
opportunities for the teams to learn communication, business, and
entrepreneurial strategies to further their STEM innovations. The Boot Camp
features a high-profile poster session on Capitol Hill, and a final presentation
to a panel of judges in a "Shark Tank" format to determine the first and second
place winning teams.&lt;br/&gt;4. Leverage collaborations with experienced
professionals from NSF's I-Corps program; strategic communication and social
change agencies; and the National Association for Community College
Entrepreneurship on the development of the Boot Camp agenda, resources, and
materials.&lt;br/&gt;5. Disseminate nationally information on the CCIC winners
and the significant role of community colleges in leading undergraduate
research, STEM innovation, and entrepreneurship efforts.&lt;br/&gt;These
activities will advance the knowledge and understanding of various STEM
technician education fields and technologies and their role in ideation and
innovation. The CCIC will enrich and support students in learning vital
employability skills; cultivate STEM innovations that translate knowledge into
action; and provide professional and leadership development opportunities for
student and faculty teams. In addition, CCIC information and resources to
support community college UREs and entrepreneurial education will be
disseminated on a national level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.