* 1947094
* A Non-amniote Perspective on the Recovery from the End-Permian Extinction at High Latitudes: Paleobiology of Early Triassic Temnospondyls from Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Christian Sidor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 322,279.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Around 252 million years ago, a major mass
extinction wiped out over 90% of species on Earth. Coincident with this
extinction, the Antarctic portion of the supercontinent of Pangea transitioned
to a warmer climatic regime devoid of a permanent ice cap. Compared to lower
latitudes, relatively little is known about the survivors of the extinction in
Antarctica, although it has been hypothesized that the continents more polar
location shielded it from the worst of the extinctions effects. As the result of
a NSF-sponsored deep field camp in 2017/2018, a remarkable collection of
vertebrate fossils was discovered in the rocks of the Shackleton Glacier region.
This collection includes the best preserved and most complete materials of
fossil amphibians ever recovered from Antarctica, including two previously
undescribed species. This grant supports one postdoctoral researcher with
expertise in fossil amphibians to describe and interpret the significance of
these fossils, including their identification, relationships, and how they fit
into the terrestrial ecosystem of Antarctica and other southern hemisphere
terrestrial assemblages in light of the major reorganization of post-extinction
environments. Historical collections of fossil amphibians will also be reviewed
as part of this work. Undergraduate students at the University of Washington
will be actively involved as part of this research and learn skills like hard
tissue histology and CT data manipulation. Public engagement in Antarctic
science will be accomplished at the University of Washington Burke Museum, which
is the Washington State museum of natural history and culture. Specifically, a
new exhibit on Antarctic amphibians will be developed as part of the
paleontology gallery, which sees over 100,000 visitors per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This two-year project
will examine the evolution of Triassic temnospondyls based on a remarkable
collection of fossils recently recovered from the Shackleton Glacier region of
Antarctica. Temnospondyls collected from the middle member of the Fremouw
Formation are part of the first collection of identifiable tetrapod fossils from
this stratigraphic interval. Thorough anatomical description and comparisons of
these fossils will add new faunal information and also aid in determining if
this horizon is Early or Middle Triassic in age. Exquisitely preserved
temnospondyl material from the lower Fremouw Formation will permit more precise
identification than previously possible and will provide insights into the
earliest stages of their radiation in the extinction recovery interval. Overall,
the Principal Investigator and Postdoctoral Researcher will spearhead an effort
to revise the systematics of the Antarctic members of Temnospondyli and properly
contextualize them in the framework of Triassic tetrapod evolution. The research
team will also take advantage of the climate-sensitive nature of fossil
amphibians to better understand patterns of seasonality at high-latitudes during
the early Mesozoic by subjecting selected fossils to histological analysis.
Preliminary data suggest that temnospondyls were exceptionally diverse and
highly endemic immediately after the end-Permian extinction, when compared to
their distribution before and after this interval. If confirmed, this
macroevolutionary pattern could be used to predict the response of modern
amphibians to future climate perturbations. Overall, this research will provide
new insights into the vertebrate fauna of the Fremouw Formation, as well as shed
light on the evolution of terrestrial ecosystems in southern Pangea in the wake
of the Permian-Triassic mass extinction. As part of the broader impacts, the
research team will help to develop an exhibit featuring some of the best
preserved fossils from Antarctica to explain to the public how paleontologists
use fossils and rocks to understand past climates like the Triassic 'hot-house'
world that lacked permanent ice caps at the poles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.