* 1947703
* Collaborative Research: REU Site--Northeast Partnership for Atmospheric and Related Sciences (NEPARS)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* David Finkelstein, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2024
* USD 531,693.00

The Northeast Partnership for Atmospheric and Related Sciences (NEPARS) Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site brings together two primarily
undergraduate institutions with atmospheric and related science programs to
expand research opportunities for a diverse population of undergraduate students
early in their education. REU interns will conduct research in areas of
mesoscale and synoptic weather, microclimates, biometeorology, mountain
meteorology, modern climate, and paleoclimate to better understand physical
processes, predictability, and impact on society. The primary objective of the
NEPARS REU site is to provide learning opportunities to a promising and diverse
group of undergraduates to help them prepare for careers in STEM fields by
conducting quality scientific research, building professional networks,
improving leadership skills, and developing effective communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt;Each year a cohort of 12 undergraduate students will be
offered paid summer research positions with the NEPARS REU to work with faculty
mentors from Hobart &amp; William Smith Colleges (HWS) and Plymouth State
University (PSU). Six students and three mentors will work at each research
location during a 9-week summer research program. Additionally, the NEPARS REU
will partner with the Mt. Washington Observatory and the Department of
Atmospheric and Environmental Sciences at SUNY Albany to offer interactions
beneficial to REU student professional development. The NEPARS REU site has a
primary focus on participation of rising sophomores and rising juniors that have
just completed their first and second year, respectively, at two-year or four-
year colleges and universities across the U.S. offering degrees in STEM fields.
Each summer the REU will feature a full-group gathering at HWS in the first week
for orientation and workshops, a second gathering at PSU during mid-summer for a
colloquium and workshops, and a third gathering near the end of summer at SUNY
Albany for a REU symposium and sessions/workshops to share information about
graduate school. During the two multi-week periods between gatherings, the
primary focus will be on designing and conducting project-based research using
student pairings and close student-mentor collaboration with a goal of
progressing from project and hypothesis development to students presenting
research results at conferences and publishing in scientific
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.