* 1947044
* SG: Abiotic constraints on the invasion of ticks and tick-borne pathogens across environmental gradients in Maine
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Allison Gardner, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2024
* USD 207,242.00

In recent decades, numerous hard-bodied tick species of medical and veterinary
significance have spread dramatically beyond their historical ranges into more
northern latitudes. This expansion has increased transmission of infectious
diseases to humans, companion animals, and wildlife. Understanding the
environmental conditions that constrain establishment and maintenance of tick
populations at their northern range limits may enhance our ability to predict
future range expansion. Further, better understanding of tick distribution will
facilitate targeting vector management strategies to life-stages and times of
year when ticks are most vulnerable. The goal of this project is to identify
specific biological mechanisms by which abiotic factors limit the current
northern geographic distribution of the blacklegged tick, an important disease
vector in North America. A strong climate gradient in Maine, an emerging area of
tick-borne disease transmission, will be used to understand the effects of
temperature and precipitation on winter survival and seasonal host-seeking
activity in the black-legged tick. In addition, the relationship between tick
range expansion and spread of three tick-bourne pathogens will be examined. This
project will provide training opportunities for numerous undergraduate and
graduate students, particularly those belonging to groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM. Also, the researchers will organize public outreach
focused on safe and effective personal tick protection
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate manipulative field
experiments and observational field studies to test several hypotheses regarding
environmental constraints on range expansion of the blacklegged tick, as well as
implications of range expansion on the distribution of tick-borne pathogens. In
particular, researchers will examine large-scale environmental gradients to
better understand: 1) interacting effects of temperature and snow cover on
blacklegged tick overwinter survival, 2) impacts of climate on tick host-seeking
phenology, and 3) co-invasion dynamics of the blacklegged tick and three
pathogens it transmits. These objectives will be addressed by establishing
experimental tick overwinter survival assays and host-seeking behavioral assays
at five field sites in Maine representing spanning a range of temperature and
snowfall conditions. In addition, observational studies of off-host and on-host
ticks in the same locations will be conducted at the same locations. The
combination of manipulative field experiments and observational field studies
utilized in this research effort will simultaneously isolate abiotic constraints
on the current geographic distribution of the blacklegged tick while preserving
the ecological realism of natural conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.