* 1947195
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Blockchain Infrastructure, Decentralization, and Value
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Julie Chu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 25,197.00

An emergent digital accounting system combining computer and financial
engineering, the distributed ledger technology known as blockchain promises to
transform socioeconomic relations. Its development today is bound up with
political and moral desires and far-reaching claims that the technology has the
capacity to challenge or even replace the existing financial system and its
centralized institutions with decentralized organizations and governance. In the
long wake of the 2008/09 financial crisis, blockchain's promise of
decentralization has resonated. But if the vision of decentralization is
initially based on the distributed networks architecture of computer systems,
what happens when people try to translate it into social reality? What cultural,
economic and political concepts and sensibilities underpin the making of
blockchain, and how does the technology's development in turn influence human
behavior? This project investigates the human dimensions of an opaque yet
increasingly widespread technology, formulating both academic and non-academic
descriptions and arguments about blockchain's sociocultural and political-
economic contours for scholars and broader publics. In addition to providing
funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project would enhance
scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to organizations
invested in developing more effective methods for communicating science and the
scientific method to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will consist
of fourteen months of ethnographic study in two established blockchain hubs,
which are also home to lively crypto-communities. The two research locations
allow for comparative tracking of how distinct political, economic, social, and
cultural situations and discourses bear on blockchain development. Asking how a
digital native or Internet-based infrastructure becomes meaningful across highly
uneven economic, geopolitical, and cultural-linguistic contexts, the project
also examines how blockchain gains traction in relation to or even at the
expense of other matters of concern. In both locations, research will
investigate how blockchain developers, entrepreneurs, and other stakeholders (1)
define value, and how they understand blockchain as a technology that
identifies, makes or manipulates value; (2) what attracts them to blockchain;
(3) how they think blockchain will and/or should change human relations; and (4)
how they imagine decentralization in relation to blockchain's promise. Through
data gathered at blockchain-oriented promotional, educational, and networking
events, conferences, and hackathons, from online, social and journalistic media,
and through interviews with engineers, entrepreneurs, and other stakeholders,
the investigation will produce results shedding light on the nature of
blockchain as a technology of value and its promise of economic and social
decentralization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.