* 1947970
* Collaborative Research: Gases in the Overturning and Horizontal circulation of the Subpolar North Atlantic Program (GOHSNAP)
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Hilary Palevsky, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2024
* USD 190,919.00

Every winter, frigid winds blowing eastward from the North American continent
cool the surface waters of the Labrador Sea, which is situated between Canada
and Greenland. As the ocean cools, oxygen and carbon dioxide are mixed from the
atmosphere into a thick layer of water that ultimately spreads southward to fill
a large volume of the North Atlantic and beyond. The presence of this water mass
prevents the North Atlantic anywhere from becoming completely devoid of oxygen.
Vertical mixing in the Labrador Sea also redistributes carbon dioxide into the
deep ocean, where it can remain for hundreds of years, preventing it from
contributing to the greenhouse effect. Yet, the processes governing the uptake
of gases by the ocean are not well understood or quantified. Given that, over
the last century, the ocean has become steadily more depleted in oxygen while
also absorbing a large fraction of anthropogenic carbon dioxide, observing gas
exchange processes is essential for understanding and predicting the evolution
of the ocean and climate system. The circulation of the Labrador Sea has been
monitored since 2014 with an array of instrumented cables extending from the
seafloor to nearly the ocean surface. This project adds gas sensors to this
array to investigate the rates and processes governing gas exchange. Through
this project, a student and postdoc will be trained in interdisciplinary
oceanography with a rich network of international collaborators. Responding to
the need to increase public ocean literacy, the project scientists will work
with University of Rhode Island’s Inner Space Center to broadcast live,
interactive science sessions to educators at partner high schools and will
follow-up with in-person science cafés at three participating
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the unique role of the Labrador Sea in
providing a pathway for oxygen (O2) and carbon dioxide (CO2) to enter the
intermediate depths of the ocean, a quantification and mechanistic understanding
of the gas uptake and transport in the basin is a leading scientific priority.
Oxygenation of Labrador Sea water prevents large-scale hypoxia from developing
anywhere in the Atlantic Ocean and anthropogenic CO2 storage in the basin is the
highest in the global ocean. The assumption that, in the Atlantic Ocean, O2 and
CO2 uptake and their variability are tied to the dynamics of heat loss and the
overturning circulation pervades the literature but has never been evaluated on
the basis of direct observations. Thus, GOHSNAP (Gases in the Overturning and
Horizontal circulation of the Subpolar North Atlantic Program) addresses this
gap and the urgent need to better understand interactions between gas uptake,
transport, and the overturning circulation. Specifically, this program will
provide a continuous 2-year record of the trans-basin, full water column
transport of O2 across the southern boundary of the Labrador Sea, leveraging the
mooring infrastructure of the US-lead, international Overturning in the Subpolar
North Atlantic Program (OSNAP). The addition of O2 sensors at various depths on
this array, supplemented by observations collected by autonomous platforms will
allow for the quantification of O2 export from the Labrador Sea. The data will
further be used to empirically model carbon concentrations and estimate carbon
export. Proposed instruments will also measure the mixed layer O2 and pCO2 for
two winters, from which air-sea gas exchange will be calculated and compared
against analogous observations in the convective interior of the Labrador
Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.