* 1947514
* Auction Design for Complex Centralized Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Paul Milgrom, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 277,000.00

This project will use economic theory and simulations to study, develop, and
improve practically implementable auction designs for complex centralized
markets. The project will contribute to our understanding of the effectiveness
of auction designs that have been used in recent years to sell packages of radio
spectrum, electrical power, internet advertising opportunities, and fishing
rights. As our understanding of these kinds of markets has grown, we have come
to understand that these market methods must be adjusted to simplify
communication and computational complexity and allow for specific features such
as economics of scale, very numerous differentiated goods, and exposure risks.
This award funds research that will develop methods to evaluate and improve
recent auction designs and to create entirely new
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Markets with combinatorial valuations and/or
specialized constraints introduce complexity that limits the effectiveness of
current auction methods. Under well-known assumptions, market allocations are
efficient. However, even when there are no externalities, information
asymmetries, or market power, market-clearing prices may fail to exist, may not
be unique, or may not be easily computable. In these cases, decentralized
economic systems that are guided by market prices may be dynamically unstable.
The project will consider the optimal organization of practical exchanges when
this is a possibility. Even when market-clearing prices do not exist, auction
mechanisms that combine prices and rationing can lead to nearly optimal results.
One part of this project will characterize and evaluate the performance of such
mechanisms. Sometimes when market clearing resource prices do in fact exist, the
relevant resources are so numerous and differentiated that auctions are
impractical. Another part of this project will decide how to apply prices in
these settings to meet societal goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.