* 1947616
* Geoinformatics Facility: Integration of alphaMELTS petrologic software with flexible modeling environments
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Paul Asimow, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 705,668.00

Scientists investigate the generation and evolution of magma (molten rock) with
a range of tools such as field-based studies, experiments at high pressures and
temperatures, and models of the physical and chemical behavior of partially
molten rocks. The modeling component is particularly important for situations
where field work is too hazardous or inaccessible and where it would take too
many experiments to fully describe the processes leading to a catastrophic
volcanic eruption. This work focuses on continuing development of a flexible,
powerful, and easy-to-use package of modeling software used by hundreds of Earth
scientists. The alphaMELTS 2 software can model complex scenarios with changing
pressure, temperature, and chemical composition while monitoring energy and mass
of major and trace elements and gaseous species. This project will increase the
mineral systems alphaMELTS 2 can model, support users, extend applications of
the software in teaching and training, and facilitate outreach workshops to
train new users. These workshops will reach several dozen users, mostly early-
career scientists, and equip them with quantitative tools for modern petrology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several particular advances on which
this effort will focus, mostly new thermodynamic model calibrations for use with
alphaMELTS 2 and related tools: modeling of CO2 in mantle magmatic systems; the
amphibole mineral group; the biotite mineral group; more flexible treatment of
trace elements; better integration with MATLAB, Python, and other development
environments; and user interaction and training through the online forum and
dedicated training workshops. Extension of the calibration strategy to exploit
new categories of experiments such as two-liquid equilibria, will allow the
pMELTS code for high-pressure melting to describe carbon-bearing systems such as
subducted carbonate or upwelling carbonated mantle rocks. The most widespread
and important igneous minerals that are not well-modeled in current generations
of MELTS are amphibole and biotite; a new strategy will be implemented that can
tackle the great complexity of naturally occurring amphiboles and make an
accurate yet tractable calibration. Dynamically loadable libraries that allow
for seamless incorporation of all alphaMELTS 2 functionality into any Fortran,
C++, Matlab or Python code will enable coupling with other codes and flexible
scripting. Finally, a large expansion of the phases and trace elements that can
be treated with variable and modular partition coefficients will allow users to
customize their trace element calculations for greater
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.