* 1947929
* CRII: CHS: Investigating Multilingual Teams Communication and Collaborative Writing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Ge Gao, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,983.00

In multilingual teams, people speaking different native languages combine
expertise and perspectives to achieve common goals. A major problem faced by
multilingual teams involves grounding--establishing shared understanding of
intended meanings--during collaborative writing in English. Common ways to
establish grounding such as face-to-face chat create additional challenges, such
as the need for verbal explanations and overlapping schedules. This project
investigates new ways to create grounding in multilingual teams engaged in
collaborative writing. It will improve understanding and develop new tools.
Knowledge and design solutions generated from this project will benefit diverse
workers, including members of global research projects, students in
international education programs, and employees of multinational business
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces the term “editing
traces” to refer to information generated as a by-product of document editing
processes. Editing traces will be investigated as a means of grounding
communication in a collaborative writing environment. Sharing selective editing
traces between native speakers (NS) and non-native speakers (NNS) will be
researched as a means for grounding intended meanings. Three interwoven
activities are expected to contribute to developing new understandings of
practices, needs and requirements involving conversational grounding in
collaborative writing activities, and techniques for supporting them: (1)
developing classifications of grounding issues and editing traces for
understanding how collaborative writing works in multilingual teams; (2)
specifying the effects of using selectively displayed editing traces from NNS to
alleviate targeted grounding problems detected by NS; and (3) using editing
traces in the design of a tool that supports the establishment of grounding
between NS and NNS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.