* 1947257
* CRII: III: RUI: Association Testing and Inversion Detection without Reference Genomes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ronald Nowling, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 223,432.00

The last decade has seen the cost of DNA sequencing plummet. Consequently, the
potential to sequence the genome of every living organism is within our grasp.
Genome assemblies often require significant "polishing," which is often a manual
and labor-intensive process. New methods are needed to directly analyze
fragmented or unassembled genomic data. Analysis of these genomes include the
identification of physical rearrangements such as inversions. Large inversions
have significant impacts on the biology of organisms and their evolution.
Existing computational methods for identifying inversions have been primarily
tested on and developed for well-studied, "reference" genomes. This project
seeks to develop new inversion detection and association testing methods
suitable for the large and growing number of fragmented and/or unassembled
genomes that are becoming available. Undergraduate research assistants will be
funded as active collaborators on the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;So-called
"k-mer" methods have become popular in the last decade for the analysis of
unassembled genomics or metagenomics data. This project seeks to utilize k-mers,
unsupervised learning, and association testing to identify inversions in
fragmented or poorly assembled population genomics data. Since millions of
association tests will be run per data set, the methods will be accelerated
using GPUs. The resulting method and software will be developed in conjunction
with undergraduate research assistants and released under an open-source
license.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.