* 1947541
* NSF-BSF: Studying the compensatory mechanisms underlying gene loss-of-function in the nervous system
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Nilli Zmora, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2024
* USD 953,029.00

This project aims at understanding how organisms cope with a possible loss of
essential genes. One of the fundamental biological processes in animals is
reproduction that ensures the continuation of a species. Gonadotropin releasing-
hormone (GnRH), a protein in the brain, is the governor of reproduction in
vertebrates, and its loss of function in many species, including humans, leads
to infertility. Surprisingly, zebrafish in which the GnRH gene has been silenced
remain fertile. This project examines how reproduction proceeds in zebrafish
without GnRH, as well as the possibility that the lack of GnRH triggers yet
unknown mechanisms that compensate for its absence so that reproduction, and
therefore the species, are maintained. Alternatively, it is possible that
zebrafish will prove to be the first known GnRH-independent vertebrate species.
Therefore, the study will examine 1) whether GnRH is indispensable for
reproduction in zebrafish, 2) if and how a compensation is conveyed, and 3) the
role of two potential compensators in replacing GnRH. This study offers an
opportunity to reveal a novel adaptation for a critical gene, with the
likelihood that this adaptation exists in a broad range of species, and may lead
to potential therapies for infertility. The project will support the training of
graduate students. Partnering with Carnegie’s BioEYES Baltimore, which provides
students in grades 2–12 with hands-on biology experiences using live zebrafish,
the project will develop a reproduction-oriented training module for K-12
teachers from Baltimore City middle schools, thereby reaching over 20,000
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Normal reproduction in hypothalamic GnRH (GnRH3)
knockout (KO) zebrafish can be explained by its dispensability for reproduction
or by the activation of a compensatory mechanism. The effect of reproductive
impairment induced by 1) focal hypothalamic GnRH3 knockdown via RNAi, in vivo,
2) GnRH receptor blocking by specific antagonists, and 3) Gnrh3 neuron laser-
ablation, have indicated that GnRH3 is an active regulator of reproduction in
zebrafish. Multiple molecular changes along the reproductive axis of the GnRH3
KO zebrafish, point towards an inherited multi-factorial compensation, ruling
out known compensatory mechanisms such as homologous factors (i.e., GnRH2) or
neurotransmitters. The hypothesis of the proposal is that GnRH3 is the principal
regulator of reproduction in zebrafish and its genetic loss activates inherited
complex compensatory machinery along the brain-pituitary axis. The role of GnRH3
in the control of reproduction will be determined via knockdown of Gnrh3 through
viral delivery of RNAi, and KO of Gnrh receptors in the brain as well as
specifically in Lh and Fsh gonadotropes. The role of GnRH3 neurons (versus GnRH3
peptide) in controlling reproduction will be studied using the GnRH3 KO line and
GnRH3 conditional neuronal ablation by cytotoxins. Possible compensating factors
that mimic GnRH3 function within GnRH3 neurons will be identified in FACS
isolated GnRH3 neurons, followed by Transcriptomics and Proteomics. Two
promising non-GnRH3 neuronal neuropeptides that may be replacement candidates
for GnRH3 (or that work in conjunction) will be tested through their gene KO and
by determining if GnRH3 peptide modulates their expression through histone
modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.