* 1947142
* Doctoral Dissertation Grant: A History of the American Cement and Concrete Industries
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Dara Orenstein, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 12,600.00

This award supports a proposal for a doctoral dissertation research project to
develop a history of concrete that includes its global, material, and cultural
aspects. The project will examine how American businessmen, scientists, and
workers defined good concrete, and how they transmitted the material, the
technologies necessary for its manufacture, and the knowledge about labor
practices to different building communities around the world. The project
supported by this award will track the discovery of cement rock in the Lehigh
Valley of Pennsylvania, the expansion of the industry to the American South, the
formation of the concrete empire in the Global South, and the potential use of
concrete for colonizing outer space. The dissertation argues that for cement to
be successful, it had to mix with other industries like agriculture, the
military, and science to spread invisibly and seemingly naturally. Funding will
be used to conduct research at government, private, and university archives. The
dissertation argues that for cement to be successful, it had to mix with other
industries like agriculture, the military, and science to spread invisibly and
seemingly naturally. Funding will be used to conduct research at government,
private, and university archives. The results of this research are to be
presented at professional conferences and published in peer-reviewed journals.
They will also serve to illuminate the extent to which materials selected for
building efforts have a significant impact on neighboring residents; in doing
so, they may serve to empower members of the general public to participate in
environmental monitoring, to engage in broader conversations about air quality,
and to participate in scientific knowledge production. Such activities are
especially important for marginalized communities, which have been historically
relegated to living in polluted regions often without knowledge of its looming
toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will support a history of
technology project that examines the American cement and concrete industries.
Unlike coal and other alike industrial substances that have received extensive
historical coverage, concrete has been ignored under the assumption that it
lacks history and importance. By taking concrete itself as the key problematic,
as opposed to its testing or use in design, the results of this project will
contribute to the growing literature on the movement of materials across the
world and their political and environmental consequences. In addition to
introducing concrete to Science and Technology Studies scholarship, it may serve
to transform the field by expanding how scholars think about the development of
knowledge communities. The project shows that to understand the complexity of
knowledge communities, scholars need to look beyond professional hierarchies and
think about the physical, bodily, and geographical networks of people and
places. By rooting the experiences of scientists, quarrymen, carceral laborers,
farmers, and soldiers in the material geographies of concrete manufacture, this
project will reveal how cement and concrete industries constructed ideas about
skill, knowledge, and who was able to acquire it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.