* 1947213
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Burnout: The Epistemologies of a Modern Condition
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Dorothy Howard, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 07/31/2022
* USD 15,520.00

This project investigates ‘burnout’ at work as a category of experience and
object of inquiry in science, organizational design, and culture. Blending
insights from science and technology studies on scientific classification
processes, organizational design, and knowledge workers, it asks three main
research questions: What epistemic, political, and institutional changes account
for shifts in the ways that burnout has been conceptualized and addressed? How
do actors make claims about burnout? Why has the concept of burnout become
crucial to efforts to maintain well-being within the workforce? These questions
will be answered using a mixed-methods research design blending archival
research, ethnography, interviews, and participant workshops to investigate
three case studies: the early history of burnout research, a group who study
burnout among healthcare workers, and a group of software developers
experiencing burnout. Broader impacts include holding participatory workshops
among stakeholders to inform them about their condition and generate knowledge
about how burnout manifests in individual, interpersonal, and institutional
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project synthesizes data from multiple
qualitative research methods to understand the phenomena of ‘burnout’ within the
modern workplace. Data from historical archival research, ethnographic
observations, and participatory focus groups are triangulated to understand the
causes and consequences of burnout within the modern workforce, and how the
concept of burnout has undergone cultural, political, and historical
transformations. Documentary analysis of the early history of burnout research
enables understanding of how the concept of burnout has changed over time.
Participant observation of a university-based research group who studies burnout
among healthcare workers allows for understanding of how burnout affects
physicians and how interventions are developed to deal with it. Ethnographic
observations among information technology workers who develop open source
software facilitates deeper understanding of how workers define and deploy the
notion of burnout in non-medical contexts. Taken together, this project advances
the current state of knowledge about burnout in science and technology studies
and social and cultural studies of work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.