* 1947613
* CRII: CPS: High-Performance Adaptive Hybrid Feedback Algorithms for Real-Time Optimization and Learning in Networked Transportation Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Jorge Poveda, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 02/28/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Recent technological advances in the areas of sensing, computation, and
communication, as well as the modern data revolution, are bringing
transformative changes to the operation and control of several engineering
systems that are tightly connected with society. In particular, intelligent
transportation systems stand as prominent examples of socially integrated
engineering systems where the combination of large-scale data sets, automation,
and feedback control could have a tremendous societal impact in terms of
improvement in travel efficiency, safety, and reliability. Nevertheless, to
fully exploit this potential, different fundamental open questions at the level
of algorithmic design and analysis need to be rigorously addressed. These
questions include how to design data-driven feedback-based optimization and
control algorithms that are robust, efficient, and suitable for deployment in
highly dynamic and complex systems; and how to certify and characterize the
fundamental limitations of these algorithms. Motivated by these questions, this
project will develop novel analytical and data-driven algorithmic tools for the
real-time optimization and control of intelligent transportation systems. The
proposed research is motivated by two particular applications where feedback-
based algorithms have shown tremendous potential: dynamic pricing control, which
has recently been implemented in several cities across the United States, Europe
and Asia; and urban traffic light control, which is now a fundamental
infrastructure technology in dense urban cities. This project includes outreach
and mentoring of high school and graduate students, as well as an active
dissemination of the results via educational
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is the
design and analysis of novel adaptive and robust data-driven control and
optimization algorithms with provable performance guarantees in transportation
systems. Unlike traditional approaches, the algorithms will incorporate
acceleration to maximize exploitation, while simultaneously using information-
rich data sets to relax traditional aggressive exploration requirements. All of
this, without sacrificing structural robustness properties, which are
fundamental for a safe interconnection with the dynamics of the transportation
network. To achieve this, the feedback-based algorithms will be developed and
analyzed using tools from hybrid dynamical system's theory, which is suitable
for the study of complex cyber-physical systems. The adaptive nature of the
proposed algorithms will allow them to cope in real-time with the complex
discrete-time and continuous-time dynamics that emerge in transportation
networks. To certify closed-loop stability and robustness properties, the
project will exploit time scale separation techniques and passivity tools. The
performance of the algorithms will be validated by extensive experimental and
numerical simulations in realistic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.