* 1947448
* Earthquake Sequence Simulations with Thermomechanical Coupling and Fault-Zone Fluid Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Eric Dunham, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 465,695.00

Earthquakes involve frictional sliding along fractures extending through the
Earthâ€™s solid crust, called "faults." Geologic faults can be saturated by fluids
like water which affect the frictional resistance to sliding, hence the size and
timing of earthquakes. Fluid pressure within the fault zone, an important
parameter, is controlled by the production and migration of that fluid. It is
critical to quantify the effects of fluids on fault sliding to better assess
earthquake hazards. Here, the researchers use and develop state-of-the-art
computer simulations to model earthquakes on faults that are thought to have
active fluid flow along them, like the San Andreas fault. The project focuses on
fluid migration and changes in pressure and frictional resistance. Its outcomes
have relevance to naturally occurring earthquakes, as well as to induced
seismicity; these latter earthquakes are triggered by human activities that
involve injection or extraction of fluids from the Earth. The project also
provides support to a female graduate student and training to undergraduate
students. The developed modeling software will be released with an open-source
license for use by the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquake
sequence simulations capture the slow tectonic loading, aseismic slip,
earthquake nucleation, and rupture propagation. They are becoming major tools to
study earthquake processes and interpret observations. Fault strength is the
product of a rate-and-state friction coefficient and the effective normal stress
(total normal stress minus pore pressure). In this project, pore pressure is
determined using a fault-zone fluid-transport model, rather that set a priori as
is typically done. Fluids ascend through the crust in a fault zone whose
permeability varies in time; it decreases interseismically from healing and
sealing processes and increases from cracking and dilatancy during fault slip.
This behavior is called "fault valving." Preliminary simulations reveal fault
valving behavior with earthquake recurrence influenced by cyclic overpressure
build-up and release. The fluids model is here merged into a thermomechanical
earthquake sequence framework. It accounts for the transition from localized
frictional sliding to distributed viscous flow at depth using a temperature-
dependent power law. Temperature obeys the heat equation with frictional and
viscous shear heating that create a thermal anomaly along the fault and its
viscous root. The model is generalized to a poroviscoelastic framework that
accounts for creep closure of pores, thermal expansion of fluids (and pores),
and fluid pressurization. The system behavior is quantified in terms of
dimensionless ratios of relevant time scales, such as earthquake recurrence
interval, healing/sealing time scale, and pore pressure diffusion time across
the seismogenic depth. Outcomes of the simulations predict crustal deformations,
seismic and aseismic slip patterns, heat flow, stress profiles, and other
features which can be compared to geophysical data and geological
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.