* 1947295
* SaTC:EDU: Enhancing Security Education in Hybrid Mobile and Internet of Things Firmware through Inclusive, Engaging, Learning Modules (E-SHIIELD)
* EDU,DGE
* 12/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Harini Ramaprasad, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 512,101.00

Improvements in advanced cybersecurity education are necessary to strengthen the
nationâ€™s cybersecurity workforce, including efforts to ensure diversity in the
cybersecurity workforce. This project has two overarching goals: (1) to develop
curricular materials relating to web-based (hybrid) mobile apps and Internet of
Things (IoT) firmware security, and (2) to strengthen the nation's workforce,
especially for current and future generation students from underrepresented
groups. Toward the above goals, this project will create and broadly deploy two
courses in the web-based mobile app and IoT security technology spaces. The
courses will incorporate state-of-the-art educational techniques that address
challenges that instructors face in teaching these advanced cybersecurity
topics. Using multiple methods of instruction and rapidly-changing course
materials, the faculty will employ inclusive and engaged educational strategies
for promoting diversity in advanced cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
primary goals of this project are to develop, deploy, evaluate and disseminate
course modules in the areas of hybrid mobile apps and IoT firmware security. The
courses will be designed as stackable modules for easy integration into existing
courses, and broadly disseminated under a Creative Commons license.
Additionally, the courses will be designed to align with NSA/DHS Centers for
Academic Excellence (CAE) Knowledge Unit requirements to incentivize CAE
institutions to adopt them. The scope of the course modules will range from
junior and senior level undergraduate courses to graduate level courses. Modules
will target students pursuing various degree programs in cybersecurity at the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC) and extend more broadly to
students pursuing Computer Science degrees at UNCC and other institutions.
Specifically, the project will train faculty at five North Carolina universities
(including HBCUs and community colleges) on the course modules, to deploy them
at their universities. The project will also include a K-12 IoT Roadshow at five
Title I Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools. The course modules will adopt the
Inclusive Curriculum Framework and mploy state-of-the-art educational strategies
aimed towards improved student learning and engagement. Modules will support
multiple class modalities (face-to-face, hybrid, online). The course modules
will also ensure accessibility and inclusivity in the concept, content,
delivery, assessment, feedback and review. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds
proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically
cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity
Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research
Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of
cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.