* 1947021
* Monotone Methods in Reputations: Behavioral Predictions and Reputation Sustainability
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Di Pei, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 277,000.00

This award funds research in economic theory. The PI wants to advance the use of
game theory to understand how strategic decision makers build and maintain
reputations. The research focuses on understanding how a long lived individual,
firm, or organization will make decisions when it faces a series of short lived
opponents who have less information about relevant facts. The project will focus
on developing specific predictions that can be tested with data. The research
seeks to answer specific questions. First, when can decision makers sustain
reputations? Second, how will decision makers behave when reputation building is
costly and monitoring is noisy? Third, how can we best test the predictions of
reputation models given limited availability of data on long-term interactions?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will answer these questions by
using monotone methods. The first project introduces interdependent values to
the study of reputations. This expands the applicability of reputation results
to a richer set of informational environments. The project will give robust
predictions on player’s behaviors in addition to their payoffs. The second
project will examine whether and how interdependent values can contribute to the
sustainability of reputations. The goal is to relate long run outcomes (such as
reputation sustainability) to primitives, including the supermodularity or
submodularity of stage-game payoffs, and players’ beliefs about the payoff
relevant state. The third project develops an alternative framework to study
reputations. This framework may help us better understand players’ reputation
building behaviors. It also can yield sharp predictions on a long-run player’s
action frequencies that apply not only to all of his equilibrium strategies, but
also to all equilibrium best replies. This means that the prediction can be
tested by observing a realized path of equilibrium
play.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.