* 1948947
* Spatial-temporal analysis of social disintegration
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Fiona Greenland, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 144,000.00

This project addresses the relationship between civilian harm and the deliberate
destruction of sites, monuments, and objects having group, religious, and
artistic significance. Theory and evidence are unclear on this issue. In this
project, time-space analytical techniques will be trained on a new dataset of
incidents from a region in which both kinds of events occurred prominently at
high rates. The case is valuable for study because of the strong evidentiary
base and because destructive incidents included many that existing theory would
not have predicted. Specifically, many incidents had neither apparent strategic
advantage or ramifications for the civilian population. Variations in technique,
target, and timing will yield important insights into the intensity and location
of civilian targeting and will assist scholars and decision makers to protect
both humans and cultural sites and objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Newly available
information from these events will be coded to support spatial and temporal
analysis of two key categories of disruption: civilian harm and deliberate
cultural destruction. Sociological theory has tended to view cultural
destruction as an aspect of psychological hostile actions taken against a
population. This needs to be verified, however, by systematic analysis of the
co-occurrence of the two kinds of disruption. This project capitalizes on the
dense and unusually detailed record of cultural destruction generated by
official actors, less sanctioned groups, and civilian witnesses, including cell
phone footage, films, print materials, and satellite images. Data come from a
three-year period (2014-2017) that saw a popular movement that fractured into
multiple (often opposed) factions, interventions from the outside, intervention
more locally, and overwhelming levels of the incidents in question. The
resulting dataset will include georeferencing information in order to analyze
the clustering of civilian harm before, during, and after cultural destruction
events. Analysis will proceed via appropriate statistical techniques including
autoregressive distributed lag models (ARDL), clustering, vector autoregression
(VAR), and event history analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.