* 1948611
* Chemistry of Useful Destruction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Benjamin Bythell, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Benjamin Bythell and his group at the University of
Missouri-St. Louis is developing new tools for determining the structure of
complex sugars known as "glycans." The complexity of glycans makes their
analysis challenging, but their pervasiveness in biology makes their
characterization important. The primary difficulty comes from the fact that
subtle differences in the assembly of similar components can make large
structural and - importantly - functional differences. The Bythell group is
using tandem mass spectrometry (a powerful technology for determining molecular
structure and sample composition) combined with computational modeling to enable
screening and identification of unknown glycans without the need for synthetic
standards. Resulting savings of time and money can advance the pace of
discoveries impacting areas such as medical and pharmaceutical interventions.
The work provides interdisciplinary research opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate, and high-school students, including members of underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key aim of this research is to understand how
sequence information can be recovered following mass spectrometric fragmentation
of glycans. The PI seeks to predict ratios of fragment ions based on the
energetics of the transition and the structures of the products. Combining these
two capabilities will enable prompt generation of predicted spectra for
comparison with experiments. The approach uses computational methods combined
with tandem mass spectrometry of regioselectively labeled and sodiated glycan
model compounds. Improved understanding of fragmentation chemistry will provide
greater confidence in assignment of glycan ion structures and prediction of
relative abundance, leading to faster and more accurate identification of glycan
sequences and glycosidic bonding arrangements without the need for synthetic
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.