* 1948154
* Collaborative Research: Implications of Solar Radiation Management for Strategic Behavior and Climate Governance
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Mark Borsuk, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 565,872.00

With recent scientific reports warning of serious global impacts if greenhouse
gas emissions are not quickly curtailed, some nations or other entities may be
inclined to pursue a technological climate management strategy that does not
require international cooperation. Solar radiation management (SRM) is emerging
as the leading candidate from among a variety of potential “geoengineering”
technologies. SRM seeks to increase the amount of sunlight reflected back into
space to offset the heat-trapping effects of GHG emissions. One approach, which
involves widespread release of reflective particles in the stratosphere, is
expected to be especially cheap and fast‐acting. This means that a single nation
that is especially vulnerable to climate change may decide to deploy SRM, even
if it is potentially detrimental to other nations. This research project is
designed to investigate how the potential availability and implementation of
geoengineering is likely to impact future climate action and impacts. The
research team also explores the ways in which alternative international
governance frameworks might promote strategies that lead to the greatest global
benefit. The project advances existing theory and models of climate action by
considering the potential evolution of decision making as climate change becomes
more urgent and nations struggle to reach a cooperative solution. This
theoretical advancement is reinforced by behavioral laboratory experiments as
well as computer model simulations. By providing insight into the wider
ramifications of geoengineering, The research is timely and socially relevant.
Specifically, the researchers broaden the impact of the work via three main
mechanisms: (i) Direct engagement of domestic and international climate
policymakers, to improve mutual understanding of the implications of SRM; (ii)
Translation and dissemination of our modeling and experimental tools and results
for application to other problems in science and technology policy; (iii)
Provision of socially relevant experiences for diverse students that develop
their capacity to communicate with decision makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate
change is a typical public goods problem, requiring collective action to
successfully co-manage. Global collective action on climate change is a
challenge, however, as each potential actor has an incentive to “free‐ride” on
the actions of others. This leads to insufficient overall action – the so‐called
“tragedy of the commons.” This situation may be transformed, however, by the
potential of solar radiation management (SRM) as a non‐cooperative climate
change management strategy. In particular, the injection of reflective particles
into the stratosphere may be a sufficiently cheap and easy means of cooling the
earth to be feasibly implemented by a single nation. However, SRM is an
imperfect solution as it is short‐lived and has its own risks and governance
challenges. In this project, we seek to understand the potential impacts of SRM
on future climate management strategy, the prospects of cooperative action, and
the role of international governance. Key research questions include: Under what
conditions will SRM encourage free‐riding, free‐driving, or cooperation? Will
nations reserve SRM as a last resort, or implement it before it is necessary?
What role can SRM play in a climate management portfolio that includes
mitigation and adaptation? How will heterogeneity among nations in their
preference for SRM impact the potential for cooperation? How can international
institutions rein in any free‐driver impetus created by SRM while incentivizing
cooperation? This project addresses these and other research questions by
connecting theory, model simulation, and experiment in pursuit of three specific
aims: 1. Develop and analyze a game theoretic model of the dynamics of
international climate cooperation when some nations have the ability to
implement SRM. 2. Design and implement experimental games that represent the key
features of SRM to test the theoretic model against actual behavior and to
inform development of an agent‐based simulation. 3. Simulate and field test
alternative frameworks for international governance and institutional design
that promote climate strategies with the greatest social benefit. While our
project is motivated by the prospect of SRM as a non‐cooperative, short‐term
solution to climate change, insights from our project are potentially applicable
to any situation in which a risky technology is being presented as a quick fix
for problems traditionally addressed through collective action. Finally, the
project team addresses opportunities for transferring the theory, modelling, and
experimental frameworks to other settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.