* 1948489
* CRII: SaTC: Simplification of Mixed Boolean-Arithmetic Obfuscated Expression
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Dongpeng Xu, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2023
* USD 174,982.00

Software obfuscation is a transformation procedure to make a program difficult
to understand, but still preserves all of the program's original behavior.
Mixed-Boolean-Arithmetic (MBA) obfuscation is a powerful and efficient
obfuscation method. It transforms simple calculations to very complex
expressions with mixed Boolean and arithmetic operators. Since many malware
developers have adopted obfuscation techniques to hide malware from detection,
analyzing obfuscated programs plays a crucial role in modern software security.
This project seeks to effectively reverse MBA obfuscation result, which means to
recover the original program logic from an obfuscated program produced by MBA
transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to unveil
the theoretical and practical attributes of MBA obfuscation. This research
reveals the undiscovered fundamental weakness of MBA obfuscation and
consequently challenges the existing design of MBA obfuscation. The research
tasks include: 1) developing an arithmetic-based simplification method to
reverse normal MBA obfuscation; 2) simplifying multi-granularity MBA
obfuscation; and 3) reducing generic non-linear MBA expression. This project
will advance human knowledge about MBA de-obfuscation and produce practical MBA
reverse analysis tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable broader
adoption of formal methods in security analysis applications and inspire more
interdisciplinary research across programming languages and software security.
The developed methods and data set will be publicly available. Besides, this
project will facilitate the development of novel educational tools to enhance
several current courses at The University of New Hampshire (UNH). The minority
students and under-served populations will be engaged in both research and
extracurricular activities (such as Capture-the-Flag competition) to participate
in cutting-edge cyber-security research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Source code,
documentation, experimental results, and scholarly publications, will be managed
using the distributed version control system Git. New curriculum materials will
be organized by the course management system at UNH. A local repository copy
will be stored in the backup servers at UNH SoftSec Group. Data will be retained
for at least three years beyond the award period. The scholarly publications,
presentations, and open-source code will be available on the homepage
(https://www.cs.unh.edu/~dxu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.