* 1948709
* Collaborative Research:  STEM Career Connections: A Model for Preparing Economically-Disadvantaged Rural Youth for the Future Workforce
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Tamara Sumner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 03/31/2024
* USD 599,660.00

This project will develop and study an innovative model to support science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) knowledge and career interests
of rural, economically disadvantaged students. Students will work directly with
STEM professionals and use science and engineering practices to investigate
design challenges. The project will design a curriculum where youth use
programmable sensor technologies for science and engineering investigations. The
curriculum will be designed using a storyline technique whereby a coherent
sequence of science investigations is driven by student questions. Storylines
will also support student progress towards solving design challenges. This
project is a collaborative effort involving scientists, practitioners,
educational researchers, and instructional designers from the University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research, University of Colorado Boulder, and Utah
State University. The project team will work within an existing partnership in
Eagle County, Colorado, consisting of a non-profit community foundation,
YouthPower365, serving youth from economically disadvantaged families, the Eagle
County Schools, and local Vail Valley businesses to collaboratively develop and
study innovative out-of-school time (OST) learning experiences. This project
will help prepare economically disadvantaged middle school youth to more fully
participate in STEM and computing career pathways by engaging with sensor-
integrated learning experiences around locally relevant design challenges in
afterschool and summer programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine
how the project model can serve as a bridge between youth learning and career
experiences, examining the degree to which youth are able to construct
personally relevant connections. The team will use qualitative and quantitative
research methods to answer three research questions. 1) What tools and practices
enable a community partnership to support youth exploration of locally relevant
STEM and computing pathways? 2) What learning experiences enable middle school
youth to create personally relevant connections with STEM and computing careers?
3) To what extent does participating in STEM Career Connections stimulate
disadvantaged youth interest and learning in STEM and computing careers?
Research data to be collected include student interviews, surveys, and artifacts
created by youth during OST activities. Changes in students' interests in STEM
and computing careers will be determined through content analyses of
participating students' Individual College and Career Plans (ICAP). Project
evaluation will examine the degree to which projects goals are being met,
partners are effectively engaging, and youth are making productive STEM and
computing career connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices that increase middle
school youth motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of science,
technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.