* 1948005
* Collaborative Research: Patterns and processes of abrupt Arctic warming based on paleoclimate observations and models
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 527,906.00

The rate at which the Arctic has warmed during the past 50 years is likely
faster than anytime during the past 7 millennia, and temperatures will likely
continue to rise during the coming centuries. This research uses geological
evidence and model simulations to study the Arctic system’s response to past
warming events that had similar rate and duration to that of modern warming.
This project provides detailed insights into the temperature and ocean-
atmosphere circulation changes associated with abrupt warming events in the
Arctic, thus providing a better understanding of the potential response to
future warming. Through outreach efforts, this project connects K–12 students in
underserved communities to higher-education opportunities and supports multiple
early career researchers, including graduate and undergraduate students.
Finally, the database and model output generated from this project will be made
publicly available in community-standard formats and archives, thus accelerating
advances in Arctic science beyond the life of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on the feedbacks and processes
that determine the interactions of multiple components of the Arctic system as
they have undergone rapid warming during the recent deglacial period: sea ice,
coupled ocean and atmosphere, and terrestrial Arctic climate. This project tests
the hypothesis that during past abrupt warming events, Arctic temperature and
moisture changes exhibit a common spatial pattern, strongly controlled by
proximity to sea-ice changes and paths of moisture transport. The researchers
employ a three-pronged approach: (1) Quantify the climate response to three
periods of abrupt warming (14,500; 11,700; and 8,000 years ago) by generating
new paleoclimate data — specifically new hydroclimate inferences based on
compound-specific isotopes and more accurate chronological control based on a
large number of new radiocarbon ages — using existing lake sediment cores from
sites that fill major data gaps; (2) Reconstruct the spatiotemporal pattern
associated with these abrupt warming events using an updated Arctic-wide
paleoclimate database; and (3) Compare the paleoclimate database with existing
and new global climate simulations, including those using state-of-the-art
isotope-enabled models to assess mechanistic links between components of the
Arctic and global climate system during abrupt
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.