* 1948453
* Laboratory Acquisition Protocols and Standards (LAPS): A Standardized Digital Data System for Experimental Results
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Matej Pec, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 387,146.00

The project will design and develop a web-based digital resource, entitled
Laboratory Acquisition Protocols and Standards (LAPS), to facilitate public
access to geophysical laboratory information. This information includes
equipment capabilities, original and edited experimental data, laboratory
calibrations, as well as information about testing protocols and procedures.
Recent developments in data mining techniques and machine learning have made it
possible to utilize and digest large amounts of information; yet such data must
be initially prepared and structured in a meaningful way. This project will
initially develop a prototype database resource with sample data, which will be
available for testing by researchers and the public. The final resource will be
compatible with Strabospot, a newly developed digital data system, which will
enable the comparison of field and experimental data based on key criteria. The
LAPS resource will help improve the quality of scientific and technical studies,
such that: 1. Laboratory managers will be able to compare data using
standardized testing protocols in order to improve data quality; 2. Data
analysts will be able to quickly examine large sets of experimental data using
new algorithms and potentially discover previously unnoticed phenomena and
correlations; and 3. teachers will be able to search and access experimental
data in real-time to illustrate concepts discussed in the classroom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory data are essential for testing and refining
theories and models in the Earth sciences. Yet, this data is currently not
accessible in digital, searchable form, limiting its utility. Recently a digital
data system, StraboSpot, was developed to incorporate field and microstructural
data and make it available to the public. The utility of StraboSpot will be
further enhanced by the integration of data from laboratory experiments on rock
mechanics and properties. However, there are a wide variety of specialized
laboratories, and many follow their own procedures and standards. The goal of
this project is to integrate relevant data and metadata from rock mechanics
experiments conducted at any laboratory into the StraboSpot system so that the
data is openly accessible and searchable by any interested party. This project
will establish a coherent and effective way to describe equipment and
experiments across a variety of testing rigs and devices to facilitate
communication and common standards in experimental geophysics. Goals of the
project include publishing data for the broad Earth science community and
improving interlaboratory communication. Specific research objectives include:
1. Collecting data for lab specific procedures, needs, and current workflows; 2.
Outlining and describing metadata structure, attributes, formats, and
restrictions for experimental data via community input; 3. Building an inventory
of experimental systems and their capabilities for the benefit of the
experimental community; 4. Publishing applications and tools to aid integration
with StraboSpot; 5. Demonstrating the capabilities of the system by integrating
the applications into the workflows of rock deformation laboratories; and 6.
Documenting ongoing progress on the projectâ€™s
homepage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.