* 1948765
* Collaborative Research: Community tools for automated paleoenvironmental interpretation from sedimentary field data
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Elizabeth Hajek, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 308,259.00

Geological field data is essential for reconstructing historical conditions on
Earth and Mars, finding and developing natural resources, and managing natural
hazards. Sedimentary geology relies on a set of patterns in rock outcrops that
provide information on where natural environments (like oceans, rivers, deserts,
or lakes) existed in the past. This project will develop tools for automated
interpretation of past environments from sedimentary outcrop data. Collaborative
evaluation of outcrop datasets by geoscientists and computer scientists will
yield new perspectives on how geological outcrop interpretation can be
accomplished and provide a deeper understanding of the information required for
automated interpretation of field data. Automating outcrop interpretation will
broaden researchers’ ability to rapidly mine existing and new digital datasets
for information that will contribute new insights into the history of surface
conditions on Earth and Mars. The tools developed as part of this project will
be broadly disseminated and will integrate with existing digital platforms for
field data. These tools will help facilitate collaborations among a broad range
of geoscientists, including those who can’t easily conduct fieldwork in remote
locations. This project will strengthen workforce development by cross-training
sedimentary geologists with advanced computer science skills and will provide
examples of practical applications of machine-learning approaches for computer
science students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these goals, this project
will leverage existing digital outcrop datasets and collect a new targeted
dataset to explore automated approaches for extracting sedimentary features from
outcrop image and surface-topography data. The project will focus on extracting
sedimentary features that are critical for paleoenvironmental reconstruction,
including types of cross bedding, and investigate how outcrop quality, scale,
and orientation influence the recoverability of sedimentary features.
Additionally, this project will explore the degree to which the three-
dimensional orientation of sedimentary features can be extrapolated from
automated outcrop observations. The tools developed in this project will be
tested with structural geology and geomorphology outcrop datasets to evaluate
how workflows developed as part of this work could aid a broader range of
geoscience disciplines. Results will be packaged as an accessible online tool
that can be used in combination with digital field data repositories. Widespread
dissemination of this tool and broad community participation will strengthen the
algorithm and improve the community resource over time. Educational materials
suitable for undergraduate sedimentary geology courses will be developed and
will help expand undergraduate geosciences students’ exposure to computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.