* 1948744
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intergenerational Memory Practices and Social Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Jennifer Cole, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 25,200.00

Over the past several decades, intergenerational memory and trauma have become
key terms in debates about post-conflict recovery. Originally conceptualized as
an experience so shocking it cannot be integrated into a subject's conscious
memory, trauma now refers to extra-ordinarily painful experiences, or wounds to
memory, which profoundly shape both collective and individual identity. Victims
of violence and their descendants have mobilized both psychological and
neurobiological arguments about trauma to gain social recognition, as well as
access psychosocial and material resources. However, commonsense understandings
of intergenerational memory and trauma are largely based on a narrow set of
paradigmatic studies of mass-violence. This project tests whether that selection
bias impedes the efficacy of those claims. In addition to providing funding for
the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, the project would enhance scientific
understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to organizations invested in
the use of evidence-based media production to understand and inform post-crisis
community interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zoe Berman, under the supervision
of Dr. Jennifer Cole of the University of Chicago will explore whether, and if
so, to what extent, different sociohistorical conditions shape the ways in which
memories and trauma are experienced and shared. How do understandings of
historic violence, mental health, and social difference evolve after conflict?
What practices enable individual and collective resolution after violence, and
how do these practices change over time? The researcher will explore such
questions through an ethnographic investigation of intergenerational memory
practices, trauma, and social antagonism in a post-conflict context. Over 15
months, using a range of ethnographic and linguistic techniques of data
collection and analysis (including interviews, participant observation, archival
analysis, and collaborative interpretation), she will track the work of official
and unofficial memory practices within and across three multi-generational
youth-focused organizations, as well as in popular media and at the level of
policy. Exploring how memories and trauma are evoked and made relevant to
different contexts, the researcher will investigate whether a range of normative
and structural social relationships are reproduced or re-imagined through
practices of remembering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.