* 1948790
* Water Unaffordability in the United States: Using Principles of Organizational Learning to Understand Municipal Capacity to Safeguard Water Access
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Sharon Harlan, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 234,794.00

Water Unaffordability in the United States: Using Principles
of&lt;br/&gt;Organizational Capacity to Understand Municipal Variation in
Providing Water Access&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The United Nations has recognized access to sufficient,
safe, acceptable, physically accessible, and affordable water and sanitation as
fundamental human rights. Nevertheless, the cost of household water and
sanitation services for U.S. consumers has risen much faster than the general
cost of living in the 21st century. Nonpayment of water bills is increasing and
water utilities in some cities have responded by shutting off water delivery to
households with unpaid bills. This project will identify the historical,
ecological, demographic, technological, political, and legal factors that
contribute to water unaffordability, and assess the consequences of escalating
water costs for vulnerable populations. The project will show how a city’s
organizational capacity, e.g., fiscal and economic resources, formal policies,
physical infrastructure, information system resources, and the skill and
professional training of city employees, affects the design and implementation
of city policies on water affordability. The project will also illustrate the
extent to which certain types of policies and practices disproportionately
affect elderly, disabled, low-income, and non-white Americans. The project will
help government officials identify forces that create variations in water
affordability policies, and will also develop educational materials to
facilitate partnerships between municipal officials, water utility managers, and
the public, to help them improve local water affordability and assistance
programs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The costs of household water and sanitation
services has risen sharply in the 21st century, and nonpayment of water bills
has affected some households. The study uses mixed methods and a comparative
case study design to understand how a municipality’s organizational capacity and
discretion among water resource managers interact with state-level legal and
economic factors to shape decisions about cost relief policies for low-income,
non-white, and other socially vulnerable groups, and enforcement mechanisms that
secure payment of water and sanitation bills. The project will first collect
administrative and archival data on water policies in a sample of 12 cities in 2
states: Massachusetts and Pennsylvania. Next, the project will select 6-8 cities
for semi-structured, in-depth interviews, with 9-10 interviews in each city, for
a total of approximately 80 interviews. The comparative case study design, which
nests municipal decision making in the context of state-level legal, political,
and economic constraints, will advance research on sustainability that focuses
on how place-based dynamics contribute to sustainable and just management of
human needs and ecological resources. The project will advance sociological
theories on organizational capacity and organizational learning by showing how
public sector organizations integrate multiple types of knowledge--technical,
bureaucratic, and ethical--in developing policies that facilitate or constrain
access to basic human needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.