* 1948137
* Surfzone Energy Cascades
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Steve Elgar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 978,422.00

Rotational currents with order 0.1 m/s velocities and periods of about 30
minutes have been observed in many surf zone environments and for a wide range
of conditions. These low-frequency surf zone eddies provide a mechanism for
cross-shore dispersion and exchange of material between the shore and the inner
continental shelf. This study tests the hypothesis that low-frequency surf zone
currents may be the result of energy transfer from breaking waves. Existing data
from an extensive two-dimensional array of wave and current sensors will be
analyzed to investigate the inverse energy cascade to lower frequencies. Due to
limitations in the spatial scales resolvable by the existing data, new data will
be collected through the deployment of an alongshore array of wave and current
sensors in the surf zone. The sensor deployment will occur during a multi-
agency-funded field project to take place in 2020, leveraging significant
infrastructure and ancillary measurements. In addition to understanding the
contribution of these low frequency oscillations to material exchange between
the surf zone and the coastal ocean, the study will also address the need for
exposure of future scientists and professional engineers in field data
collection and analysis. The project will provide students and young coastal
professionals field data collection experiences and 1-week long workshops in
analyzing field observations. In addition, the research will form part of the
dissertation of an MIT-WHOI PhD student advised by the
PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several hypotheses for the generation of
low-frequency surf zone motions, including instabilities of mean currents (shear
waves), slow modulations of the incident wave field (wave groups), and nonlinear
energy transfers (breaking waves). The wide range of observed wave conditions in
existing field data sets, combined with new observations will allow separation
and isolation of these mechanisms. Preliminary analyses of surf zone
observations suggest that some statistics of the low-frequency current field are
consistent with the expectations of a two-dimensional inverse energy cascade.
Based on preliminary results, two hypotheses have been formulated and will be
investigated as part of this project: (1) vortical energy with spatial scales of
a few meters injected into the surf zone at the ends of high frequency (50 to
300 mHz) breaking wind waves is transferred to low-frequency (&lt; 4 mHz) surf
zone currents via a two-dimensional inverse cascade, and (2) enstrophy (the
integral of vorticity squared) is transferred from breaking-wave-generated
vorticity to smaller-scale, higher-frequency motions via a two-dimensional
forward cascade. The spatial scale for which the inverse and forward cascades
intersect is an indication of the spatial scale of the injected
vorticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.