* 1948863
* 2020 Cooperative Election Study
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2022
* Stephen Ansolabehere, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 09/30/2022
* USD 556,771.00

The 2020 Cooperative Election Study is a collaboration of over 50 different
university research teams throughout the United States. Collectively this group
designs and fields a large sample survey of at least 50,000 American adults. The
survey measures demographics, attitudes, and voting behavior in national and
state elections. The very large sample size allows researchers to have
sufficient data to study state electorates as well as the entire nation. The
survey is used to study who votes and why, and what explains the choices that
voters make. Since its inception, the CCES has involved more than 100 different
research teams and hundreds of faculty and student researchers, and it has
conducted interviews with over 300,000 American adults. The data from this
project are used widely by researchers, journalists, and members of the public
to understand American elections and public opinion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2020 Cooperative Election Study is developed by a consortium of research teams.
Each research team that wishes to be involved in the project purchases a
1,000-person sample survey from the same firm. Each individual team determines
half of the questions on its survey. The other half of the content (Common
Content) is created by a design committee, drawn from the participating teams.
Common Content consists of questions that every team would like to measure or
questions that are of broad interest and require a very large sample. The
project, thus, fields as many surveys as there are teams and also produces a
single large sample survey that consists of the Common Content. The survey will
be fielded over the Internet, with samples constructed to be nationally
representative. Each team will receive the data from its own 1,000-person survey
and a dataset consisting of the 50,000+ observations from the Common Content
survey. Survey data are validated using voter validation and through comparisons
of state level election results to the survey results from the subsamples for
each state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.