* 1948723
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Worker Beliefs and the Job Application Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Andrea Moro, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Senay Agca
* 03/31/2021
* USD 25,995.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the largest factors contributing to the
gender wage gap is sorting across occupations and industries. This sorting
behavior may be driven by workers' second-order beliefs, which are beliefs about
other people's beliefs, through the job application decision. This research
examines whether second-order beliefs are an important mechanism underlying the
sorting by gender through the job application decision. The research explores
this question with a structured field experiment by soliciting applications for
a real high-paying white-collar job using advertisements that vary the relevant
second-order beliefs through varying the gender of the hiring manager and the
gender associations of the product sector. After the job application decision of
the candidates, their second-order beliefs are elicited through a laboratory
experiment to understand how these beliefs affect job sorting. Overall, this
proposal sheds light on labor market behavior based on second-order beliefs and
has implications for designing recruitment tools to mitigate job sorting by
gender and the corresponding gender wage gap. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Job sorting
behavior is an important factor contributing to the gender wage gap. Beliefs
about what employers believe about the relative ability of men and women, which
are second-order beliefs, may be a reason why there is job sorting to certain
industries and occupations. This study combines a field experiment with an
online laboratory experiment to determine whether second-order beliefs affect
workers' job application decision. In the field experiment, product lines are
varied to reflect occupations traditionally favored by different genders, as
well as the gender of managers. Both of these factors are relevant for second-
order beliefs of workers. The field experiment is followed by a survey to reveal
the second order beliefs of the participants. By combining the field and
laboratory data, this proposal provides evidence on how second-order beliefs in
the labor market contribute to the gender wage gap through job sorting
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.