* 1948963
* Collaborative Research:  Ensuring Sustainable Energy Storage Operations in the US Electricity Grid
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Ines Azevedo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2022
* USD 98,733.00

This research project investigates the environmental effects of energy storage
operations in the United States using life-cycle assessments and electricity
system engineering-economic modeling. The first objective of the proposed work
is to understand the climate, health and environmental effects of operating
energy storage devices on the electricity grid. The second objective is to
propose new electricity system policies that allow the economic benefits of
storage to be captured without causing inadvertent system emissions. Energy
storage deployments are expected to increase rapidly in the coming years, but
the environmental consequences of their operation phase are generally unknown.
The effort will build on the researchers' prior work on the topic and will
estimate the emissions effects of several different energy storage technologies
providing energy arbitrage, renewable energy integration, and frequency
regulation services. In addition, project activities include the participation
of both graduate and undergraduate research assistants, through an undergraduate
summer research program. The public is being engaged on the research topic
through development of a freely-distributed "Emissions and Renewables" expansion
to the popular board game, Power Grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project is utilizing electricity system modeling approaches, marginal emissions
factors, and emissions-related damage estimation tools. The analysis also
includes an evaluation of a variety of likely policy interventions that can
improve the environmental footprint of energy storage, including performance
standards and alternative operational strategies. As part of this work, existing
concepts are being coupled in new ways, combining energy storage operational
models with marginal emissions factors to estimate climate, health and
environmental impacts. Part of this effort involves developing new forecasts of
marginal emissions factors for use in both this research project and by others
examining the expected effects of future changes to the electricity grid.
Finally, policy or market limitations on new energy storage, which have not been
considered up to now, are an integral part of the research effort. Energy
storage will be rapidly adopted in the coming decades. Policies that ensure
sustainable development of these technologies are needed before large-scale
deployment occurs, and the results of this work could be used directly in the
formation of new policy.