* 1948244
* CRII: SaTC: Automatic Generation of API to Natural Language Data Type Mappings for Developer and End User Privacy Risk Mitigation
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Rocky Slavin, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 183,000.00

Since the advent of the smart phone, an increasing amount of the population has
gained access to Internet-accessible software applications (apps). This, coupled
with the various sensors available on mobile devices, make the general public
highly susceptible to privacy risks as sensitive information (e.g., location,
camera images, biometrics) may be leaked to the Internet. To help users make
informed decisions about the potential privacy risks in using apps, regulators
increasingly require app developers to include privacy policies communicating
what information is collected or shared and how that information is used.
However, even when such privacy policies are present, trust must be put in the
app developers to adhere to the promises therein. Furthermore, developers are
accountable for their adherence to their policies and must be confident that
their privacy policies accurately represent their practices. This project aims
to assist both developers and general app users in verifying the alignment of
privacy policies and the apps they represent by producing an automated process
for linking the semantics of language used in privacy policies with the code
used to produce the apps themselves. Furthermore, the project will use this
framework to generate tools for end users and developers to directly benefit
from this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project aims to produce an
automated process for generating mappings between code-level APIs and natural
language data types using machine learning. The resulting mappings will be
utilized in developer and end user tools to identify and help mitigate potential
privacy leakage during development and app usage. The current state of
misalignment detection between privacy policies and app code requires the manual
generation of mappings from code-level Application Program Interface (API)
methods to privacy-oriented natural language data types. Even for small app
categories, this process can require a human to review thousands of methods and
hundreds of annotations resulting in potential for inaccuracies due to fatigue
and incomplete domain knowledge. APIs also change as methods are introduced and
deprecated resulting in outdated mappings. These problems make it difficult to
apply the framework practically as the environment continually evolves. This
project will address these challenges through two contributions. First, machine
learning will be applied to the mapping generation process to produce an
automated, scalable method for generating code-phrase mappings for APIs as
needed. This will allow for misalignment detection for API levels, methods, and
app categories beyond those build in previous contributions. This automated
approach will make use of a state-of-the-art pre-trained language models to
detect semantic similarity between API documentation and natural language data
types used in privacy policies. Second, the resulting mappings from the
automated model will be applied to practical developer and end user tools to
enable informed decision for privacy risk mitigation. The PoliDroid tool suite
will be developed including a developer-oriented integrated developer
environment plugin which detects potential unintended privacy leaks based on a
privacy policy and a real-time misalignment detection tool for end
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.