* 1948338
* CRII: III: Learning to Integrate Heterogeneous Data from Disparate Sources for Disease Subtyping
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Suzan Arslanturk, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,987.00

Patients suffering from the same cancer disease often not only experience a high
degree of symptomatic variability but also respond significantly different to
the same treatment. As a result, many cancers are over-diagnosed causing
patients to receive unnecessary and costly cancer treatments, while some
patients do not receive the needed treatment. These can be greatly reduced with
targeted treatments that result in greater efficacy and fewer debilitating or
dose limiting side effects. Hence, the discovery of patient subgroups and/or
disease subtypes that differ in cancer progression will help better tailor
treatments with reduced lethality and improve the quality of life by avoiding
over-treatment. Studies have shown that, in addition to the genetic factors,
such factors as clinical history, hormonal exposure, lifestyle, and
epidemiologic factors may play an important role in the onset and progression of
cancers. Hence, investigation of clinically relevant disease subtypes cannot be
achieved by solely analyzing data from a single source, i.e. only the genetic
composition. This project will build innovative machine learning technologies to
integrate knowledge collected from multiple repositories from different cohorts
of multiple data types (e.g. genomic, clinical, and epidemiologic) for a more
accurate and robust discovery of disease subgroups and/or patient subtypes. Its
activities will thus advance the field of multi-type data integration from
disparate sources with different cohorts. Anticipated results will greatly
benefit the society by reducing the health care costs and improving patient care
by distinguishing between patients who are at higher-risk and need the most
aggressive treatments from those who will never progress, recur, or develop
resistance to treatments. The interdisciplinary nature of the project will
further the education of undergraduate and graduate students through cross-
disciplinary training by bridging the fields of computer science, biology, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these goals, the project will
investigate a novel clinically-relevant disease subtyping system by flexibly
integrating collective information available through multiple studies with
different cohorts and heterogeneous data types using innovative deep learning
models and algorithms. Here, the investigator hypothesizes that if the
information in partially coupled data from disparate sources is integrated in a
meaningful way that is statistically sound and robust, then the analysis on the
integrated data would lead to a more unified picture and global view of the
system, and thus, to a more accurate and robust discovery of disease subtypes.
Existing data fusion approaches suffer from such challenges as uniqueness,
interpretability, high-dimensionality of the feature space and linearity
assumptions. This project will develop theory, algorithms, and implementation of
a deep machine learning technique capable of discovering the salient knowledge
of the learning task during the integration of disparate datasets. Therefore, it
is expected to overcome such challenges as high dimensionality of genomic
datasets. The project would result in a valuable tool with broad implications
and utility in cancer research. These ﬁndings will not only provide useful and
valuable models to identify patient subgroups and/or disease subtypes, but will
also result in a valuable precision medicine resource for the wider scientiﬁc
community on other diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.