* 1948536
* CRII: SHF: Analyzing the Linux's KBuild Makefile
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2022
* ThanhVu Nguyen, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 190,975.00

The Linux system empowers a wide range of computer devices,
ranging&lt;br/&gt;from tiny IoT sensors and mobile phones to desktop and
supercomputers.&lt;br/&gt;This flexibility is due to the highly-configurable
design of Linux,&lt;br/&gt;allowing the users to customize and build Linux with
an extensive set&lt;br/&gt;of options. This reconfigurability has many benefits,
but it also&lt;br/&gt;greatly complicates tasks such as testing and debugging
due to the&lt;br/&gt;large number of possible configurations. This project aims
to develop&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and tools to analyze the complex Linux build
process to&lt;br/&gt;understand how configuration options affect the building of
individual&lt;br/&gt;source files. This research will allow developers to
find&lt;br/&gt;orphan files that are never used in the build process, examine
and&lt;br/&gt;test configurations that affect individual source files, and
determine&lt;br/&gt;how patches or code changes affect a given configuration.
The research&lt;br/&gt;also helps users, e.g., allowing embedded system
manufacturers to&lt;br/&gt;optimize Linux to fit their devices. In addition, the
research allows&lt;br/&gt;for the discovery of many interesting and useful
information about the&lt;br/&gt;Linux build system, e.g., the complexity of
build&lt;br/&gt;conditions, highly-influential configuration options,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop static and dynamic
analyses to analyze&lt;br/&gt;the Linux build system, in particular the
"makefiles" that control the&lt;br/&gt;building and linking of individual source
files. The research is&lt;br/&gt;divided into three main activities. The first
develops a symbolic&lt;br/&gt;execution technique that simulates the runs of the
makefiles to obtain&lt;br/&gt;path conditions over configuration options mapping
to built files.&lt;br/&gt;These path conditions provide a formal description of
how&lt;br/&gt;configuration options affect the building of individual kernel
files.&lt;br/&gt;The second develops a dynamic analysis that learns path
conditions&lt;br/&gt;from kernel files built from actual make runs over a sample
of&lt;br/&gt;configurations. This analysis will be based on a recent work
developed&lt;br/&gt;by the team that alternates between a learning and checking
phase to&lt;br/&gt;improve the overall quality of the learned conditions.
Finally, by&lt;br/&gt;representing the obtained path conditions as logical
formulae, modern&lt;br/&gt;constraint solvers can be applied to solve problems
such as finding&lt;br/&gt;orphan files and the impact of configuration options
to files included&lt;br/&gt;in a build.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.