* 1948692
* Collaborative Research: The economics of social data
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Alessandro Bonatti, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 229,885.00

This award funds research in economic theory. The rise of large Internet
platforms is leading to an unprecedented collection and use of data. The
platforms generate massive amounts of data about individual consumers, their
preferences, their locations, their friends, their political views, and almost
all other facets of their lives. The availability of individual-level data
allows companies to offer refined search results, personalized product
recommendations, informative ratings, timely traffic data, and targeted
advertisements. The resulting markets for data introduce a fundamentally new set
of economic relationships. A central feature of the data collected from
individuals is its social aspect. Namely, the data captured from an individual
user is not only informative about that specific individual, but also about
users similar to her. Thus, individual data is really social data. The social
nature of the data generates an informational externality. That is, an
individual providing information about herself affects the marketplace options
available to others. This project will give us new insights into how data
markets affect economic outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The team will pursue a
research agenda focused on data markets. The first step is to establish the
theoretical foundations of our understanding of how information markets work.
This research focuses on the social aspect of information collection, which
leads to a newly understood "data externality" that can be associated with
various market failures. This research seeks to understand why internet data
platforms tend to become large dominant firms, and how this affects the welfare
of consumers, advertisers, and publishers. The next step is to analyze whether
and how large internet platforms can maintain and possibly extend their market
power through various contracting and commercial practices, and how both
antitrust enforcement and regulatory policy might respond. The team will
investigate the likely industry equilibrium and competitive structure in such
markets for data and information, and any possible regulatory interventions.
More specifically they will develop new results on how the gathering of this
kind social data impacts the economics of content providers (e.g., online,
print, radio and television media). Finally, how do the current contracting
practices in the digital advertising markets accentuate or attenuate the data
externalities, and the resulting social outcomes? These questions gain
importance in the presence of the externality generated by the social
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.