* 1948133
* CRII: III: Efficient and Robust Statistical Estimation from Nonlinear Compressed Measurements
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jie Shen, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,994.00

This project advances the nation's development in science and engineering by
providing new theory and algorithms for knowledge discovery from high-
dimensional data. High-dimensional estimation, a computational procedure that
extracts the most useful information from a large pool of redundant or
irrelevant features, has played fundamental roles in various areas such as
medical imaging, biology, and climatology. However, the well-established
estimation schemes degrade dramatically when the data have complex structures,
or when they are contaminated due to hardware failures, programming errors, or
cyber-attacks. The goal of this project is to significantly broaden the
understanding of the fundamental limits of learning algorithms against different
types of structures and data errors, to offer a complete guideline for robust
algorithmic design, and to highlight the extent to which an intelligent system
behaves reliably and consistently. Outputs, such as theoretical results,
algorithm implementation, and reusable empirical data, are designed to support a
wide range of researchers in machine learning, high-dimensional statistics,
signal processing, biology, and other related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will be carried out by investigating the interplay of high-dimensional
statistics, optimization, and learning theory. The investigator will develop a
unified framework for nonlinear estimation in the high-dimensional regime, which
uncovers parameter estimation from quantized measurements and learning with
nonlinear activation functions in deep neural networks. In particular, to
account for the nonlinear and possibly nonconvex nature, the investigator will
develop efficient constrained optimization algorithms by leveraging inherent
geometric structures into algorithmic design and theoretical analysis. Based on
the unified framework and the established generic results, the investigator will
revisit an ensemble of heuristic algorithms and will provide a theoretical
justification on when and why they succeed in practice. Lastly, the investigator
will design algorithms that are robust to various types of data corruption, such
as adversarial noise, outlier, and malicious noise. To obtain a near-optimal
dependence on the noise rate and data dimension in the sample complexity, a
series of new statistical results will be established by leveraging tools from,
and enriching theory in learning theory and robust
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.