* 1948943
* Using New Longitudinal Linked Data to Investigate the Determinants of Educational Attainment and Achievement
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Jere Behrman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2024
* USD 412,538.00

In spite of the policy relevance of what determines educational attainment and
achievement, economists do not have a good understanding of the issue even
though there are several studies on the subject. This research will study the
determinants of educational attainment and achievement, as measured by scores on
standardized tests for children/youth in grades 6-12 using newly available
administrative test score and survey data. The study is based on a nationwide
standardized tests to children in all public schools as well as surveys of
special students, teacher, principal and parents in a random sample of schools.
These rich data provide opportunities to analyze how school quality, teacher
quality and family characteristics affect student enrollment and performance in
a way that learning is a cumulative process across grades. The researchers will
also use the data to study how a program that pays subsidies to children to
attend school affects child working behaviors, schooling attainment and
performance. The research will also study how school quality, differences in
curricula, and distances from home affect parents’ willingness to pay for
education; it will also analyze how willingness to pay for their children’s
education is influenced by family background. The results of this research can
inform educational policies in the US and many other countries. The research
project will also help establish the global leader in educational outcomes
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite several studies, researchers
do not have a good understanding of the determinants of educational attainment
and achievement, especially at the K-12 level. This research will contribute the
literature on the determinants of K-12 education. Specifically, this research
aims at: (i) estimating value-added models of test score dynamics to study how
school quality and family inputs affect student performance and to examine how
cash transfer a program affects beneficiaries and nonbeneficiaries through peer
effects; (ii) develop and estimate a dynamic model of the determinants of
student enrollment, achievement and grade progression that incorporates failure,
grade retention and dropout; (iii) estimate the demand for different types of
schools, accounting for individual-specific choice sets (based on geographic
location), and analyze how demand depends on school quality, distances to
schools, family background, subsidy status and local labor market conditions
that affects returns to education and the demand for child labor; (iv) develop
and estimate a discrete choice dynamic programming (DCDP) model of student
enrollment, study effort, drop-out, and working decisions and use the model to
study the effect of varying income transfer incentive payments, modifying school
quality and increasing schooling access. (v) Finally, the research develops and
estimate a strategic model of student effort choices within classrooms to study
how initial ability distribution influences effort choices and test score
outcomes. The results of this research will provide important inputs into
policies to improve education outcomes, increase human capital formation, and
increase long-term economic growth. The research results could also help
establish the US as the global leader in research on educational
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.