* 1948322
* CRII: III: Capturing Dynamism in Causal Relationships: A New Paradigm for Relationship Extraction from Text
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Sunandan Chakraborty, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2023
* USD 190,332.00

Text mining made important advances in methods to convert vast and unstructured
text data into knowledge. However, the current paradigm of relationship
extraction has one major limitation: it models snapshots of information but
fails to capture the fundamentally dialogic and dynamic nature of knowledge:
conflicting findings, inconsistent discoveries, refutations, contradictions,
reinforcements or confirmations, all changing over time. This project aims to
capture such fundamental dynamics of knowledge, specifically focusing on causal
relationships. Whereas numerous articles, including academic articles, present
knowledge and relationships that express causality, such relationships are not
static and can change over time due to changing conditions. The objective of
this project is to identify cues of causal knowledge from text data, quantify
the strength of the causal relationship, and model its dynamics over changing
conditions. Ultimately, the project aims at modelling a more holistic view of
the knowledge extracted from text. As text data is extensively used by
researchers and practitioners from different domains of national importance,
including, medicine and health, economics, public policy, journalism, the
results of this project seek to provide the foundation to offer practitioners
new ways to understand the evolving nature of the causal relationships present
in large text datasets. Specifically, the novel approaches developed in the
project will be applied to explore public health data to determine how changing
climatic, political, economic conditions may affect the mental and physical
health of the population in different geographic areas. In addition, there will
be various educational activities as part of this project - emerging and related
topics from this project will be included in the curricula of various courses in
the applied data science master’s program; promote undergraduate research,
specifically, recruit students to work in the project who are from
underrepresented and economically disadvantaged communities; organize a research
workshop to encourage participation of high school students in STEM research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project activities include the development of a novel
model of causal relationship extraction that leverages a unified deep learning
framework combining both semantic and syntax cues. This approach will utilize
the key syntactical features of a sentence represented by the grammar
relationships between noun, verbs and other parts of speech through graphical or
tree-like models. This work will determine whether the sentence features a
structure that signals causality. Moreover, the sequential component of the
model will utilize the semantics and identify the influence of certain words in
the sentence to characterize the nature of the causal relationship expressed in
the text. This task will capture the strength of the relationship (e.g., using
cues like "extremely likely", "definitely"), any supporting or opposing
evidences (e.g., "will lead to" or "does not lead to"), and will identify
conditional cues (e.g., "in the presence of") etc. Quantifying such qualitative
properties will lead to the second innovation of this project – causal distance.
Causal distance is a time-variant metric that will denote the magnitude of
causality between two entities as well as capture the dynamism of the
relationship by modifying itself over time with changing conditions or new
evidences. Collectively, the advances pursued in this projects will further
enhance our understanding of the novel computational approaches needed to
unearth and reason on cues of causal relationships embedded in large text data
sets. The outcomes of this project, such as datasets, source code, final
software, results and publications will be shared via publicly accessible URLs
and online code repositories. Additionally, all the project resources and
outcomes will be made available on the project
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.