* 1948910
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining Land Tenure Change and Well-Being
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Bram Tucker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 7,182.00

The governance of land resources is vital to human well-being, particularly
given increasing demand for land and the ease with which land conflicts have
been documented to escalate into violence. A longstanding theoretical claim has
been that individuals are unlikely to coordinate sustainable resource management
without strong state action or private property interests incentivizing them to
do so. Direct state control of land or strict private property enforced by state
bureaucracy has therefore been considered necessary for sustainable management.
However, more recent studies have revealed that community-based resource
governance operating outside direct state control or private market mechanisms
is often viable in the long-term and can contribute significantly to well-being.
Successful community-based resource management typically exhibits rule-making,
monitoring, and sanctioning implemented by resource users themselves and
requires personal interaction among resource users as well as familiarity with
local environments. This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, comparatively analyzes
formal and non-formal tenure arrangements to explore their impact on human well-
being. The project also aims enhance public understanding of science and the
scientific method through its dissemination plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Andrew
Bonanno, under the supervision of Dr. Bram Tucker of the University of Georgia,
will examine the well-being implications of new bureaucratic land governance in
a context where traditional, community-based land governance among most small-
scale farmers have persisted alongside ongoing governmental and organizational
efforts to formalize land holdings through state-enforced private property. In
particular, this research examines how land governance impacts farmers' rights
and abilities to benefit from land use, and the affects this has on human well-
being. Research will be conducted at two sites: one with primarily traditional,
community-based land governance, and one with recently introduced formalized
land governance. Farmers will be interviewed about their land rights and
resource use, and the researcher will accompany farmers during land-use
activities to elucidate local processes of land allocation, use, and claim-
making. The researcher will then conduct focus groups to identify local
conceptualizations of well-being. Finally, household surveys will be implemented
to investigate statistical associations between various rights and multiple
well-being indicators, including local well-being conceptualizations as well as
standard wealth and incomes measures. Data will aid other scientists in
analyzing connections between land and human well-being and further
understanding of how different forms of land governance can shape well-being.
Such insights are critical for informing and evaluating land use and governance
polices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.