* 1948975
* RUI: Evaluating selection via ocean acidification and evolutionary responses of two coastal fishes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Darren Johnson, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Ongoing increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide have changed the acidity of the
ocean, which could affect growth and survival of marine organisms. For fishes,
the projected decreases in ocean pH could cause severe increases in mortality
during the larval and juvenile stages. In turn, these effects may lead to major
reductions in the numbers and size of adult fish, loss of fishery yields, and a
loss of income for people whose livelihoods depend on the sea. However, if
species can genetically adapt to become more tolerant of ocean acidification
conditions, then evolutionary responses may play a role in the long-term
dynamics of populations. This project examines how ocean acidification may alter
patterns of natural selection for two species of fish in a set of breeding
experiments that test tolerances to low pH of different genetic lineages. These
experiments are determining the genetic capacity present in these populations to
adapt to future conditions and offset the negative effects of changes in
seawater chemistry. Broader impacts of this project include the training of two
graduate students and at least nine undergraduates at an institution that is
recognized as both a Hispanic Serving Institution and an Asian American, Native
American, and Pacific Islander Serving Institution, and is one of the most
culturally diverse universities in the world. Additional broader impacts include
public outreach activities through local aquaria and regular meetings with local
city and beach managers. Presentations focus on long-term population predictions
of two fish species that are culturally and economically
valuable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand how
ocean acidification will affect both offspring survival and maternal fitness.
The project combines quantitative genetic studies with laboratory experiments
and population modeling to examine tradeoffs between fecundity and offspring
survival under present and predicted ocean acidification conditions. Breeding
experiments are assessing the natural genetic variance underlying larval traits.
The experimental protocol includes testing for parental effects by exposing
adult fishes to high-pCO2 seawater during gametogenesis and measuring the
survival of offspring experiencing conditions of ocean acidification. The
capacity for genetic change in response to changes in ocean carbonate chemistry
is being investigated through mathematical models. Quantitative evaluation
includes 1) how selection operates as seawater chemistry changes; 2) levels of
genetic (co)variation underlying larval traits; 3) whether non-genetic
inheritance may affect responses to ocean acidification; and 4) whether
evolutionary changes are fast enough to affect the dynamics of populations over
relevant timeframes (e.g., 10-100 years). The project is developing a genetic
model for describing how changes in ocean chemistry are driving natural
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.