* 1948267
* OPUS: CRS - Developing a Synthetic Understanding of Programmed DNA Elimination in Eukaryotes and the Evolution of Genome Size in Copepods
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Grace Wyngaard, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 175,189.00

In most organisms, all cells within an individual contain identical DNA
sequences. Germ cells (sperm and eggs) contain half the amount of DNA as somatic
cells (e.g., skin, lung cells) but still contain identical DNA sequences. This
sequence identity contributes to stability and normal functioning of the genome.
Certain invertebrate and vertebrate species are exceptions to this rule because
during their liftime they eliminate large portions of their germline genome from
somatic cells. This programmed elimination is precise and occurs in every
generation. Among the excised DNA sequences are genes, genetic parasites, and
repetitive sequences of unknown function. The excised DNA is similar among some
species but different in others. Hypotheses to explain this phenomenon include
1) controlling the size of somatic cells and thus development rate and body
size, 2) ridding the genome of parasitic DNA, 3) controlling gene expression, 4)
generating new combinations of genes, and 5) providing molecules needed for DNA
replication during development. Understanding the role of “downsizing” and
reorganization of the somatic genome is critical for understanding the
fundamental question of how genomes are organized and the extent to which they
can be altered through natural processes but still function normally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will synthesize 30 years of research on the
genome biology of copepods, microcrustacean zooplankton of which some species
excise 50 – 99% of their germline DNA. Understanding based on copepods will be
integrated with what occurs via similar processes in protozoans, nematode worms,
hagfish and lamprey. Data derived from DNA sequences, histological preparations
of cells, and life history traits at the organismal level will be used to infer
adaptation at levels from the genome to the whole organism. Products will
include (1) a comprehensive description and interpretation of DNA elimination in
copepods and comparisons with other taxa that possess a similar trait, (2)
patterns of genome size and its correlated evolution with fitness traits in
copepods, as inferred using phylogenetic comparative methods, (3) an
instructional paper with videos on methods unique to studying DNA elimination in
copepods, and (4) critical thinking exercises that use the trait DNA elimination
to assess the transfer of skills in using the scientific method from one
discipline to another discipline, scale, or context. Additionally, as a large
body of the work was conducted with undergraduate researchers, the synthesis
will demonstrate the role that research experiences play in training the next
generation of scientists and advancing scientific
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.