* 1948758
* Excellence in Research: Assessing the Control by Multiple Micropredators on Bacterial Communities in Estuarine Environments and Characterization of Prey Lysis Products Resulting fr
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Sven Kranz, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 929,241.00

Microbes are the most abundant organisms on Earth and play an important role as
degraders, cycling nutrients in the environment. Too many or too few bacteria
may disrupt a sensitive ecological balance and proper functioning of
environmental processes such as carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus cycles. The
abundance of bacteria populations in any given environment is controlled by
various biological, chemical and physical mechanisms. Among the biological
agents are microscopic predators, or micropredators, of bacteria. The most
studied of these are protists, viruses that infect bacteria, and a group of
bacteria collectively known as the Bdellovibrio and like organisms (BALOs).
These micropredators prey upon certain bacteria to obtain required nutrients or
other cellular material for their replication. In the process, cellular products
from the prey bacteria are released into the environment and utilized as
nutrients by other microbes. Although the micropredators co-occur, and likely
interact, in nature, most experimental studies have investigated their
activities individually, rather than collectively. As a result, little is known
about their collective role in controlling bacteria populations and the cycling
of nutrients. The goal of the proposed research is to address this gap in
knowledge by investigating all three as a collective group under simulated
natural conditions representing a range of temperature, salinity and abundance
of prey. This project is conducted at two Historically Black Universities
(HBCUs) with strong records of training and mentoring students and postdocs from
underrepresented populations in science. The project benefits up to 100 students
by providing unique and meaningful educational and research training experiences
at the undergraduate and graduate student levels and for early-career scientist.
Specific activities include courses on scientific writing and presenting results
at annual project workshops as well as national and international scientific
meetings. Graduate students are being trained in modern advanced methodologies
in chemistry and microbiology. There is an ongoing assessment module to document
education and training outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Up to now, the two mainly
accepted mechanisms of mortality in bacterial populations are heterotrophic
protist grazing and viral infection. Increasingly, it has become evident that an
understudied group of predatory bacteria, BALOs, can also contribute to
bacterial mortality. Yet, the mechanisms underlying the dynamics of BALO-prey
interactions are poorly understood, as are the interactions among the
micropredators, BALOs, protists and bacterial viruses. Ultimately, these
processes may have contrasting influences on the structure and functioning of
the microbial loop, including impacting higher trophic levels and biogeochemical
cycles. The investigators hypothesize that environmental factors significantly
influence how mortality in bacterial populations is partitioned among the
micropredators. To test this hypothesis researchers are (1) investigating the
interactions amongst the micropredators, (2) examining the molecular-level
composition and dynamics of dissolved organic matter as the result of the
different mortality processes by the NMR/ FT-ICR mass spectrometry (MS) hybrid
approach, and (3) modeling these tri-trophic dynamics. Intellectual Merit:
Results from this research will define a new mechanistic understanding of
mortality dynamics that influence the microbial loop and oceanic biogeochemical
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.