* 1948806
* Collaborative Research: EarthChem &amp; SESAR - Data Infrastructure for Geochemistry and Earth Science Samples Communities
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Kerstin Lehnert, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,634,387.00

Earth scientists gather a vast amount and diversity of data by collecting
specimens of geological materials including rocks, minerals, fossils, sediments,
ice, river water or seawater, and analyzing these samples in the laboratory to
measure their chemical and physical properties. The data generated by these
analyses help scientists understand natural processes of the past, present, and
even future Earth systems, and form the basis of new ideas, hypotheses, and
discoveries. Thus, it is important that data are preserved and made easily
findable and accessible online in a useful format and accompanied by information
relevant for other researchers, decision makers, teachers, and the general
public. This project continues the operation of two data systems, SESAR (System
for Earth Sample Registration) and EarthChem, that provide online open access to
information about samples collected as part of Earth and environmental science
research, and to data generated when these samples are chemically analyzed in
the lab. EarthChem manages and curates hundreds of geochemical datasets
contributed by researchers and maintains databases with over 30 million
geochemical measurements for more than one million samples. EarthChem will
ensure that these data are available to, and consumable by, anyone (educator,
student, researcher, industry groups, general public) interested in using them
for essentially any purpose, especially research and education in STEM fields.
SESAR makes samples discoverable and accessible online, thus allowing more
efficient and effective access to sample collections that play a central role in
a wide diversity of Earth, environmental, and planetary sciences and may inform
critical decisions, laws and policies, and future science. EarthChem and SESAR
build important national and international connections among data providers and
users that facilitate the availability of information and knowledge to society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the two years of this project, EarthChem and SESAR
will provide ongoing data stewardship services for the geochemistry, petrology,
and Earth samples communities. EarthChem also will undertake essential
developments to modernize and optimize technical implementation, enhance user
functions, expand accessible data holdings, and engage with a broad community of
users and data facilities to establish best practices and interoperability
standards for geochemical data. EarthChem will restructure and reengineer its
systems to ensure that its data services scale to evolving community demands and
that operations are optimized for efficiency, resilience, and sustainability.
New developments will support next generation modes of data-driven research by
improving both human and machine-readable interfaces for discovery, access,
visualization, and analysis of content in EarthChem data systems. Applications
of Machine Learning and other data science approaches will help extract new
knowledge from the data collections. SESAR will continue to expand its user
community beyond geochemistry and the Earth sciences. In addition, SESAR’s
services will move to a new, independent, multi-disciplinary infrastructure for
sample registration, an emerging collaborative effort with cyberinfrastructure
providers in biology, genomics, and archeology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Geoinformatics and the Petrology and
Geochemistry programs in the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.