* 1948868
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Development of Farm Management Expertise in New Farming Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Donald Nelson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 20,533.00

Farming continues to provide the basis of livelihoods across the United States.
Starting new farms and maintaining them has become increasingly costly and
complex, however, requiring farmers to navigate local and global markets,
financial institutions, changing environments, and a profusion of technological
innovations. How do novice farmers make sense of these complexities? What
resources are available to them to learn to successfully navigate farming
landscapes in an increasingly global context? How do different actors use the
information they acquire to make economic and environmental decisions that
affect the sustainability of their efforts? This project trains a graduate
student in scientific cultural anthropology and sheds light on these issues to
provide a holistic understanding of farming entrepreneurship among novice
immigrant farmers in South Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
research queries how ties to farmers' home communities facilitate or hinder
navigation of new social, ecological, and institutional environments, adaptation
to new farming practices and technologies, and, by extension, impacts on the
economic and environmental decisions they make. Research will be conducted among
immigrants who operate small farms in agricultural areas of South Florida where
farming is central to livelihoods for many new immigrants. Using a combination
of ethnographic and quantitative methodologies, investigators will collect data
from farmers and agricultural experts at a variety of sites including farms,
markets, meetings, trainings, and informal gatherings. Understanding the
transnational resources immigrant farmers use will improve our theoretical
understanding of how knowledge moves within and across borders, in turn
contributing to programmatic efforts of extension agents, outreach groups, and
policy-makers as they address evolving constraints in agriculture and local food
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.