* 1948724
* Support for Institutes and Research Groups on Qualitative and Multi-Method Research: 2021-2023
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2023
* William Lowe, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 296,250.00

The Institute for Qualitative and Multi-Method Research is a two-week meeting
held each summer at Syracuse University. The Institute promotes the teaching and
application of qualitative research methods in social science. The Institute is
now firmly established as the premier venue for intensive instruction on,
training to conduct, and preparation to teach qualitative and multi-method
research. The Institute provides high-level, carefully designed instruction for
a large and diverse group of attendees drawn from a wide national and,
increasingly, international constituency. By June 2020, over 2,650 graduate
students and junior faculty will have received instruction on advanced
qualitative methods at the Institute. The Institute takes place at the same time
as an associated Research Group, a two-day authors' workshop that meets at least
once during each Institute's two-week duration. The Research Group encourages
and empowers scholars to publish in the field of methodology, thus directly
enhancing and expanding the core canon of published research on qualitative and
multi-method research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the inferential leverage that
using multiple analytic techniques can deliver, the Institute's instructors and
participants, and thus its pedagogy, are strongly concerned with how qualitative
methods undergird and complement alternative analytic approaches. In addition,
early versions of books and articles developing, disseminating and/or using
qualitative methods have been presented and discussed at the Institute. "Road-
testing" forthcoming work at the Institute gives authors an unparalleled
opportunity to receive valuable feedback and criticism from an audience with
diverse epistemic commitments and substantive interests. Interchange at the
Institute has also resulted in collaborative writing projects among faculty and
participants, and has stimulated new methodological research by both groups. In
all, the Institute has improved methodological training in the social sciences,
facilitating the production of more rigorous and useful
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.