* 1948292
* CRII: CHS: Novel Approaches for Real-Time Data Capture in Fast-Paced Medical Work
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Zhan Zhang, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 05/31/2023
* USD 174,890.00

Significant effort has been made to digitize medical documentation in order to
provide a more accurate account of treatments and changes in patient status.
Unlike clinicians providing ongoing care in hospital wards, emergency care
providers engage in complex tasks that are unpredictable, time-critical, and
cognitively consuming. More importantly, most of these tasks require their eyes
and hands on the patient, rather than on a medical record. Emergency care work
is inherently important to society as it involves life-threatening injuries and
situations that affect people from all backgrounds. Improving the work
efficiency of emergency care will lead to decreased medical errors and better
patient outcomes. To this end, this research will develop novel tools and
interaction techniques for real-time and hands-free data capture in fast-paced
medical work. This project uses Emergency Medical Services (EMS) as an example
domain to derive design requirements by determining how context-specific
information should be captured and integrated in real time, to support the work
of emergency medical teams while also accounting for their limited capacity to
interact with handheld computing devices. The specific research contributions of
this project will include: 1) a conceptual and empirical understanding of the
information behaviors and temporal rhythms of emergency care providers
collecting data during fast-paced medical work; 2) approaches for supporting
real-time data capture and integration; 3) novel interaction techniques to
reduce the physical and cognitive demands of using data capture tools; and 4)
recommendations based on the development and evaluation of hands-free data
capture prototypes in both simulated and real-world
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has two main aims. The first aim is
to gain a deeper understanding of the work practices, issues, and the
technological needs around real-time data capture during fast-paced medical
events. Understanding what, when, and how contextual information is currently
being documented will inform the design of innovative approaches toward seamless
and unobtrusive data capture. The researchers will pursue this objective by
conducting fieldwork and video analyses. Building upon the findings, the second
aim focuses on iteratively designing technological solutions to support rapid,
hands-free data capture. The researchers will take a multi-phased, user-centered
approach involving participatory design, rapid prototyping, and formative
evaluation methods. Findings and design recommendations will be generalizable to
multiple domains including information behaviors in time-critical work, human-
computer interaction in environments where direct interaction with devices is
limited, and designing for wearable technologies to support rapid data capture
and integration from multiple sources. The conceptual insights and design
recommendations derived through this project can potentially be applied in other
settings facing similar challenges with real-time data capture and integration
such as disaster response. This research will also establish an
interdisciplinary education and outreach program by involving a diverse group of
high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, most of whom are
underrepresented minorities and first-generation
immigrants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.