* 1948785
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Revitalization among Diasporic Native American Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Sissel Schroeder, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 25,187.00

Representation of Native Americans in contemporary American culture is an
increasingly visible issue in the American consciousness. Social awareness of
present-day Native peoples has grown considerably, but stereotypes, both
negative and positive, continue to impede intercultural dialog between the
federally-recognized tribes and the rest of the nation. At the same time, an
ever-growing number of Native Americans are participating in acts of cultural
revitalization that serve to reaffirm the culture of their respective sovereign
nations and increase visibility of contemporary Native Americans to the general
public. One particularly popular avenue for revitalization is through material
culture, particularly for relocated tribes, where this process serves as a
critical mechanism for tracing connections to ancestral lands and values. This
project, which trains a graduate student in methods of scientific data
collection and analysis, explores ethnic preservation among diasporic
communities of the Oneida, who migrated from the northeastern United States to
present-day sites in Wisconsin. The project engages with Oneida communities,
including contributions to curricula for K-12 students, museum exhibits, and
community center demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a
combination of ethnographic, ethnohistoric, and archaeological methods to
investigate how material culture, as expressed in craftwork, has been impacted
by the Wisconsin Oneidaâ€™s exposure to a wide range of intertribal and
international influences both before and after removal from their native
territory in the New York area. Comparing contemporary works produced by
Wisconsin Oneida to those crafted in their ancestral homelands and among their
sister nations of the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) Confederacy provides insights
into which cultural elements have been prioritized in their material culture and
which have been altered in a manner that reflects their unique history of
diaspora and cultural interaction. By addressing the popularity of different
traditions and the degree to which they have been changed from recognized
Iroquoian forms, the investigators can comment on the potential advantages
and/or disadvantages of incorporating external cultural influences into the
cultural revitalization process. The findings of this project will aid in
developing a greater understanding of how cultural identity is maintained and
protected by diaspora communities and Indigenous groups. Further, the
development of curricular materials for K-12 educators will increase visibility
of the perspectives of contemporary Native Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.