* 1948550
* CRII: CPS: Data-Driven Cascading Failure Abstraction and Vulnerability Analysis in Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Xiang Li, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 169,201.00

The goal of this proposal is to establish a framework for cascading failure
abstraction and vulnerability analysis in Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs),
empowered by data. CPSs are critical to modern society, however, they are
vulnerable to attacks and failures. The failures in CPSs are more destructive
because of cascading failure, which means that the failure of a part of the
system can cause failure in the rest of the system and result in more severe
damage. However, analysis of CPS vulnerability involving cascading failure is
extremely challenging, mainly because 1) it’s hard to theoretically analyze the
various physical processes happen in a cascade and 2) local diffusion models
applied to the CPS network cannot capture the global impact of cascades. Using
simpler cascade models derived from data as media, it is possible to have a
deeper understanding of how CPSs are vulnerable to cascading failure. CPSs are
gaining popularity and there is an urgent need to enhance its security, hence
the proposed work will greatly benefit the society and of national interest. The
project will provide opportunities for undergraduate students, underrepresented
minority groups and women to research in some of the society’s most concerned
fields like machine learning and security. Also, the outcomes of this work will
be introduced in courses for undergraduate and graduate students and integrated
into STEM outreach programs for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
goals will be achieved via four major tasks. (i) Develop simple meta-cascade
models that preserve key features of cascades. (ii) Quantitatively measure
vulnerability in CPSs with general damage functions defined on failed components
and multiple meta-cascade models, as well as design protection schemes. (iii)
Develop efficient sampling based dynamic approximation algorithms, which can run
efficiently in billion-scale networks and can be stopped at any time with
theoretical guarantees. The algorithms are widely applicable to optimization
problems in large-scale networks and are essential in supporting the first two
tasks. (iv) Implement and evaluate the proposed models and algorithms. The
innovations in meta-cascade models can benefit research in CPS security, while
the sampling-based algorithms can be a powerful new tool for a wide class of
optimization problems in large-scale networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.