* 1948186
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: A TRANSPARENT-MIDDLE-LAYER COMPUTATIONAL AND DATA MANAGEMENT INFRASTRUCTURE FOR SYNOPTIC APPLICATIONS OF COSMOGENIC-NUCLIDE GEOCHEMISTRY
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Benjamin Laabs, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 222,477.00

This project will develop computational and data management knowledge and
infrastructure to enable global-scale applications of cosmogenic-nuclide
geochemistry. Cosmogenic-nuclide geochemistry is a geologic dating method that
is widely used to study geologic processes active at the Earth's surface,
including, for example, glacier and ice sheet change, erosion and sedimentation,
tectonic deformation, and earthquake size and frequency. Cosmogenic-nuclide
geochemistry does not directly measure the age of a deposit, but instead relies
on geochemical properties of rocks and sediments that change over time and thus
have some relation to age. Interpreting the geochemical measurements as a
precise, geologically-useful age requires a series of calculations and
associated data, which themselves are the subjects of active research. Thus, any
synthesis of data collected in different places or at different times requires
constant recalculation of ages from a growing data set of raw geochemical
observations, using a continually improving method. This project focuses on
developing a cyberinfrastructure system that automates calculations and makes
them transparent to users interested in analysis of large data sets, and
training Earth science researchers and students in how to use the system.
Overall, the goal is to improve the ability of Earth science researchers to use
geochronological data to study Earth surface processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop a transparent middle-level computational infrastructure for
cosmogenic-nuclide geochronology, based on a prototype that has been successful
in trial applications. The resource will automate middle-level calculations,
allow continual assimilation of data and improvement of calculation methods, and
allow users to focus on large-scale data analysis. This research will involve:
1. expansion and professionalization of the existing prototype, 2. support for
new research and education applications that involve analysis or visualization
of large data sets; and 3. engagement and training of researchers and students
aimed at embedding transparent middle-level concepts and infrastructure into
research workflows. Overall, the aim is to build the computational
infrastructure, and the community of researchers who are able and motivated to
use it, that is necessary to move the field from single, site-specific
investigations toward regional and global syntheses of rapidly growing data
sets. In addition, elements of this project focus on integrating Earth science
research and education, including: 1. a users-as-co-developers strategy for
engagement and project guidance, 2. a strategy of incorporating synoptic
analysis and data visualization into undergraduate teaching resources, and 3. a
program of training Earth science researchers and students in computational and
geospatial skills. Integrating cyberinfrastructure development into
undergraduate and graduate Earth science education will build a community of
students and researchers who are better prepared to succeed in both Earth
science and other fields, as well as building the capability to link small-scale
field research to the broader regional- or global-scale data set of similar
observations. Innovative aspects of this project may provide models for enabling
scientific investigation through cyberinfrastructure development in other areas
of Earth science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Geoinformatics and the Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics programs in the
Division of Earth Sciences, as well as the Office of Polar
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.