* 1948447
* CRII: OAC: An Efficient Lossy Compression Framework for Reducing Memory Footprint for Extreme-Scale Deep Learning on GPU-Based HPC Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2020,06/30/2020
* Dingwen Tao, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 174,593.00

Deep learning (DL) has rapidly evolved to a state-of-the-art technique in many
science and technology disciplines, such as scientific exploration, national
security, smart environment, and healthcare. Many of these DL applications
require using high-performance computing (HPC) resources to process large
amounts of data. Researchers and scientists, for instance, are employing
extreme-scale DL applications in HPC infrastructures to classify extreme weather
patterns and high-energy particles. In recent years, using Graphics Processing
Units (GPUs) to accelerate DL applications has attracted increasing attention.
However, the ever-increasing scales of DL applications bring many challenges to
today’s GPU-based HPC infrastructures. The key challenge is the huge gap (e.g.,
one to two orders of magnitude) between the memory requirement and its
availability on GPUs. This project aims to fill this gap by developing a novel
framework to reduce the memory demand effectively and efficiently via data
compression technologies for extreme-scale DL applications. The proposed
research will enhance the GPU-based HPC infrastructures in broad communities for
many scientific disciplines that rely on DL technologies. The project will
connect machine learning and HPC communities and increase interactions between
them. Educational and engagement activities include developing new curriculum
related to data compression, mentoring a selected group of high school students
in a year-long research project for a regional Science Fair competition, and
increasing the community's understanding of leveraging HPC infrastructures for
DL technologies. The project will also encourage student interest in research
related to DL technologies on HPC environment and promote research
collaborations with multiple national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing state-of-the-art GPU memory saving
methods for training extreme-scale deep neural networks (DNNs) suffer from high
performance overhead and/or low memory footprint reduction. Error-bounded lossy
compression is a promising approach to significantly reduce the memory footprint
while still meeting the required analysis accuracy. This project will explore
how to leverage error-bounded lossy compression on DNN intermediate data to
reduce the memory footprint for extreme-scale DNN training. The project has a
three-stage research plan. First, the team will comprehensively investigate the
impacts of applying error-bounded lossy compression to DNN intermediate data on
both validation accuracy and training performance, using different error-bounded
lossy compressors, compression modes, and error bounds on the targeted DNNs and
datasets. Second, the team will optimize the compression quality of suitable
error-bounded lossy compressors on different intermediate data based on the
impact analysis outcome, and design an efficient scheme to adaptively apply a
best-fit compression solution. Finally, the team will optimize the compression
performance on the proposed lossy compression framework for state-of-the-art
GPUs. The team will evaluate the proposed framework on high-resolution climate
analytics and high-energy particle physics applications and compare it with
existing state-of-the-art techniques based on both the memory footprint
reduction ratio and training performance improvements (e.g., throughput, time,
epoch number). The project will enable scientists and researchers to train
extreme-scale DNNs with a given set of computing resources in a fast and
efficient manner, opening opportunities for new
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.