* 1948145
* Collaborative Research: Forcing, Energy Flow and Impacts of Oceanic Infragravity Waves
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Alan Chave, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 259,512.00

This project will examine oceanic surface gravity waves with periods from 30
seconds to an hour, the ‘infragravity’ waveband. Existing observations of ocean
bottom pressure, geomagnetic field, atmospheric pressure, and ocean gravity
waves will be analyzed with spectral techniques to examine the mechanisms
(sources) by which energy is used to generate infragravity waves (IGW). Sources
include the interactions of tsunami and swell with coastlines, ocean surface
tides, and energy from the solar normal modes that have previously been observed
in solar wind, seismic, geomagnetic, barometric, and ionospheric data. IGWs can
be important connectors between disparate phenomena, connecting source
variability to the excitation of earth’s normal modes, flexing of ice shelves in
Antarctica, contribution to mixing in the abyssal ocean, and adding ‘noise’ in
altimeter data. If understood and modeled appropriately as IGW, such noise could
be minimized, to improve such altimetry data. In addition, this project will
contribute to the education of a graduate student in physical oceanography
building the next generation of scientists capable of exploring our planet for a
more environmentally secure future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As technology has
expanded the availability of observations of terrestrial and extra-terrestrial
variables, such as the solar wind and pressure at the bottom of the oceans, new
information has yielded insight into how highly connected disparate phenomena
can be. Of longstanding interest are so-called infragravity waves (IGWs; oceanic
surface gravity waves at periods of 30 seconds to an hour) due to their
excitation by tsunamis and swell (gravity wave periods less than 30 seconds) at
the coasts. IGWs forced at the coasts are a factor that enhances flooding and
erosion by tsunamis and swell. In the open ocean, IGWs are weaker, but have been
found to be unexpected pathways for energy that engender remarkable phenomena,
such as the continuous excitation of Earth's normal modes, signals that are now
regularly used to explore the details of Earth's structure and composition. But
understanding is limited regarding the various sources of energy for the IGWs,
and the mechanisms this energy contributes to infragravity waves (i.e., the
energy pathways). The principal investigators recently demonstrated the
existence of two new energy sources: ocean surface tides and solar normal modes.
This project will: (1) acquire more observational evidence of the tidal and
solar energy pathways into the IGWs; and, (2) quantify the contributions of
these two sources as a function of frequency, time period (e.g., season; 11-yr
solar cycle) and location (e.g., geomagnetic latitude; marginal seas vs. open
ocean). The relative contributions of these sources to IGWs, and especially
their spatial distribution, are crucial characteristics for understanding the
impacts of IGWs and their connections to the other phenomena noted
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.