* 1948831
* Collaborative Research: Geoinformatics: Facility: Paleobiology Database: Preserving and Presenting Ancient Data for Future Research
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Mark Uhen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 666,472.00

The Paleobiology Database (PBDB) is an open access, community-curated resource
containing information on the temporal and geographic distribution of almost 1.5
million fossil occurrences, their taxonomic classification, and associated
bibliographic information. The PBDB has become the go-to data resource for
answering questions such as, “what fossils are found in my backyard”, “how has
biodiversity changed over time,” and “what are the drivers and consequences of
mass extinctions?” The PBDB has cyberinfrastructure that allows data to be
accessed and used within educational, commercial, and research web, mobile, and
analytical applications. This project will develop and deploy new state-of-the-
art machine reading and learning tools to automate key steps in the process of
finding and extracting PBDB-relevant data from published scientific papers and
reports. The primary objective is to decrease the high cost of expert time and
effort that is currently required in order to find and enter new data into the
system. The automated reading and learning tools will primarily focus on
paleontological and taxonomic literature. However, this new machine reading and
artificial intelligence system, which is capable of locating and extracting
specialized information and automating key steps in database construction, will
address a general cyberinfrastructure challenge that has far-reaching
applications across science and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
facilitate research that characterizes natural geological resources, improves
stratigraphic correlation and paleogeographic reconstructions, calibrates
molecular clocks, and facilitates paleoecological assessments of the effects of
modern and ancient environmental change. The project will establish a first-of-
its-kind, AI-driven pipeline that would connect a rapidly growing digital
library and computing infrastructure, called GeoDeepDive, to the large expert
community of PBDB users. This will serve as a template for deployment of other
such pipelines for other user communities. As part of this process, the PIs will
complete development and deployment of the PBDB data acquisition application
program interface (API), which will modernize the PBDB data entry workflow and
enable the development of third-party apps designed for entering and editing
specific PBDB data types, such as taxonomic opinion and classification data.
This will likely lower the barrier for participation in the process of PBDB data
entry and editing, and thus enhance a crowd-source model for future PBDB growth
and improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Geoinformatics and the Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology programs in the
Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.