* 1948607
* SG: Synergistic effects of forest fragmentation and droughts on tropical plant demography
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Emilio Bruna, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2023
* USD 214,390.00

Droughts have many negative effects on species in forest ecosystems, including
increased risk of population decline and even extinction. It has been
hypothesized that the effects of drought are especially severe for populations
found in the fragments of habitat that remain following deforestation. This is
thought to be especially true for plant species in biodiversity rich tropical
forests, which are often especially sensitive to changes in environmental
conditions. The research team will use a long-term dataset on plant growth,
reproduction, and mortality collected in the Central Amazon to determine how
droughts influence the risk of plant extinction in rain forest fragments. In
addition to answering an important unresolved ecological question, the results
will help those tasked with managing biologically, socially, and economically
critical forest ecosystems for a future in which droughts are predicted to
become more frequent or intense. In doing so the investigators will be training
early-career scientists in advanced statistics and mathematical modeling, making
several ecologically valuable datasets publicly available, and curating an art
museum exhibit about rain forests and their global importance to society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine how droughts and deforestation interact to
increase the risk that plant populations will go extinct, the researchers will
use previously collected data on the growth, reproduction, and mortality of
thousands of individuals of a plant species from the central Amazon: the
understory herb Heliconia acmuniata. These data were collected in both unbroken
rain forest and experimentally isolated forest fragments near the city of
Manaus, Brazil. The researchers will first use four decades of data on rainfall
in the region to identify drought years and categorize drought intensity. They
will then compare plant growth, reproduction, and mortality before and after
droughts, as well as how long after droughts any differences can be detected.
Finally, these statistical analyses, along with the analysis of drought
frequency, will be used to calibrate mathematical models with which they will
simulate future population sizes under alternative drought scenarios predicted
for the Amazon. The results of these simulations will indicate if the
probability that populations will go extinct because of drought is greater in
unbroken rain forest or forest fragments, and if this probability changes when
droughts are more frequent or severe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.