* 1948331
* CRII: SHF: On-chip Multi-Task Learning Analog Artificial Intelligence For Low-Cost Image-Based Environmental Monitoring
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Arindam Sanyal, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 10/31/2022
* USD 174,663.00

Wireless imaging is an important tool for non-disruptive environmental
monitoring, including habitat monitoring of birds or endangered species which
can provide important insight about behavioral pattern and distribution of
endangered species. The key requirement for imagers supporting wireless imaging
is that they should draw very low power from battery source such that the
battery lasts a long time, since the imagers used for environmental monitoring
are typically deployed in locations without access to wired power source. In
order to understand the power requirement, operation of wireless imager can be
divided into 2 phases – 1) image acquisition and 2) transmission of image over
the wireless network. Recent advances in CMOS imager techniques has
significantly reduced power consumption during image acquisition phase. However,
image transmission still consumes several orders of magnitude higher energy than
image acquisition which limits battery life to few weeks. The project will
result in ultra-low power wireless CMOS imagers that can run from standard
battery source for several months instead of just weeks. While the specific
research aims of this project relate to wireless imagers, the same principles
can be extended to design high energy-efficiency edge devices for internet-of-
things (IoT) and wearable healthcare. The fundamental research topics addressed
in this project is likely to appeal to broad set of students and will be
leveraged by the investigator for outreach programs involving high school and
undergraduate students to motivate them to pursue graduate studies in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To reduce high energy consumed during image
transmission, this project will leverage artificial intelligence (AI) to reduce
energy transmission by adopting the following two-pronged approach: a) compress
raw images, and b) transmit images only upon identification of object-of-
interest. Analog circuit design techniques will be used to implement the AI
algorithms in hardware at very low area and energy cost. The project has three
components – 1) development of AI algorithms to reduce transmission power, 2)
design of circuits to implement the AI algorithms on-chip, and 3) validation of
the project aims. A multi-task learning AI model will be developed which will
perform two shared tasks within the same neural network – a) compress the raw
image, b) identify object-of-interest (target animal species in natural habitat)
and only transmit compressed image of the object-of-interest. To suppress non-
idealities associated with analog design, a hardware-software co-design
methodology will be used in which physical transistor models are incorporated
into the offline AI model training phase to greatly suppress deviations between
software training and hardware implementation results. The project will result
in a CMOS chip with the AI model embedded and will be tested with images of
wildlife from publicly available dataset (such as
CIFAR-100).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.