* 1948042
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the role of compound-specific phosphorus hydrolase transformations in the marine phosphorus cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 06/30/2019,08/31/2022
* Julia Diaz, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2022
* USD 263,509.00

Phosphorus (P) is an essential building block for life. Because P is in short
supply over vast areas of the ocean, P availability may control biological
productivity, such as photosynthesis and carbon fixation, which has implications
for uptake of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide and thus climate regulation.
Marine microorganisms must satisfy their nutritional requirement for P by
obtaining it from seawater, where P is present in a variety of chemical forms,
from simple phosphate ions (Pi) to complex dissolved organic phosphorus (DOP)
molecules. The concentration of DOP vastly exceeds Pi over most ocean areas,
therefore DOP is a critically important source of P for marine microbial
nutrition and productivity. However, much remains unknown about the contribution
of specific DOP compounds to the P nutrition, productivity, and structure of
marine microbial communities. In this project, the investigators will conduct
field experiments in the Atlantic Ocean and perform a series of controlled
laboratory studies with pure enzymes and microbial cultures to determine how and
to what extent different DOP compounds are degraded to Pi in the marine
environment. Furthermore, the contribution of these compound-specific DOP
molecules to microbial P nutrition, carbon fixation, and community structure
will be determined, thus advancing the current state of knowledge regarding the
factors that control the activity and distribution of microbial species in the
ocean, and the ocean?s role in the climate system. This project will support two
female junior investigators, a postdoctoral researcher, and graduate and
undergraduate students. The undergraduate students will be recruited from the
Marine Sciences program at Savannah State University, an Historically Black
Colleges and Universities. In addition, results will be incorporated into new
hands-on K-12 educational tools to teach students about microbial P
biogeochemistry, including a digital game and formal lesson plans with hands-on
demos. These tools will be validated with K-12 educators and will be widely
accessible to the public through various well-known online platforms. These
activities will thus reach a broad audience including a significant fraction of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;P is a vital nutrient
for life. Marine microorganisms utilize P-hydrolases, such as alkaline
phosphatase (AP), to release and acquire phosphate (Pi) from a wide diversity of
dissolved organic P (DOP) compounds, including P-esters (P-O-C bonds),
phosphonates (P-C), and polyphosphates (P-O-P). Compound-specific DOP
transformations have the potential to exert critical and wide-ranging impacts on
marine microbial ecology (e.g. variable DOP bioavailability among species),
biogeochemistry (e.g. P geologic sequestration via formation of calcium Pi), and
global climate (e.g. aerobic production of the greenhouse gas methane by
dephosphorylation of methylphosphonate). However, the mechanisms and comparative
magnitude of specific DOP transformations, in addition to their relative
contributions to microbial community-level P demand, productivity, and
structure, are not completely understood. This study will fill these knowledge
gaps by tracking the fate of specific DOP pools in the marine environment.
Specifically, this project will test four hypotheses in the laboratory using
recombinant enzymes and axenic cultures representative of marine eukaryotic and
prokaryotic plankton from high and low nutrient environments, and in the field
using observational and experimental approaches along natural Pi gradients in
the Atlantic Ocean. In particular, the investigators will reveal potential
differences in the hydrolysis and utilization of specific DOP compounds at the
community- (bulk enzymatic assays), taxon- (cell sorting of radiolabeled cells
in natural samples), species- (axenic cultures) and molecular-levels (pure
enzyme kinetic studies and cell-associated proteomes and exoproteomes). Results
from our proposed work will provide a robust understanding of the enzymatic
basis involved in the transformation of specific forms of DOP and create new
knowledge on the relative contribution of these specific P sources to Pi
production, marine microbial nutrition, community structure, primary
productivity, and thus global carbon cycling and climate. In particular, our
refined measurements of the concentration of bioavailable DOP and our unique
estimates of DOP remineralization fluxes will provide critical new information
to improve models of marine primary production and P cycling.