* 1948104
* Effects of Climate Change Variables on Microbial Autotroph-Heterotroph Carbon Flux
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Mary Ann Moran, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 988,916.00

Phytoplankton in the surface ocean are responsible for roughly half of all
photosynthesis on the planet. Much of the organic material created by these
photosynthetic organisms is ultimately consumed by diverse marine bacteria with
differing preferences for specific types of chemical compounds. This project
investigates how climate change (temperature and CO2) might alter the types and
amounts of organic compounds produced by different species of marine
phytoplankton and the types and amounts of compounds transferred from
phytoplankton to marine bacteria. Shifts in organic compounds transferred to
bacteria could alter the distribution of bacterial species in the ocean, their
growth rates and efficiencies, and flows of energy through the global ocean.
This project helps scientists better understand the effects of climate change on
marine ecosystems. Two graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher are
supported by the project, receiving interdisciplinary training in biology,
chemistry, and ocean sciences. Summer research internships in the PIsâ€™
laboratories are offered to AP Biology students enrolled at Cedar Shoals High
School in Athens, GA, a school that serves a diverse social and economic
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the bacterial secondary production in
the surface ocean is supported by rapid uptake of labile metabolites released
from phytoplankton, either directly through excretion and diffusion or
indirectly through lysis and predation. This project investigates the effects of
two climate change variables (temperature and CO2) on the metabolite pools
produced and released by three model phytoplankton species (a diatom, a
coccolithophore, and a cyanobacterium) and assesses changes in the composition
and fate of metabolites transferred to bacteria. Phytoplankton species are being
grown axenically at two different temperatures and CO2 concentrations in a
factorial design and endo- and exometabolite composition is determined using
NMR. A suite of phytoplankton physiological characteristics is measured and
evaluated in the context of metabolite composition. Experiments with
heterotrophic bacteria (either model bacteria or natural bacterial communities)
are being conducted to assess the effects of climate change variables on
metabolite transfer from phytoplankton to marine bacteria. In the first
experiment type, bacteria are co-cultured with the phytoplankton at different
temperatures and CO2 concentrations, and changes in bacterial gene expression
and metabolite concentrations are used to assess shifts in the composition of
metabolites transferred. In the second type, bacteria are grown on phytoplankton
metabolite pools produced at different temperatures and CO2 concentrations in
high-throughput bioassays, and changes in bacterial traits (growth rate,
carrying capacity, growth efficiency) resulting from the different climate
scenarios are used to indicate changes in metabolite quality. Knowledge of how
the heterotrophic processing of phytoplankton metabolites might shift in
response to climate change allows better prediction of Earth's future carbon
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.