* 1948310
* Effects of Social Mobility on Individual Well-Being, Attitudes, and Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Fabian Pfeffer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,999.00

This research project will develop new statistical models for estimating the
effects of social mobility. Downward social mobility, or the movement of an
individual from an advantaged to a disadvantaged socioeconomic position, is an
increasingly common experience. Downward mobility is hypothesized to lead to
undesirable outcomes, such as deteriorating mental health, increased violence,
and early mortality. Due to limitations of existing methods, valid empirical
evidence has been lacking on the effects of social mobility for a wide variety
of policy-relevant outcomes. This project will address the methodological
weaknesses of existing scientific work on social mobility. Using existing data
from two NSF-supported studies, the investigators also will examine the
individual-level consequences of social mobility. The empirical application of
the approaches developed in this project will provide training opportunities for
graduate students. A user-friendly software package and an open-access online
tool will be developed to increase access to and use of the newly developed
methods by researchers, policymakers, and analysts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will develop a new approach to partially identify the effect of
social mobility net of the effects of origin and destination. By developing new
techniques to disentangle the effects of social mobility from the consequences
of socioeconomic position, the project will provide insights on how researchers
can obtain reliable estimates from statistical models applied to rank-deficient
or high-dimensional data. The new methods will be applied to data from the
General Social Survey and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Investigators will
examine the effects of mobility experiences on individuals' well-being (such as
perceived happiness and stress), attitudes (such as social trust and out-group
bias), and behaviors (such as marriage and fertility). The newly developed
methods also will be readily applicable to other substantive applications in
which linear dependency problems exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.