* 1948955
* Quantifying mechanisms of variability in ocean CO2 uptake 1980-present
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Timothy DeVries, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2024
* USD 364,100.00

Over time, the ocean has absorbed roughly one third of all human carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions due to fossil fuel burning and deforestation. However,
observations show that the rate at which the ocean absorbs CO2 from the
atmosphere can vary greatly from one year to the next, and on even longer
timescales. These variations result from some combination of natural and human-
caused climate variability, but our understanding of the reasons for this
variability remains incomplete, which hampers our understanding of the global
carbon budget and hinders our ability to make accurate climate forecasts. In
this project, we will perform targeted experiments with several different state-
of-the-art models of the ocean carbon cycle to determine what factors are
responsible for variability in the rate of CO2 uptake by the ocean over the past
four decades. These experiments will determine which models best represent the
important climate processes driving variability in ocean CO2 uptake, and will
identify areas where the models can be improved, which will lead to better
constraints on the climate sensitivity of ocean carbon uptake, and lead to
better climate projections. This work will also help to identify how and why the
variability of CO2 uptake in models differs from the observations and help to
resolve imbalances in the global carbon budget. Finally, this will lead to
improved constraints on CO2 emissions to limit the damaging effects of global
warming. The broader impacts of this work include the training of a graduate
student in ocean carbon cycle modeling, and training of two undergraduate
students from historically black colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ocean is one of the two main
sinks for anthropogenic CO2 emissions (the terrestrial biosphere being the
other) and absorbs roughly 25% of current anthropogenic CO2 emissions. Recent
work has shown that the variability of the ocean CO2 sink rivals that of the
terrestrial CO2 sink on decadal timescales, but the mechanisms driving this
variability remain unclear. Identifying the drivers of variability in the ocean
CO2 sink is important for understanding how the ocean carbon sink will respond
to future climate changes, for developing more accurate prognostic climate
models, and for reconciling decadal imbalances in the global carbon budget. This
project will undertake targeted simulations with ocean biogeochemical models and
ocean inverse models to answer the overarching science question: “What are the
drivers of interannual to decadal variability in the ocean CO2 sink over the
past four decades?” To answer this question this work focusses on three main
objectives: (i) quantifying mechanisms of variability in ocean CO2 uptake over
the past four decades in a suite of ocean biogeochemical models and an ocean
circulation inverse model, (ii) comparing across models and methods to determine
the most robust mechanisms driving variability in ocean CO2 uptake at both
global and regional scales, and (iii) comparing the variability of ocean CO2
uptake in biogeochemical models and ocean inverse models to determine which
models and mechanisms best agree with the observations. This work will determine
which models best represent the important processes driving variability in ocean
CO2 uptake and will identify areas where the models can be improved. This work
will also help to identify how and why the variability of CO2 uptake in models
differs from the observations, and help to resolve imbalances in the global
carbon budget. Last, our results will lead to an improved mechanistic
understanding of variability in the ocean carbon sink, which will lead to better
constraints on the climate sensitivity of ocean carbon uptake, and to better
climate projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.