* 1948842
* Quantifying ocean oxygen-to-carbon demand by chemical analyses and inverse models
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Francois Primeau, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2023
* USD 779,450.00

The marine carbon and oxygen cycles are intimately linked through the production
and consumption of oxygen during photosynthesis and respiration. The amount of
oxygen consumed per mole of respired organic carbon, the respiration quotient,
is key for accurately predicting ocean oxygen concentrations and how ocean
oxygen levels will respond to climate change. Despite this importance, the
respiration quotient has rarely been measured directly. The aim of this research
is to estimate the respiration quotient and its variability across ocean regions
and depth. This will be done through an integration of direct chemical
measurements of particulate organic matter collected from multiple ocean regions
and indirectly by using an ocean circulation model to analyze a global database
of dissolved oxygen and carbon concentration with a circulation model. In
addition to advancing the understanding of the ocean oxygen cycle in the
scientific community, this project will provide research training for
researchers and students. The project will also improve awareness and
understanding in the general public about possible future changes to marine
oxygen concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main uncertainties in
predicting current and future oxygen levels is the regulation of the biological
respiration demand. The respiration quotient describes the amount of oxygen
needed during the consumption of one mole of organic carbon and thus is a key
link between the carbon and oxygen cycles. Here, we propose to measure the
amount of oxygen consumed per mole of respired organic carbon, the respiration
quotient, in particulate organic matter (POM) from the surface and thermocline
using a newly developed chemical technique. Thus, we aim to obtain new direct
chemical measurements of the respiration quotient across distinct oceanic
regimes and depths. Subsequently, we propose to incorporate these observations
into a seasonally-resolved inverse model using global hydrographic tracer
concentration data. This combined approach will provide the first global-scale
estimates (and uncertainties) of the mean and regional variability of the
respiration quotient in the POM stock and export flux. Different
parameterizations linking the respiration quotient to regions or environmental
variables will be applied to test how they impact and replicate global oxygen
concentrations and the extent of the oxygen minimum
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.