* 1948623
* Collaborative: The Predictive Nature of Microbial Biofilms for Cuing Larval Settlement at Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vents
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Costantino Vetriani, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2024
* USD 553,860.00

Over four decades of research have shown that tiny free-swimming offspring of
the unique inhabitants of hydrothermal vents can disperse effectively between
their specialized habitats. Yet, we know almost nothing about how these larval
animals complete the journey by locating and settling down in suitable
locations. This question remains one of the key unresolved puzzles in the
ecology of the deep sea and is becoming increasingly important to solve as
hydrothermal vents are becoming threatened by human impacts. The investigators
suggest that the films of bacteria that first form at vents are good signposts
for settlement of larvae because they indicate that the hydrothermal vents are
suitable for life. This project uses a combined program of field experiments,
cutting-edge molecular biology techniques, and shipboard experiments with
hydrothermal-vent larvae and cultured bacterial films. The project also connects
undergraduate research interns at a primarily undergraduate institution (Western
Washington University) with undergraduate research interns at two research
institutions (Rutgers and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution) while working on
the project at sea together. Finally, the team is producing a science-in-action
documentary filled with ocean science and exploration intended for television
distribution and museum screenings. The investigators are using footage of the
deep-sea vents, shipboard and diving operations, and laboratory work to create a
documentary that highlights the foundation of scientific research—hypothesis-
driven research, the application of the scientific method, and the importance of
critical thinking—all in the framework of the study of an exciting, but
threatened, ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal vents are particularly
tractable systems in which to study questions about the roles of biofilms in
larval settlement because biofilms at vents are relatively low-complexity; vent
animals are strictly dependent on vent microbes, often through symbiotic
partnerships acquired after settlement; and environmental variations are present
within the range of a common larval pool. Moreover, decades of research on
settlement in model organisms give us good insight into biofilm cues; there is
solid foundational understanding about colonization patterns at vents; we now
have excellent tools to collect, identify, and culture vent larvae and microbes;
and modern environmental "-omics" techniques are a good tool to characterize
biological cues produced by biofilms. The project provides an unprecedented,
quantitative look into the role of microbial biofilms in structuring larval
settlement at hydrothermal vents, achieved only through the close collaboration
of microbial and larval ecologists. The combined field program of short-term
settlement experiments, microbial "-omics" work, and subsequent shipboard
settlement experiments allows the investigative team to use field experiments to
statistically model the factors that best predict larval settlement in the
field, then test those predictions with shipboard experiments that decouple
covarying conditions. This extensive characterization of putative larval
settlement cues and their relationship to colonization success in heterogeneous
vent habitat niches will contribute to a broader understanding of colonization
success across diverse marine ecosystems. Understanding the role that the
initial settlement of larvae plays in the recovery and resilience of
hydrothermal-vent ecosystems is critical to developing informed management plans
for deep-sea mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.