* 1948517
* CRII: CHS: RUI: Gaze Sharing to Support Remote Collaboration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alexandra Papoutsaki, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 121,572.00

Remote collaboration is becoming a common practice in virtually all employment
sectors as it enables flexibility, accommodates different lifestyles, combines
resources, and reduces expenses. Despite its numerous advantages and the many
technological advancements to support it, there remain numerous challenges.
Remote collaborators struggle to maintain shared awareness, mutual
understanding, and coordination, leading to frustration and time and monetary
loss. Recently, dual eye tracking technology has been explored as a novel way of
enhancing remote synchronous collaboration. Through gaze sharing, the process
where two collaborators can see each other's point of gaze visualized on their
individual screens in real time, remote collaborators in diverse settings have
seen improvements in the quality and outcome of their interactions. This project
will explore previously overlooked dimensions of remote collaboration and how it
is affected by gaze sharing. In particular, it will investigate the
communication channel that is used in conjunction with gaze sharing and will
explore how gaze awareness affects multi-party groups that go beyond the
traditionally studied pairs. This project will be a first step toward
understanding how contextual gaze sharing can intelligently support remote
collaboration in realistic scenarios that include multiple
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on real-time gaze sharing has shown
that it is a promising way to alleviate some of the limitations of lack of
collocation by increasing shared awareness. However, prior gaze sharing studies
have not considered the medium of communication and have only studied its effect
on communication during audio calls. With the prevalence of text-based
communication, it is important to systematically examine the combined effect of
the communication medium and shared gaze on collaboration. The first phase of
this project will explore gaze sharing as an additional signal to instant
messaging and will contrast it to audio-based communication. Using existing
communication theories, it will examine the joint effect of gaze sharing and
primary channel of communication on collaboration through metrics that include
gaze overlap, efficiency, effectiveness, and cognitive workload. The second
phase of this project will focus on the group size of remote teams. Gaze sharing
has been shown to be particularly effective in studies that include pairs, but
it is unclear whether these positive effects would persist in multi-party
groups. This project will explore the effect of gaze sharing on multiple
collaborators through the development and release of a free and open-source
writing platform that will allow multi-party gaze sharing. A user study on
writing with groups of varying sizes will follow to uncover whether visualizing
multiple gaze locations will be detrimental rather than beneficial to the
quality of the collaboration and its outcome. The findings of this project will
offer recommendations for future technologies that support multi-party
collaborations through the use of different communication media and gaze
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.