* 1948583
* Collaborative Research: Developing Service-Learning Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences to Increase Student Interest in Research by Targeting Communal Goals
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Eduardo Gonzalez Nino, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 37,448.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the diversity of
the STEM workforce of the United States. To do so, the project proposes to
increase students’ perception of, interest in, and motivation to pursue research
careers. Research studies have shown that students, particularly women, students
from historically underserved groups, and first-generation students, often value
communal goals of working together and helping people. Consequently, the project
proposes to create innovative undergraduate courses in which students not only
perform STEM research but also apply their research work to directly serve their
communities. This combination of research and service learning has the potential
to transform students’ ideas about research, including the capacity of research
to help people. In addition, it can also empower the communities with whom the
students work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to combine two high-impact
practices, service learning and research experiences, to create a Service-
Learning theme within a Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experience (SL-
CURE). This SL-CURE will be implemented in three different institutions: (1) a
large, public, historically black university; (2) a small, private,
predominantly white liberal arts college; and (3) a large, public Hispanic
serving institution in the context of multiple disciplines (biology, public
health, social work). Assessing the impact of the SL-CURE will be grounded in
the theory of the transtheoretical stages of change from pre-contemplation (when
students don’t consider research as a potential career) through preparation
(when students develop scientific skills and a broader, more realistic
perspective of research affordance of communal goals). The project will also
contribute to the STEM education community by assessing how specific
implementations of service-learning, including community-based participatory
research, science communication and outreach, and mentoring, influence students’
perceptions of, interest in, and engagement in research practices not only
during the course, but also one to two years beyond course completion.
Disseminating this model is expected to influence existing and future CURES,
which may result in a strong positive impact on retaining diverse individuals in
the STEM workforce pipeline. This project is supported by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources. The IUSE:
EHR program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is in the Engaged
Student Learning track, through which the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.