* 1948365
* CRII: CSR: Energy-Aware Coordination and Management of Multi-Purpose Autonomous Robots for Maintained Continuity of Operations and Long Battery Lifetime.
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Marco Brocanelli, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Autonomous Robot (AR) fleets will soon assist humans for the execution of
several tasks. One of the most important factors that will likely affect the
widespread adoption of AR fleets in our society is their ease of management for
the end users. The goal of this project is to achieve the easy management of the
AR fleet by allowing end users to indicate the set of tasks to execute during a
working period and by implementing algorithms that automatically (i) allocate
tasks to ARs, (ii) coordinate recharge schedules, (iii) ensure continuity of
operations, and (iv) minimize the battery degradation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of this project are focused on designing an AR fleet manager
system that can be used by end users to interact easily with an AR fleet. Three
main research thrusts are: (i) joint optimization of concurrent tasks allocation
and recharge scheduling for ARs to minimize the task downtime and battery
degradation during the working period; (ii) coordination of the ARs' computing
and sensing resources to balance tasks performance and energy consumption; (iii)
full system implementation and experimentation on a small-scale physical testbed
and a large-scale simulated testbed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
will introduce new technologies available for the management of AR fleets and
boost the widespread use of autonomous robots in our society, e.g., homes, smart
farms, industry, and smart cities. The project will provide a new hardware and
software testbed to help train and inspire undergraduate and graduate students.
New industry collaborations will be established to enhance AR adoption. New
academic collaborations will also be established with researchers in various
areas including robotics, artificial intelligence, control systems, sensing, and
approximation algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the new algorithms and the
experimental results generated as part of the proposed project will be
distributed in the form of journal articles, conference proceedings, workshops,
invited presentations, and student thesis. In addition, the data, source code,
simulators, and hardware details will be maintained on a dedicated research
website (http://brok.eng.wayne.edu/AFM.html). This repository will be retained
and maintained for at least five years after the completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.