* 1948822
* Collaborative Research: PReSto: A Paleoclimate Reconstruction Storehouse to Broaden Access and Accelerate Scientific Inference
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Julien Emile-Geay, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 347,629.00

Records from tree rings, lake sediments, corals, and ice cores can be used as
sources of information to understand how climate has changed in the past. Each
of these sources can contain local climate information, so to look at
continental or global-scale changes in climate these observations must be
combined into “paleoclimate reconstructions”. Such reconstructions are broadly
used to inform many fields, including archaeology, ecology and climate science,
as well as land management and climate policy decisions. At present, there is no
integrated solution to produce, update, or distribute these reconstructions. As
a result, they are rarely updated, and the lack of a central clearinghouse makes
reliable reconstructions difficult to find for non-experts. This project will
create a Paleoclimate Reconstruction Storehouse (PReSto), that will use the most
up-to-date data and cutting edge methods to provide broad access to paleoclimate
reconstructions on the internet. By streamlining and increasing broader access
to these important scientific resources, this project can accelerate scientific
advances and improve public access to scientific products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PReSto will be an integrated solution that builds on
existing and emerging cyberinfrastructure to 1) connect a steadily growing
digital collection of paleoclimate data to evolving methodologies, 2) distribute
the results, and 3) effectively visualize them through a web-based portal.
Although PReSto will be designed for paleoclimate reconstructions of any climate
variable or time period, this project will pilot the platform on two
complementary time periods: the Common Era (the past 2,000 years) and the
Holocene (the past ~12,000 years). Both periods help place modern climate into a
much longer context, allowing researchers to probe low-frequency climate
variability and its drivers. The Common Era incorporates monthly and annual
records and established methodologies, whereas Holocene climate is typically
observed at lower temporal resolution and synthesized using methods that are
still under development. All code and outputs in PReSto will be publicly
available and support knowledge transfer to constituencies at multiple levels of
data and science literacy. PReSto will build capacity in the paleoclimate
community with workshops that will 1) train data stewards to properly digitize
and describe paleoclimate datasets, and 2) train early-career researchers to use
this cyberinfrastructure to further their scientific objectives. This project
will also develop resources for K-12 and tribal college teachers in Northern
Arizona, and design and offer one-day educational workshops for teachers
throughout the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.