* 1948494
* 18th Annual Symposium of the NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellows
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Joshua E.G. Peek, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2020
* USD 30,806.00

This award will provide support for the attendees and invited speakers for the
eighteenth Annual Symposium of the NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellows, to be held in conjunction with the winter meeting of the American
Astronomical Society in January 2020, in Honolulu, Hawaii. The purpose of the
Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowships (AAPF) program is to support
integrated research and education activities at the postdoctoral level to better
prepare its fellows for positions of distinction and leadership in the
scientific community. The Annual Symposium provides a forum for the Fellows to
discuss their research and education projects while increasing their visibility
within the astronomy and astrophysics community. The Symposium represents a key
component of the AAPF program and is a very effective mechanism to facilitate
the transfer of knowledge and experience that the Fellows have acquired through
their postdoctoral training.

As with previous symposia in this series, the 2020 AAPF Symposium will promote
interactions among astronomers with diverse research interests and backgrounds.
By creating a forum in which discussions can occur across traditional research
boundaries, the Symposium will provide Fellows the opportunity to gain new
insights and pursue interdisciplinary collaborations. The Symposium will also
provide a venue for discussing major issues that are important to early-career
astronomers. In addition, the Symposium will (1) provide a forum to discuss
integrated research and education activities, (2) facilitate collaborations
between Fellows on both research and education, and (3) provide greater exposure
for the Fellows and the AAPF program within the astronomical community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.