* 1948867
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating Consultation and Informed Consent via Social Network Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Janet Chernela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 21,206.00

Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) is a principle that is intended to
promote the full and effective participation of indigenous and other local
community members in decisions that affect them, including all stages of planned
conservation and development. The research supported by this award investigates
the concept of informed consent within the context of a carbon sequestration
program. Understanding how to evaluate and improve current FPIC consultation
methodologies is essential to minimizing conflicts and ensuring long-term
ecological sustainability. In addition to providing funding for the training of
a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, the project would enhance understanding of basic
science and the scientific method by broadly disseminating its findings to
organizations engaged in optimizing practices for individual and community
informed consent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will be carried out
by the University of Maryland doctoral student, Jessica Breitfeller, with
guidance from Dr. Janet Chernela. At a site where policies for indigenous
consultation (FPIC) are being developed, this project will explore the process
of information delivery to indigenous communities affected by carbon
sequestration projects (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation: REDD+). The research design tests hypotheses that center on how
attributes of network ties and structure affect information transfer. Data will
be collected through semi-structured interviews, social network mapping and
analysis, participant observation, and document analysis. Findings from the
study will contribute to scientific understanding of the processes, including
knowledge exchange and policy translation, that underlie FPIC protocols. In
addition, this research will present a replicable framework through which to
evaluate consultative processes and inform future consultation
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.