* 1948345
* CRII: NeTS: Configurable Optical Wireless Data Center Networks.
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Abdelbaset Hamza, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 01/31/2023
* USD 174,956.00

There is an increasing demand for efficient Data Center Networks (DCNs) to
support the ever-expanding portfolio of data-centric applications that have a
major role in enabling businesses, national security, Internet-of-Things (IoT),
and social interaction. With today’s massive DCNs critical to companies such as
Google and Amazon, to businesses such as the financial, communications and
manufacturing industries as well as to government organizations, careful design
of the DCN is critical to achieve efficient use of the server resources. Current
DCNs use fixed cables to connect servers, leading to high cabling complexity and
an inflexible topology that makes it difficult to efficiently provide the
computation power across many applications. This project will explore the
integration of Optical Wireless Communication (OWC) technology in DCNs to
utilize the flexibility of wireless technologies to establish configurable on-
demand links, and thus solve load hotspot and cabling complexity problems
simultaneously. In addition to advancing the research in this area, this project
will provide the opportunity to establish a network research track in the
Department of Computer Science at Appalachian State University and will serve
the needs of the diverse body of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the design space of
efficient, configurable OWC DCN topologies. Deploying wireless links in DCNs is
challenging since high data-rate wireless links usually require, preferably,
Line-of-Sight (LOS), point-to-point communication. The row-based physical
topology used in conventional DCNs makes establishing point-to-point wireless
links one of the most significant challenges facing wireless DCN designers. The
research will focus on using graph theory and simulation to understand how
different design parameters influence the performance of the DCN, and what mix
of OWC and cable connectivity may provide the best performance. The preliminary
results obtained from this project will serve as the guiding compass to realize
a practical and efficient OWC DCN. The DCN simulation tool that will be
developed by the PI and students, along with the results from this project will
be made available to the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.