* 1948419
* OPUS: CRS -- A synthesis of the effects of biodiversity on plant, animal, and human health
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Felicia Keesing, Bard College
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 02/29/2024
* USD 241,048.00

Connections between ecology and health have become more compelling and more
urgent as society confronts increasingly rapid and widespread environmental
challenges, including loss of biodiversity, globalization of species
distributions, and changing weather patterns. These environmental changes often
result in conditions suitable for local or global disease outbreaks. Once
outbreaks are underway specialists in the ecology of infectious diseases are
frequently asked to provide timely input, sometimes on disease systems that are
not well known. One example is the recent rapid expansion of Zika virus in the
Americas. However, appropriate data are often unavailable, for example because
the species involved in transmission of an emerging pathogen are not known. What
is needed is a better understanding of general principles underlying disease
outbreaks and a toolkit of responses that slow disease spread. This project will
produce synthesis papers describing aspects of ecological epidemiology and the
relationship between biodiversity and health. These papers will be broadly
accessible to students, scientists, and policy makers, and will help foster
better-informed societal responses to disease outbreaks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One general principle that applies to many (but not all)
disease systems is the dilution effect, in which ecological communities with
higher species diversity have lower disease risk through a suite of well-
understood mechanisms. Unfortunately, applications of the dilution effect to
prediction and mitigation of infectious disease outbreaks are compromised by
confusion about what it does and does not assert, and by misunderstandings of
how it could be applied in policy and management. The project will synthesize
current studies and provide an overview of the dilution effect, including the
basic biology that underlies it. This synthesis paper be useful for students
interested in health or ecology, and health professionals developing strategies
for combating infectious diseases. A second synthesis will identify general
principles linking biodiversity and health, which could guide future studies by
providing more robust conceptual foundations than are currently available. This
paper would be useful for disease ecologists and people in allied disciplines
such as medical entomology or public health. In sum, these two products, will
help move the field of disease ecology towards a more predictive
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.