* 1948306
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Constraint in Marriage Systems and Fitness Outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Steven Gaulin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/28/2023
* USD 25,200.00

Whom one selects as a partner has enormous consequences on access to resources,
social support, health, and well-being. Theories abound explaining which traits
are suspected to be the most desirable, yet limited research explores the
consequences of constrained decision-making on whom one selects as a
reproductive partner. This is despite the fact that partner choice is
constrained in numerous contexts. This study seeks to understand the effects of
constrained decision-making on partner choice and associated effects on health
and well-being. The work will train a graduate student in scientific cultural
anthropology and will provide insights relevant to debates about the causes and
consequences of variation in human reproductive systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
review of marriage systems indicates that the marrying individuals generally
prefer different partners than those selected from within endogamous social
networks. The effects of this discordance are not well studied, however. This
study will be conducted in a community where roughly half of marriages involve
constrained partner choice and half involve marriages in which partners are
freely chosen. The research leverages this comparison to ask several important
questions about the consequences of constrained reproduction. In particular, the
researchers investigate whether more or healthier children result from in
constrained versus unconstrained marriage. To understand these relationships,
this study will measure marriage satisfaction, birth rates, child survival and
growth rates, and child health, as well as material parental contributions in
both types of marriages, with the ultimate goal of understanding what benefits
unconstrained partner choice might provide. These findings are increasingly
relevant to public health issues, especially as scientists struggle to
understand the role of other processes that compromise partner-choice
mechanisms, including other forms of medically assisted
reproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.