* 1948100
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Astrobiological Models in NASA's Search for Microbial Life
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Ilana Feldman, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2021
* USD 19,593.00

How do scientists search for evidence of life on Mars and how does this relate
to knowledge about life on Earth? NASA astrobiology scientists in the United
States are leading the efforts to search for microbial life on other planets,
for the purpose of understanding how life on Earth originated and whether non-
Earth environments can support life. In NASA, the search for life takes place at
the microbial level. While scientists have devised precise techniques for
detecting microbial life on Earth, they are unsure of the forms Martian microbes
could take. In order to prepare for interplanetary missions, scientists must
find ways to imagine and detect non-Earth life. The way that NASA scientists
imagine non-Earth life shifts ways in which life on Earth is defined. This
project, which trains a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, explores how astrobiological
models and mission plans develop as scientists imagine Earth microbial in
relation to extraterrestrial life. The project outcomes and plans for
dissemination of its data and findings will complement recent efforts by NASA to
increase public involvement in discussing and participating in future space
missions, such demonstrated by STEM education initiatives to promote student
experiments on the ISS and inviting public opinion on Mars Sample Return mission
concepts. Additionally, the project broadens the participation of groups
historically underrepresented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dana Burton,
under the supervision of Dr. Ilana Feldman of the George Washington University
will explore the research processes that NASA scientists employ to imagine,
define, and detect non-Earth life, and probe the networks through which they
debate this knowledge, amidst growing public interests in deteriorating climatic
conditions on Earth and commercial interests in accessing other planetary
bodies. The research for this anthropological doctoral dissertation will take
place at two facilities: Ames Research Center and Jet Propulsion Laboratory
(JPL). Ames scientists are interested in the biological definitions and
delimitations of life, while JPL scientists are in charge of constructing
technologies that conduct science in space, such as rovers. Through interviews,
observations, and analysis of archival data, the researcher will study these
sites in unison to understand both how life is defined (particularly by
observing scientific research (in the lab and in the desert) of life forms that
live in extreme environments) and how the durability of mission technologies is
tested. In so doing, this project will comment on how scientists are preparing
for explorations of life and the environments supporting life in space. Overall,
this research endeavors to understand how scientific knowledge about
astrobiology is produced and how it may shift conceptualizations of life in
significant ways on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.