* 1948572
* Testing risk communication strategies designed to address cognitive simplifications that underlie factually erroneous beliefs about scientific issues
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Ann Bostrom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 649,300.00

Much remains to be learned about communicating science effectively. When people
process complex information, they often simplify it in order to understand it.
To facilitate this process, simplification is necessary in almost all science
communication. However, the exact form of simplification is key, especially with
controversial issues.. This is because some simplifications may confuse people,
or even be exploited to intentionally mislead them. This project tests risk
communication strategies designed to address the cognitive simplifications that
underlie factually erroneous beliefs about scientific issues in situations where
such misunderstandings may be likely to lead to suboptimal intentions and
decisions. The research also tests the effects of explicitly acknowledging
scientific uncertainty on trust in the information provided. Previous research
shows that overstating the certainty of the science may invite skepticism. In
sum, this project will contribute to a better understanding of how lay audiences
think about complex scientific issues and uncertainty as well as to the
development of risk communication strategies based on those principles. The
project will identify strategies that can be adopted by science educators and
risk communicators to help audiences to understand complex risks that subsume
critical science elements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful science and risk
communication depend critically on first understanding how people process
complex information. When people think about complex scientific issues, they
tend to use shortcuts and more readily accept information consistent with their
own prior beliefs. Communication strategies that are guided by cognitive
principles can minimize the weaknesses and capitalize on the strengths of the
human information processing system. This project will develop and test
communication strategies targeting known simplifications that tend to reduce
processing load, but also can lead to misunderstandings that reduce the
perceived seriousness and urgency of the risk. Because people may not be aware
of the assumptions upon which their understanding is based, providing
explanations illuminating those steps may allow non-experts to achieve an
unbiased and better-rounded understanding of the issue. As a result, they may
come to better appreciate the scientifically-assessed seriousness of the problem
and to better identify effective mitigative actions. These hypotheses will be
tested on nationally representative samples, in experiments that systematically
examine the extent to which targeted communication strategies influence trust,
individual reasoning, mental models, attitudes, emotions, and decisions,
controlling for key factors previously identified as being associated with
science-oriented attitudes, including political ideology, age, race and
ethnicity. The cognitive experimental approach proposed here is novel and will
make important contributions to the psychology of risk communication, as well as
to the study of higher order cognition (e.g., decision making) by applying
interventions based on dual process theories and mental model
constructs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.