* 1948162
* Quantifying the drivers of midwater zooplankton community structure
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Danie Kinkade, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 550,795.00

Processes in the midwater region below 200 m depth, also known as the twilight
zone, represent a major unknown for the biology and chemistry of the ocean.
Studies of animals drifting in the oceans, known as zooplankton, are scarce due
to the difficulty and associated time and costs of sampling deep waters. The
advent of automated image analysis and genetic tools is leading to a rapid
increase in our knowledge of the diversity, abundances and size distribution of
communities in shallow waters. However, our understanding of the deeper layers
of the ocean is still in its infancy, and there are few studies that combine
these three facets of the ecology of the zooplankton. The objective of this
project is to leverage existing samples, obtained from previously NSF-funded
research in the North Pacific and North Atlantic, to study how the abundances,
diversity, and size distribution of zooplankton in the midwater vary with
latitude and environmental factors. Automated image analyses provide information
on abundance and size, and genetic analyses give unprecedented data on the
diversity of the midwater community for the North Atlantic and the North
Pacific, from subtropical to subarctic environments. This project provides high
quality hands-on training opportunities for at least two undergraduate
researchers and generates material for undergraduate and graduate courses. Two
workshops train educators on the classroom use of the NSF-funded Biological and
Chemical Oceanography Data Management Office (BCO-DMO) open access oceanographic
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in image analysis and metabarcoding
of zooplankton communities via new data tools are an opportunity to generate
quantitative and predictive relationships between environmental drivers and
zooplankton diversity, abundances and size distribution. While this information
is available for plankton in epipelagic regions, the focus of this study is on
midwater communities, which remain poorly characterized. Obtaining these data is
the first step towards a quantitative analysis that assesses the impact of the
midwater community on biogeochemical cycles. The project uses archived samples
from two cruises conducted in the N. Atlantic and N. Pacific to test hypotheses
about how temperature, midwater hypoxia, primary productivity and biogeographic
province shape the size class structure, biodiversity and behavior (diurnal
vertical migration) of zooplankton communities. These newly-generated image and
metabarcoding datasets of the mesozooplankton community from 0-1000 m are cross-
comparable with other ocean regions. These data describe how migratory and
midwater resident zooplankton communities are structured by environmental
variables and demonstrate how this influences their biogeochemical contributions
(specifically active flux and midwater attenuation of flux). Data tools
generated for the image analysis in combination with metabarcoding has broad
application in plankton ecology and allows metanalysis of other datasets. The
project is complementary to ongoing national and international projects that
seek to describe the function and structure of the midwater. In contrast to
existing modeling and process projects, this project covers a moderately large
geographic area and thus provides a strong comparative foundation for broader
community-wide assessment of the function of zooplankton in the twilight
zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.