* 1948547
* CRII: SaTC: Towards Understanding Typing Privacy: Vulnerabilities and Protection
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Song Fang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 190,847.00

Typing is ubiquitous and plays a significantly important role in the interaction
between humans and computer devices. Emerging work has identified a class of
attacks that can eavesdrop keystrokes in a non-invasive way without pre-
infecting the target computer with malware. Their common underlying principle is
that pressing a key on a keyboard causes subtle environmental impacts unique to
that key, which can be observed and correlated for all keys. However, those
techniques require a training phase to establish the relationship between an
observed environmental change and the action of pressing a specific key. Such a
training phase is impractical for most attack scenarios. This project identifies
a new type of non-invasive keystroke inference technique without requiring the
training phase. The goal of this project is to systematically exploit the side
effects associated with the typing process via a keyboard, understand new
security threats, and design effective defense mechanisms against such
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a novel type of typing
privacy inference technique targeting various input such as letters and numbers
in real-world scenarios and build corresponding defenses to protect typing
privacy against those keystroke eavesdropping attacks. The project will provide
a much-needed insight into the security risks of typing privacy disclosure, and
also substantially improve the security of various computer systems with
keyboard interfaces. The results from this research will be openly shared. This
project will also offer graduate and undergraduate students opportunities to
gain research experience in security and privacy
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.