* 1948157
* CRII: RI: Fairness and Profitability in Online Matching Markets
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Pan Xu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2024
* USD 174,940.00

Matching markets involve heterogeneous agents (typically from two parties) who
are paired for mutual benefits. During the last decade, matching markets have
emerged and proliferated through the medium of the Internet. They have evolved
into a new style, called Online Matching Markets (OMMs), with examples including
ridesharing, crowdsourcing, and Internet advertising. OMMs feature dynamic
arrivals of agents and the real-time decision-making requirement. For
ridesharing, a wide range of gender- and race-based discrimination has been
reported from drivers to riders. In particular, it has been shown that riders
from minority groups have received unfair cancellations from drivers much more
frequently than others. In spatial crowdsourcing, reports mention that workers
tried to avoid tasks from socioeconomically disadvantaged places.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to leverage powerful algorithmic tools
to mitigate discrimination and promote revenue for a large variety of real-world
OMMs, including ridesharing and crowdsourcing. The research will cover the
following three directions. First, the project will try to carefully re-craft
the matching policy in ridesharing such that it is favorable for disadvantaged
groups who are vulnerable to discrimination. Second, this project will seek to
quantitatively study the inherent relationship between fairness and revenue
achieved by various practical OMMs. The two objectives--high fairness and high
revenue--can be somewhat conflicting with each other. The project will develop
multi-objective optimization models to investigate the tradeoff between
profitability and equity. Third, this project aims to leverage the arrival
patterns of online workers to increase revenue in crowdsourcing. Two prominent
challenging issues in crowdsourcing are workers' dynamic arrivals and their
unknown skills for tasks. The project will utilize machine-learning techniques
to learn the arrival patterns of online workers and use online-matching based
models to harvest those patterns. The proposed research could have significant
broader impacts on society as it can potentially contribute to reducing
discrimination in ridesharing and crowdsourcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.