* 1948197
* SBP: The Arizona Youth Project: (Re)defining American Identity and National Belonging
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Angela Gonzales, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 472,926.00

How young adults define their social identities has implications for their
economic advancement and political participation in our society. This project
will investigate how U.S.-born minority and White young adults perceive their
identity and status as Americans in the context of rapidly changing economic,
demographic, and political conditions. This project will further our
understanding of minority and majority integration into U.S.
societyâ€”particularly among U.S.-born young adults. This research advances the
health and welfare of minority and White young adults by understanding how the
socio-political local context affects their sense of national identity and
belonging. This study will also identify ways to promote political participation
in our democracy among young adults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a
multi-method qualitative study using two research strategies: in-depth
interviews, and Photovoice. The sample will consist of U.S.-born young adults
between the ages of 18-25 living in five sites in Arizona. We will recruit 60
participants in each of the five sites for a total of 300 participants.
Participants will be interviewed twice: once before the 2020 elections and once
after the 2020 elections. They will also be asked to participate in a Photovoice
project by taking photographs reflecting what they define as American. Interview
transcripts, photographs and fieldnotes will be downloaded to a qualitative data
analysis software that supports continuous data inputting and analysis, and
undergo a three-step coding process. Initial open coding will identify major
themes, as well as locality, key political actors, and events. Further coding
exercises will flesh out secondary themes and subthemes. A third level of
analysis, triangulation, will integrate the data to form a coherent and complete
explanation of the overarching research questions. Findings will inform
sociological theories related to ethnic relations, political participation and
the transition to adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.