* 1948946
* NSFGEO-NERC: Why are complex habitats more diverse?
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Madin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 897,545.00

Most habitats on the planet are surface habitats—from the abyssal trenches to
the tops of mountains, from coral reefs to the tundra. Surface habitats vary in
complexity, from relatively simple, planar surfaces to highly complex three-
dimensional structures. One of ecology’s key paradigms is that complex habitats
tend to contain more species and at higher abundances than flat, simple
habitats. Meanwhile, human and natural disturbances are fast changing the
complexity of habitats. Understanding and predicting the effects of these
habitat changes on biodiversity is therefore now of paramount importance. The
project uses novel 3D surface modelling technology to accurately measure habitat
complexity and determine how changes in complexity affect the diversity of
organisms that live among the habitat. The project trains two post-docs, one to
two PhD students and up to 10 undergraduate and other interns on the use of
cutting-edge technology to quantify ecological change. Outcomes from this
project facilitate assessment and projection of impacts of ecosystem flattening
on biodiversity and ecosystem function, as well as for forecasting the impact of
change on ecosystems and economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to quantify the geometry of surface habitats and examine habitat
complexity-biodiversity coupling. Using coral reefs as a test system, the
project integrates ecological theory, 3D surface mapping and associated
biodiversity and environmental data, and experimental manipulations to build a
mechanistic framework for complexity-biodiversity relationships. The project is
generalizable to other surface habitats, and therefore can be used for testing
complexity-biodiversity relationships globally and across other surface
ecosystems. The project has three main objectives: (1) to develop an approach to
quantify of habitat complexity by establishing the geometric variables that best
capture surface complexity; (2) to integrate geometric and ecological theory to
separate the effects of surface complexity and area on species’ richness,
composition and abundances; and (3) to experimentally test theory predictions by
measuring environmental and biodiversity changes caused by manipulations of
habitat complexity. Success in this endeavor will provide a much-needed
framework for predicting ecosystem responses to changing dimensionality of
habitat structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Biological Oceanography Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.