* 1948524
* CRII: RI: General Surface Reconstruction via Polarized Computational Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jinwei Ye, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2023
* USD 191,000.00

Complete and faithful digital reconstruction of the real world is critical to
many applications, such as virtual and augmented reality, holographic rendering,
autonomous driving, digital cultural heritage preservation, virtual architecture
and interior design. The physical world consists of objects made with different
materials that give them diverse appearances. Scanning a scene with high visual
diversity is challenging. All existing 3D scanning systems are limited to
specific types of surfaces that they can work for. For example, some only works
for the matte surfaces while some are designed for highly reflective ones.
Therefore, there is need to devise a generic solution for digitalizing the real-
world surfaces with diverse appearances. This project will result in an
integrated solution for reconstructing general surfaces, regardless of their
appearances. The outcome will significantly simplify the 3D scanning procedure
and allow wide use of this technology by the general public. In addition, this
research will be integrated into the curricula of new courses on computer vision
and computational imaging at Louisiana State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop robust, fast, and
accurate polarization-based imaging system for reconstructing general surfaces,
ranging from diffuse to purely specular. This research is motivated by the fact
that the polarization state of light embeds essential information on light
transport. To achieve the goal, this project has two research thrusts: 1)
formulate a polarization-inclusive light transport framework and 2) develop a
practical system for reconstructing general surfaces. The first thrust will
characterize the transformation of polarization after light interacts with
surfaces of various reflectance properties. This framework provides the
theoretical foundation for system development. The second thrust will design new
programmable polarization-coded light sources and cameras, by leveraging recent
advances in polarization sensors and optics. New physics-based 3D surface
reconstruction algorithms will be developed through polarization analysis.
Result of this project is expected to breakthrough major limitations of existing
3D scanning technology on general
applicability.&lt;br/&gt;applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.