* 1948902
* Linking Surface Deformation to Slab-Mantle Flow in the Cascadia Subduction Zone through 3D Dynamic Models
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Menno Fraters, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 241,686.00

In the Pacific northwest of the U.S. the tectonic plate beneath the Pacific
Ocean is sinking below the continental U.S. along the Cascadia subduction zone
plate boundary. This subduction zone is known to produce giant (larger than
magnitude 8.5) earthquakes and devastating tsunamis. Over the last decade
several projects have collected an unprecedented amount of data in this region.
These data have already given us insight into the subduction geometry and flow
in Earth's mantle. The data also have generated questions about the processes
needed to explain the observations. This project will make several three-
dimensional, high resolution computer models of Cascadia to explore the history
and evolution of deformation at the surface of the earth and its connection to
forces from the mantle below over the last million years. The output of these
models will be compared to a range of observations and allow us to learn how
stresses (the forces behind earthquakes) are passed from the sinking plate and
mantle to the continent. We will also use these models to investigate how
differences in structure of the sinking plate can affect stress patterns. The
project supports a postdoctoral investigator. All code developed as part of the
project will be available, and improvements and modifications made to the open
source code used by this project will be contributed back to the main branch of
the software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to address the following
two questions: 1) What is the relationship between slab structure and mantle
flow in Cascadia? and 2) What is the relationship between mantle flow,
overriding plate heterogeneity and observed crustal deformation in Cascadia? To
address question one the PI will constrain whether the subducting plate is
segmented into multiple slabs by comparing model results of different cases
against geological and geophysical data such as seismic anisotropy and non-arc
volcanism in the overriding plate. Secondly, the deep structure and dynamic link
to the surface of the Juan de Fuca slab will be investigated. Thirdly, the role
of absolute plate motion on the dynamics of the slab and the overriding plate
will be investigated. To address the second question, the PI will look at how
mechanically distinct crustal terranes partition the deformation in Cascadia.
Secondly, the role of recently active faults on the observed deformation will be
examined. This proposal will use state of the art high resolution 3-D numerical
models of the Cascadia subduction zone to advance understanding of how stresses
are transferred across the plate boundary and through the mantle in a subduction
zone with young subducting lithosphere, and how these stresses lead to the
observed pattern of surface deformation and contribute to seismic hazard. The
models will also significantly advance understanding of the link between
mechanical heterogeneity and observed deformation patterns within overriding
plates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.