* 1948737
* RCN: Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) in Geosciences and Engineering
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Herbert Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2024
* USD 479,796.00

The purpose of the Research Coordination Network (RCN) is to advance and extend
the applications of Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) in geosciences and
engineering. DAS senses ground vibration at one-meter spacing along optical
fiber that is buried in the ground or in a borehole. DAS has been successfully
implemented over distances of tens of kilometers for detecting earthquakes,
monitoring geothermal reservoirs and carbon sequestration sites, and monitoring
traffic and civil infrastructure. The RCN will reach out to researchers in
optoelectronics and machine learning to develop synergies between these
communities and geosciences and engineering. The RCN activities will be focused
around annual, multi-day workshops and short courses, and topical webinars. One
course will be field intensive and one will be devoted to data analysis.
Guidance and direction for the community activities will be by the principal
investigators and a multidisciplinary steering committee. The RCN steering
committee is comprised of members with broad expertise in DAS applications,
technology, data analysis, data interpretation, and data management. The
steering committee includes several early-career members. Early-career
scientists and graduate students are the target audience for many of the RCN
activities. The RCN will also strive to bring together DAS researchers and users
from a diverse international base of research organizations, industry,
technology companies, and government agencies to exploit synergies and enhance
efficient utilization of resources in DAS development and applications. The RCN
will speed the development of technology transfer of DAS applications and
technology to societally important monitoring, such as natural hazards and
engineering infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DAS senses deformation in
continuous fiber-optic arrays, which can span tens of kilometers with a spatial
resolution of meters and with a broadband response from millihertz to kilohertz.
DAS has been applied to 1) imaging the near-surface using ambient noise, 2)
Vertical Seismic Profiling (VSP), 3) earthquake seismology, 4) geophysical
monitoring of hydrocarbon, carbon sequestration and geothermal reservoirs, and
5) infrastructure monitoring of traffic and industrial facilities. Machine
learning and utilization of dark fiber in telecommunication networks (excess
fiber not used for communication) are exciting new developments. Other
applications on the horizon include monitoring deformation in glaciers and snow
avalanches, slope stability, and long-distance, civil infrastructure such as
roads, pipelines, and rail. Meanwhile DAS technology itself is the subject of
research and is rapidly improving. The RCN will provide guidance for managing
and archiving terabytes per day of data to meet the challenges DAS data present
to research teams and federal agencies charged with providing open data
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.