* 1948087
* Collaborative Research:Incoming plate and forearc structure of the Semidi and SW Kodiak Segments offshore Alaska Peninsula from 3-D active-source and local earthquake tomography
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Juan Pablo Canales, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 309,624.00

The largest earthquakes and associated tsunamis as well as volcanic eruptions
are found at subduction zones where one tectonic plate dives beneath another. A
prominent example in North America is the subduction zone offshore of the Alaska
Peninsula, where some of the largest earthquakes ever recorded in modern times
have occurred, like the great earthquake of 1938 and the devastating 1964 M9.2
Prince William earthquake. In this region the history of large and small
earthquakes and how strongly the two plates are locked together vary
substantially and rapidly along the margin. Many questions, however, remain
unanswered about the ability of the subduction zone to generate large
earthquakes. This project will analyze and interpret recordings of earthquakes
that were collected as part of a larger NSF-GeoPRISMS funded Alaska Amphibious
Community Seismic Experiment (AACSE) in 2018-2019. The seismic data, recorded by
a dense array of offshore and onshore seismometers, will allow the development
of a three-dimensional image of the geological structure and physical properties
of this subduction zone down to a depth of 100 km. The quality of the images
will be high enough to examine structures that have been previously proposed to
explain changes in the seismic behavior of the plate boundary in this area and
at other subduction zones worldwide. The project supports the training of two
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three-dimensional seismic
tomography studies will be conducted of P- and S-wave structure based on
controlled-source and local earthquake data recorded by the AACSE amphibious
array. The project will address the following key question: To what extent is
the segmentation of the Alaska Peninsula margin in seismogenic properties,
seismicity during the interseismic period, and plate coupling controlled by
along-strike and downdip variations in upper continental plate structure,
composition, and/or downgoing oceanic plate physical properties and structures
such as seamounts, bending faults and fracture zones? The 3-D seismic velocity
models will be used to investigate along-strike variations in water input into
the subduction zone, as well as depth extent of the presumed hydrated oceanic
mantle and whether or not water is delivered to seismogenic depths where it
could influence megathrust seismic properties. By mapping seismic velocity
anomalies along the plate interface, the plate interface relief and the presence
(or lack thereof) of subducted structural anomalies such as seamounts chains,
swell and fracture zones, and their presumed role in contributing to rupture
segmentation and variations in the geodetically inferred plate interface
locking, will be examined. An improved understanding of subduction zone
processes associated with large earthquakes is important for assessing
earthquakes and tsunami hazards at the Alaska Peninsula subduction zone.
Although this project focuses on the Alaska Peninsula subduction zone, the
scientific question applies across many subduction zones
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.