* 1948885
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Land Reclamation, Urbanization, and Infrastructural Development
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Erik Harms, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 26,221.00

Land reclamation is increasingly being relied upon by coastal cities responding
to the pressures of intensified urbanization. While there is a long history of
human settlements reclaiming land from water bodies to generate more habitable
area for human activity, reclamation is no longer limited to smaller scale
draining of swamps or the infilling of lakes and rivers to facilitate industry
and agriculture. As more cities are reclaiming land from the sea in an effort to
solve the problem of land scarcity, how is the relationship between human beings
and the natural and built environment being reshaped and negotiated? In addition
to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in
the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project
would enhance scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to
organizations with the aim of improving understanding how reclamation has
altered physical landscapes and social relations. The project will produce data
critical for those developing policies and urban planning strategies that can
address the environmental and social costs associated with reclamation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in a municipality that has
reclaimed substantial portions of its current land area and plans to continue
accruing more land space through a variety of technological methods. The city's
willingness to engage in the latest technology to facilitate its terraforming
activities also provides a window into understanding the sophistication and the
scale of contemporary reclamation projects. The researcher will study ecologists
who have been tasked with the undertaking of restoring mangroves that were
decimated in the wake of reclamation to examine how landscapes are created,
managed, and in some cases, restored. Furthermore, the study will inquire into
the subjectivities of residents to determine whether certain social groups have
benefited more or incurred more losses from reclamation over others. The
researcher will conduct participant observation, semi-structured interviews,
oral histories, and archival fieldwork to collect relevant data. Findings from
this research will provide insight for policy makers and urban planners by
broadening the technological focus of reclamation to include the social,
cultural, and environmental dimensions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.