* 1948602
* A Sustainable Plan for the Future of the Generic Mapping Tools
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Leonardo Uieda, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 757,597.00

The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) is open source software infrastructure used in
the Earth, ocean, and planetary geosciences. GMT supports other software
platforms and delivers data processing and visualizations (graphs, charts, maps)
that promote new discoveries and their dissemination to society. The primary
goal of this project is to transition GMT to a governance structure that
includes a broader and more diverse community of developers. This project will
(1) recruit and train new and diverse developers, (2) build a broad and
sustainable developer community, and (3) modernize, simplify, and strengthen the
GMT software. The first two tasks are critical social activities while the last
is technical, involving code hardening, interoperability improvements, interface
modernization, documentation completion, and data upgrades. This project will
provide training in cutting-edge computational software development and data
analysis, along with engaging undergraduate students in scientifically
challenging tasks related to the GMT project. The project will also facilitate
ongoing user training and developer workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is based on a vision for the future of GMT that incorporates how
governance, communications, developer recruitment and training will evolve in
the next decade. The project will design and implement a sustainable model for
GMT maintenance and curation, and execute a series of essential technical
improvements. These improvements will address a) automated testing and
verification of results, b) development of GMT-powered software libraries in
other languages (Python, MATLAB, Julia) and c) the recruitment of new and
enthusiastic developers so that GMT may continue to be maintained and evolve in
a changing computational landscape. In addition, GMT products such as coastline
maps will be revised with modern high-resolution data as well as technical
documentation of how updates are produced. Finally, this project will advance
GMT to a sustainable environment that results in lower maintenance, greater
confidence in GMT products, and a more engaged community of users and
developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Geoinformatics program in the Division of Earth Sciences and the Marine Geology
and Geophysics program in the Division of Ocean
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.