* 1948457
* CRII: CSR: Enabling Efficient Real-Time Systems upon Multiple Parallel Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Jing Li, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,998.00

There is a technology trend to consolidate multiple applications onto a shared
hardware platform to reduce the size, weight, power, and cost of real-time
systems, such as self-driving vehicles and autonomous robots. Furthermore,
modern platforms consist of Central Processing Units (CPUs) and Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs) with an increasing number of processing cores that share
resources. Moreover, many current applications, such as artificial intelligence
applications, have high computation needs and must execute in parallel to
satisfy their real-time constraints. These technology trends demand that real-
time systems be able to schedule real-time applications upon the shared multiple
parallel resources efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
investigate new parallel real-time scheduling frameworks for modern platforms
with multiple resources. The scheduling problem is classified into two
categories: staged-resources scheduling for alternating usage of different types
of resources (e.g., alternatively executing on CPUs and GPUs), and vectorized-
resources scheduling for simultaneously using multiple types of resources (e.g.,
running on processing units that share the last-level cache). The project will
establish new parallel real-time task models for the two categories of resource
usages. Based on the models, novel real-time schedulers and their corresponding
analyses will be developed to achieve the goal of efficient utilization of
multiple resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the
understanding of parallel scheduling in real-time systems and serves as the
initial steps of the challenge of efficient parallel real-time systems upon
powerful and complex modern platforms. This project can have industrial impact
on a wide range of today's artificial intelligence-based real-time systems to
improve their responsiveness, efficiency, and scalability. The project includes
enriching outreach activities and diversity programs to promote Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) educational activity and broaden
participation in computing and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
products generated as part of this project will be retained, managed, and
disseminated through resources available at the New Jersey Institute of
Technology. The products will be preserved with the goal of storing them for at
least three years after the completion of the project or the publication of the
corresponding articles, whichever is later. The URL to the project repository is
https://git.njit.edu/njit-prt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.