* 1948004
* Testing the limits of deep neural network models of human vision with optimized stimuli
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 818,956.00

The sense of vision gives people an instant picture of the world, enabling rapid
recognition of objects and others, and to understand their relationships and the
layout of the scene. Machine vision is essential to many applications of
artificial intelligence, but cannot yet emulate the richness and robustness of
human vision. The study of human vision and the development of machine vision
have mutually shaped each other in a virtuous cycle. The design of deep neural
networks, the kind of artificial neural networks that now dominate machine
vision, was inspired by neurobiological principles. In turn, neuroscientists
have recently found that deep neural networks trained to recognize objects
provide the best current model of human and primate vision. However, current
artificial neural networks still fail to capture visual recognition capabilities
of the human brain. The goal of this project is to learn what computational
mechanisms best explain human vision. To achieve this, the research will develop
and apply a novel methodology â€” "controversial stimuli." Controversial stimuli
are computer-generated visual images optimized to cause two neural network
models to disagree about their content. Presenting such a stimulus to a human
observer will identify neural network models that mimic human vision. These
stimuli will systematically compare artificial neural network models to human
brains, and find ways to improve the models. This project will generate
scientific insights on human vision and engineering insights for machine vision.
The project will also generate outreach activities to improve public
understanding of the power and limitations of neural networks, and their
relationship to human intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop methods for the synthesis of controversial stimuli, images optimized to
adjudicate among alternative deep neural network models of human vision with
brain and behavioral data. An initial behavioral experiment will challenge
humans to classify and rate various controversial stimuli. Further experiments
will design and employ synthetic stimuli for adjudicating between deep neural
network models on the basis of brain activity measurements. Hemodynamic
responses to the stimuli will be measured in the human ventral visual stream
with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Each of the fMRI experiments
will test a different aspect of deep neural network modeling of visual neural
responses, including the distinction between discriminative and generative image
classifiers. The stimulus synthesis algorithms that will be developed in this
project, as well as the resulting stimuli and corresponding fMRI and behavioral
datasets, will be shared with the scientific community as an open
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.