* 1948952
* SODA4: ocean climate variability at mesoscale resolution
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Stephen Penny, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 960,486.00

Oceanographic observations are sparse and not uniformly distributed over space
or time. Since many analyses benefit from complete fields available over a
regular grid, reanalysis products have been developed to fill this gap by
constraining a numerical model with available observations. One of the most
widely used ocean reanalysis products is the Simple Ocean Data Assimilation. Its
current version (SODA3) does not have sufficient resolution to capture most of
the eddies, especially in the high latitude regions. This may cause biases in
regions where strong eddy activity or wind forcing and mixing are present. This
project exploits the growth of computational power to make improved use of the
limited historical observational record using a model that resolves the dominant
smaller scales of motion in order to produce a mesoscale resolving global
ocean/sea ice reanalysis called SODA4. The project also includes a focused
examination of the role of mesoscale processes in the Arctic and in
subpolar/Arctic exchanges. This work is directed toward understanding the role
the ocean and sea ice systems play in regulating and modifying Earth’s weather
and climate partly as a guide to improve forecasts of future changes. Improved
understanding of historical ocean variability benefits the scientific enterprise
by playing a crucial role as a guide to improve forecasts of coupled climate
variability and by adding additional value to the historical observational
record by reconstructing their basin-scale context. By supporting development
and distribution of more realistic historical climate reanalysis spanning the
past four decades this project can serve to integrate research activities across
multiple areas and disciplines. The improved representation of smaller scales of
motion and of regions of high human impact such as the nearshore environment
should also help inform a broad community (coastal planners and engineers, wind
farms, the fisheries community, etc.) regarding historical ocean variability and
change. This research project also serves educational mission of University of
Maryland College Park in several ways. Most directly it will support the
dissertation research of a graduate student at the Department of Atmospheric and
Oceanic Science. It will also involve a number of undergraduate research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examination of SODA3 results shows that its
resolution is insufficient where mesoscale variability and near-surface
diapycnic processes play dominant roles. This project explores the additional
improvements to representation of the state of the ocean/sea ice system that can
be gained by more completely representing oceanic mesoscale processes even
during decades when mesoscale-resolving observing systems were not available.
One region which will benefit from enhanced resolution is the Arctic Ocean and
its connection to the subpolar gyres. The subpolar North Atlantic is the major
route by which water is exchanged with the Arctic Ocean and this connection is
of particular interest for many reasons. First, the surface water of the Nordic
Seas is warming rapidly and the winter ice is retreating. Second, strong decadal
temperature variability is present with unknown consequences for the central
Arctic. Third it is a key region of deepwater formation. This project thus
includes a focused effort to improve representation and diagnosis of the
dynamics of subpolar/Arctic exchanges and their connection to variable Arctic
Ocean water masses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.