* 1948519
* CRII: CHS: Improving Code Readability with Scalable Feedback on Students' Code Structure
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Eliane Wiese, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2023
* USD 199,000.00

The project is to conduct a series of pilot studies on the differences in
thought processes, strategies, and approaches that novices and experts use in
writing high-quality code. These studies are to be undertaken in classrooms at
the University of Utah as well as at a diverse set of partner institutions. The
goal is to ultimately develop tools and pedagogical methods to help novices
become more like experts (specifically, by writing code that follows known
discourse rules). In particular, the project will determine how to better help
undergraduate students learn to write code that is easy for others to read,
maintain, test, and debug. When undergraduate students learn to program, they
mostly focus on what the code does. However, in professional settings, it is
crucial that code not just work, but also be easy for others to read and
maintain. This project will (1) investigate which coding patterns that harm
readability or maintainability are common among undergraduate students; (2)
develop an automated system for detecting these patterns; (3) explore how
practice and instruction on these patterns can help students learn to write code
that is more readable. This research aims to improve undergraduate computer
science education and promote workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate code structures within individual methods that violate
commonly-accepted discourse rules for programming (e.g., repeating code within
an if-block and its corresponding else-block rather than factoring out the
common steps). This project will survey educators and practitioners to determine
which discourse rule violations are important to them, and will see which
patterns are common in students' code. Students will be surveyed to examine
their perceptions of code readability. Written assessments will determine how
students' preferences are related to their abilities to comprehend, write, and
edit code. This project will develop a tool to detect the target patterns with
static and dynamic analysis. This tool will flag the patterns in students' code
as they work on assignments, and will offer hints and suggestions. The efficacy
and effectiveness of the tool will be tested in a lab-based experiment and in
regular classroom settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.