* 1948981
* Investigating How Undergraduate Students Use Their Understanding of Conservation of Energy across the Disciplines of Chemistry, Physics, and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Marcy Towns, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project seeks to serve the national interest by enhancing our understanding
of how undergraduate STEM education may be better integrated across disciplines.
College courses are traditionally separated by discipline. In contrast, the STEM
workforce requires collaboration to enable professionals with expertise in
different disciplines to solve interdisciplinary problems. To gain insight on
how to promote interdisciplinary collaboration, the project will study how
college students develop and use their understanding of conservation of energy
across the disciplines of chemistry, physics, and engineering. Student
interviews and classroom observations will be collected and analyzed to discover
how different disciplinary contexts may support or hinder students’ ability to
apply ideas learned in one discipline to a different discipline. In addition,
the project will explore the strategies students use to solve such problems.
Finally, the results of the research will be used to develop guidelines that
instructors can use to assist students in developing an interdisciplinary
understanding of energy concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study
the cognitive resources that Purdue University students use to address problems
involving the first law of thermodynamics, conservation of energy. The research
will leverage Knowledge In Pieces and Dynamic Transfer frameworks to study
students’ horizontal transfer of first law concepts across chemistry,
engineering, and physics courses. “Familiar contexts” will be defined by the
disciplinary course in which a student is currently enrolled. The research
objectives are to: (1) identify the cognitive resources students activate when
addressing first law energy transfer problems inside and outside familiar
disciplinary contexts; (2) compare and contrast the resources students use
across the three disciplines, as well as across lower and upper division courses
in chemistry, physics and engineering; and (3) determine how students’ abilities
to solve first law problems inside and outside familiar disciplinary contexts
differ between lower division and upper division courses. To accomplish these
objectives, the project team will collect classroom observations and conduct
think-aloud problem-solving interviews with STEM majors enrolled in the courses.
For the interviews, the team will develop sets of disciplinary first law
problems that represent the same base conceptual problems with contexts relevant
to chemistry, physics, or engineering. The variation in context for each prompt
will be accomplished by using discipline-specific systems, language, and
notation. During the interviews, STEM majors will be asked to address an in-
discipline prompt and an out-of-discipline prompt and to compare the two prompts
in a scaffolded transfer phase. Classroom observations in each course will
inform the themes derived from the interview analyses and allow hypotheses to be
made regarding connections between student reasoning and teaching practices.
Results will be disseminated in scholarly publications and at national meetings.
In addition, the team will use the findings to develop interdisciplinary
guidelines for STEM instructors that will be disseminated via networking
workshops to support practitioners in developing tailored instructional
materials for energy and matter concepts in their courses. The success of the
project will be evaluated by an external advisory board. The project has the
potential to contribute to the STEM community by identifying the effects of
disciplinary instruction on student understanding of the first law of
thermodynamics and documenting the types of productive resources and strategies
students use to effectively cross disciplinary boundaries. In addition, it will
generate guidelines for STEM educators to promote interdisciplinary
understanding of energy. This project is supported by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, implementation of and research on
promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.