* 1948224
* CRII: CHS: Healthcare Professionals Teaching Robots Communication Strategies for Effective Intervention Delivery
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Wing-Yue Louie, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 04/30/2023
* USD 190,883.00

There is a persistent shortage of healthcare workers in the USA. Occupations
such as behavioral therapists, nurses, physical therapists, and home care
workers are among the most in demand present and future healthcare professions.
Socially assistive robots are a new strategic technology that has the potential
to alleviate labor concerns in the healthcare industry by amplifying the
capabilities of our existing labor force in delivering healthcare interventions
to individuals in need. However, these robotic technologies remain difficult to
scale and challenging to integrate in real-world healthcare intervention
delivery due to the rapidly changing needs of healthcare service consumers that
often require adaptation of existing interventions or development of new
interventions. This project will build enabling technologies for healthcare
professionals to generate and customize robot-mediated interventions according
to the needs of their consumers as well as their clinical settings. The
developed technology will also enable healthcare professionals to teach robots
communication strategies for effective intervention delivery so that socially
assistive robots can provide on par intervention services as their human
teachers. Hence, this work will benefit society by alleviating the existing
labor concerns for the healthcare industry and make healthcare services more
accessible as well as customizable to consumers via collaboration with socially
assistive robots. The outcomes of this research will advance knowledge in
effective human-robot communication, robot learning, and human-robot teaching
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these goals, this project will
develop a Learning from Demonstration inspired framework that will enable
healthcare professionals with no prior experience in programming to teach
socially assistive robots to administer intervention and nonverbal communication
strategies necessary for effective intervention delivery. The following
fundamental research challenges will be addressed: &lt;br/&gt;(a)Teaching
Interface: The researchers will design and build a socially immersive teaching
interface which enables healthcare professionals to teleoperate a socially
assistive robot to demonstrate intervention delivery tasks and effective
nonverbal communication strategies during the intervention. The primary focus
will be identifying teleoperation modalities that are most effective and
efficient for attaining high-quality demonstrations from healthcare
professionals. &lt;br/&gt;(b) Learning Interventions from Demonstrations:
Algorithms will be designed to learn from demonstrations by healthcare
professionalsâ€™ models of the structure of an intervention delivery task,
effective nonverbal communication behaviors they use during these interventions,
and the context of their use. These learned models will then be utilized by a
socially assistive robot to carry out the learned interventions for healthcare
service consumers.&lt;br/&gt;(c) Nonverbal Communication during Interventions:
The project will culminate in a human-robot interaction study focusing on
integrating and evaluating robot-mediated interventions, which utilize human-
like nonverbal communication strategies, in real-world intervention delivery
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this research will advance knowledge in
effective human-robot communication, robot learning, and human-robot teaching
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.