* 1948493
* Collaborative Research: Human Long Term Adaptation To Variable Marine Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Wendy Teeter, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 95,111.00

The goal of this project is to understand the timing and nature of human
adaptations to ecological changes in California’s Channel Islands. This is a
region where unique indigenous societies sustained long-term occupation despite
profound environmental shifts that occurred. The strategies adapted include
changes in subsistence and settlement patterns, increased material conveyance,
technological innovation, and developments in ritual and sociopolitical
organization. Archaeology is ideal for tracking these changes in culture and
environment by being able to collect and evaluate deep-time data. How closely do
cultural changes relate to environmental stress and how are people able to
respond to, and in some cases foster growth, in contexts of environmental
instability? These questions are relevant to modern society where rapidly
changing ecosystems and environmental conditions create challenges in
identifying sustainable practices and fostering resilience to support continued
societal and cultural growth. This project will also provide opportunities for
significant student training from a wide variety of colleges and universities
across southern California and includes collaborations with members of
descendant Native American communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
differs from previous work by including multiple islands, cultural groups and
more than one environmental context. It asks the question of how major
environmental and cultural shifts are reflected in their material culture. The
research team will consider how diachronic shifts within cultural data sequences
that span the millenia may correlate with data showing timing and extent of
environmental fluctuations. These shifts will be considered within a region with
multiple cultural groups to highlight particular adaptations tailored to each
group or ecological region. This region has a very long history of human
occupation, with significant environmental variation between the now eight
landmasses of the archipelago. As such, adaptation strategies were likely
tailored to individual ecological regions or specific cultural preferences. The
research team will evaluate multiple lines of data from existing artifact and
ecofact assemblages that are un- or under-analyzed, conducting tool production
and maintenance analysis, lithic sourcing, macrobotanical and faunal analysis,
oxygen isotope analysis, and Accelerator Mass Spectrometry analysis with
Bayesian modelling. These data will elucidate the region’s changing cultural and
ecological histories and allow for a comparative analysis of the adaptive
responses of different human societies. By analyzing material from primarily
existing assemblages using more advanced methods available since the times in
which the materials were collected, the researchers avoid unnecessary excavation
and help to enrich knowledge of museum collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.