* 1948432
* CRII: III: Learning Dynamic Graph-based Precursors for Event Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Yue Ning, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2024
* USD 190,990.00

From epidemic outbreaks to civil strife, societal events that involve large
populations often deeply affect peopleâ€™s lives and cause economic burden.
Forecasting these events while providing context analysis helps social
scientists and health practitioners to interpret and study human societies.
Although many existing research efforts strive to forecast societal events,
providing structured explanations for prediction is still limited given the
underlying connections among entities, actions, and locations behind these
events. This project presents a novel paradigm of identifying and organizing
multiple types of precursors while predicting events. It identifies changing
relations among entities as events evolve and studies the hidden geographical
influence on events. Both entity relations and geographical connections are
represented by dynamic graphs. Organizing event precursors in graphs greatly
reduces the complexity of comprehending unstructured input data and delivers
interpretable summarizations for event prediction. This work will involve
educational activities such as development of course curriculum; training of
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students; encouraging participation of
women and minority groups in academic research; and dissemination of outcomes
such as software and datasets for the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve these goals, this project will integrate multiple data sources and
analyze complex hierarchical features in modeling events. Although a variety of
online data has been utilized to analyze and predict societal events, it also
raises new challenges such as: (1) accounting for dynamic relationships within
data sets; (2) preserving and learning complex knowledge structures with
heterogeneous data sets; and (3) ensuring interpretable results for predictions
and decision making. This project will address the challenges in the following
ways: (i) it will integrate multi-source data by learning a unified multi-level
semantic encoding; (ii) it will identify historical key semantics by paying
attention to hierarchical text structures in a recurrent learning process; (iii)
it will provide explanations for event prediction by incorporating local dynamic
graph patterns and global influence graph patterns. The specific research aims
will be complemented with an extensive set of evaluation plans including a
retrospective evaluation on real-word event records and a user survey to
evaluate graph visualizations of event precursors. The project results,
including graph based empirical data, predictive evaluation tools, and open
source software for analyzing events, will be shared with computer science
research community and stakeholders in computational healthcare, and social
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.