* 1948335
* Collaborative Research:  Overturning in the Subpolar North Atlantic Program
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Susan Lozier, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2025
* USD 681,521.00

A US-led international effort, Overturning in the Subpolar North Atlantic
Program (OSNAP), has provided a continuous record of the full-water column,
trans-basin fluxes of heat, mass, and freshwater in the subpolar North Atlantic
since 2014, in partnership with the UK, Netherlands, Canada and Germany. Results
from the first four years of OSNAP observations have challenged the current
understanding of overturning circulation in the subpolar North Atlantic. This
grant provides funding for an additional four years of observations in order to
deliver to the community a ten-year time series of the meridional overturning,
heat and freshwater fluxes in the subpolar basin. Variations in these quantities
have been invoked to explain changes in a wide range of physical, chemical and
biological parameters in the North Atlantic, Nordic Seas, and Arctic Ocean.
Thus, by quantifying Atlantic meridional overturning variability and
understanding its drivers, OSNAP is providing a critical first step towards
addressing societally-relevant, interdisciplinary questions concerning the
melting of Greenland ice and Arctic sea-ice, heat content in the Arctic Ocean,
climate of the Nordic Seas, and anthropogenic carbon storage. The researchers
will actively engage the broader international communities through four
workshops, each targeting a societally relevant theme: 1) ocean biogeochemistry
and carbon sequestration; 2) overturning in ocean models; 3) Arctic cryosphere;
and 4) Nordic Seas variability. Two new postdocs and one graduate student will
be supported in this phase of OSNAP and will benefit from the diversity of
methodologies and exposure to the large number of OSNAP international
scientists. In addition, approximately 20 graduate students from different US
and international institutions will receive field training through participation
in OSNAP cruises through 2024.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first four years of data
from the OSNAP observing system have shown that the eastern subpolar region,
from Greenland to Scotland, dominates the mean meridional mass and heat
transport in the subpolar North Atlantic, while more than half of the total
meridional freshwater transport occurs across the Labrador basin. Based on the
success of the previous work, this project extends the time series and address
the following critical questions: 1. What governs overturning variability in the
North Atlantic subpolar gyre on intra-seasonal to interannual time scales? 2.
What are the sources of freshwater across the OSNAP section and what governs
their variability? 3. What are the impacts of the meridional heat and freshwater
fluxes in the subpolar gyre? Additional motivation for this next phase of OSNAP
is provided by the fundamental advancements in our understanding of subpolar
North Atlantic dynamics and variability, that will result from the four main
U.S. OSNAP mooring arrays, individually and in combination with other OSNAP
observations. Further observations are expected to provide a strong
observational basis for a new paradigm of overturning in this region, which will
include an understanding of the linkage between dense water formation and
overturning - a connection present in climate models, yet unobserved to date.
Additionally, this this work will further quantify the structure and transport
of the upper and deep ocean boundary currents off the east and west coasts of
Greenland and within the Iceland Basin, as well as determine their variability
and forcing mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.