* 1948165
* CRII: CIF: Dynamic Network Event Detection with Time-Series Data
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Shaofeng Zou, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 174,893.00

Network data is ubiquitous in real-world applications, e.g., communication
networks, social networks, computer networks, sensor networks, power grids,
World Wide Web, and Internet of Things. In these applications, the collected
data are usually associated with a network structure, and the network structure
may correspond to communication links in wireless networks, information flows in
social networks, and causal relationships between the network nodes. Compared to
individual entities, network data, by their interconnected nature, contain rich
causal and correlation information, and present both complication and
opportunity for statistical inference. Timely detection of dynamic events as
soon as they occur is a problem of great interest, especially as false alarms
are possible in networks of really large sizes, and measurements taken from one
part of the network may not accurately capture events in another part of the
network. This project addresses this challenge and develops a comprehensive
framework for dynamic event detection in networks with time-series data. The
developed methodology in this project can benefit a wide range of applications,
e.g., intrusion detection in computer networks, epidemic detection, seismic
event detection, and fake news detection in social networks. This project will
substantially advance the understanding of how to accurately model and
sequentially detect an event with a dynamic nature, and how to exploit network
topology for reliable and computationally efficient detection in networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, the following two thrusts will be
explored: (i) detection of dynamics at a single node; and (ii) detection of
dynamics in the network. Practical applications, e.g., fault detection in
electric motor, dynamic community detection in social networks and seismic event
detection, will be studied to validate algorithms developed in this project.
Tools from probability theory, information theory and stochastic optimization
will be used to develop novel methodologies that address the underlying
challenges in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.