* 1948584
* Testing models of metamorphic sole formation and early subduction evolution in the Easton Metamorphic Suite, Northwest Cascades, Washington
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Sean Mulcahy, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 185,140.00

Subduction zones occur where cold and dense oceanic crust descends beneath
warmer buoyant oceanic or continental crust. Active subduction zones are
responsible for most of Earthâ€™s large earthquakes and volcanic activity. Ancient
subduction zones provide important information on processes operating at great
depths that are not observable in active subduction zones, such as compositional
changes in the crust through time, the history and correlation of past tectonic
events, and the timescales of subduction zone processes. Understanding how
subduction zones form and change over time is therefore critical to
understanding the Earth and the processes responsible for earthquakes and
volcanism. This project will test multiple hypotheses for how subduction zones
form and change with time. The research will promote the progress of science by:
1. increasing representation in STEM by recruiting and involving
underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students in the project, 2.
improving undergraduate and graduate education through new laboratory exercises,
new advanced courses, and expanded field opportunities, and 3. developing
enhanced STEM expertise through undergraduate and graduate field research and
collaboration in multiple laboratories in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mechanisms by which subduction zones initiate and evolve towards steady state
are not fully understood. Subduction initiation is often preserved in
suprasubduction zone ophiolites and metamorphic soles, remnants of a newly
subducted plate that was heated by the overlying mantle, scraped off, and
accreted to the upper plate during the first ten million years of subduction.
This research will address several questions related to early subduction
processes, specifically: Does subduction initiate spontaneously via a
gravitational instability or is subduction induced by forced convergence? Do
inverted metamorphic gradients in metamorphic soles form via downward heat
advection or by the progressive accretion of subducted material? Do accreted
units within subduction zones cool by thermal relaxation, exhumation within the
subduction channel, or underplating and accretion? These questions will be
resolved through an investigation of the Easton Metamorphic Suite in the
Northwest Cascades of Washington. The region contains Jurassic ophiolite
sequences and a Jurassic-Cretaceous metamorphic sole formed during subduction
initiation beneath western North America. Combined field mapping, structural and
microstructural analysis, metamorphic petrology, and geochronology will
determine: 1. the relative timing of suprasubduction zone ophiolite and
metamorphic sole formation, 2. the timing and conditions of metamorphism within
each unit of the metamorphic sole, and 3. the structural relationship of
contacts between subducted units. The results will establish a detailed
reconstruction of the subduction history that can be used to test proposed
models for early subduction evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.