* 1948060
* Creating Modules for Contemporary Materials Challenges
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Kevin Jones, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2022
* USD 115,813.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: In an effort to improve materials engineering
innovation by both increasing the social literacy of engineers and helping non-
engineering students understand how they play an important role in engineering
innovation, a course entitled the Impact of Materials on Society (IMOS) is being
offered at many universities around the U.S. including the University of
Florida, Princeton University, University of Tennessee, Boise State University,
University of Virginia, Houston Community College, etc. The course is composed
of 12 weekly modules that introduce students to different types of materials
each week (iron, bronze, ceramics, silicon, etc.) and also introduces them to 12
different social principles (sustainability, creative destruction, entanglement,
operational chain, etc.). A series of videos are used to help introduce the
students to future materials being developed. The students engage in flipped
classroom, speculative design exercises in small groups in which they apply the
social principles they learn to future materials innovations they create. All of
the course materials to teach the class are free to the public on the Materials
Research Society (MRS) website including the open source textbook. This project
unites materials engineers, humanities researchers, social scientists, and
science educators to increase the science and social literacy of engineering and
non-engineering majors. Over 1000 engineers are using their increased
understanding of the social challenges to improve engineering innovation. The
course won the 2018 North American Award for Outstanding Innovation in Materials
Education and has been featured in Time Magazine. There is a need to continually
update this class and expand the offerings. For example, this effort is adding
modules on the challenges of dealing with plastic waste, clean water, and solar
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The first new module focuses on
the thermoplastic plastics that are currently recycled, the social challenges
with recycling, and new polymer materials being developed that can enhance the
recyclability of plastics. The second module focuses on the polymer membrane
materials currently used for water purification and desalination, the social
challenges with providing clean water, and new materials being developed to make
desalination more available. The third module focuses on silicon for solar
cells, the social impact of solar powered electrical microgrids in post
hurricane Puerto Rico and future innovations in solar cell materials. This
project helps to support the national workshops and the subsequent follow-up
work necessary to complete the development of these modules. Upon completion the
modules are being added to the IMOS/MRS website for free
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.