* 1948705
* Collaborative Research: Modeling wave breaking onset and dissipation in energy-conserving models for surface waves
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* James Kirby, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 238,685.00

Wave breaking is a crucial process affecting a variety of ocean and coastal
science and engineering problems both offshore and in the nearshore of great
societal importance. This study will develop algorithms for the detection of
wave breaking initiation, breaking conditions, and energy dissipation due to
wave breaking, for use in phase-resolving ocean wave propagations models.
Extensive validation and sensitivity analysis will be performed against recent
high-fidelity numerical simulations and laboratory and field data. The
robustness of the developed formulations will also be compared with existing
breaking models. In addition to developing the parametrizations, this study will
quantify uncertainties associated with various parametrizations of wave breaking
in operational phase-resolving wave models. The model-field data comparison
during storm conditions will benefit the coastal engineering community by better
identifying model skill and uncertainty during storms and extreme events. The
work will improve predictions of the occurrence and severity of breaking waves
in phase-resolving wave models leading to: (i) a more accurate representation of
wave-forcing (on currents, sediment processes, air-sea interactions, etc.) over
a range of water depths, including the inner shelf, the surf zone, and river
mouths; (ii) improved design analyses and safety for coastal and ocean
structures and ship design. A better prediction of breaking processes and
impacts during energetic/storm events will also benefit the public through
improved strategies for coastal resilience. A junior scientist at the University
of Washington (UW), the lead PI, will be mentored by the more senior co-PIs,
which will help him transition to a permanent appointment. The project will
support a female graduate student at the University of Delaware, who will be co-
advised by the PIs. Outreach will be conducted at the annual "Discovery Days"
event at the University of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new, unified, and
robust closure model for parameterization of the onset and progression of wave
breaking in phase-resolving, energy-conserving surface wave models is proposed,
applicable to Boussinesq (commonly used in shallow water) and High-Order
Spectral (HOS, commonly used in deep water) models. The proposed work is
motivated by and builds on recent results obtained using high-fidelity numerical
simulations, which establish that the onset and strength of breaking of an
individual wave crest can be determined solely from local properties of the
evolving crest as it approaches breaking in arbitrary depth. The new closure
model will improve on existing methods by providing a formulation that is
adaptive to individual wave crests, as opposed to being calibrated based on the
general features of the wave train. Extensive validation and sensitivity
analysis of the proposed breaking closure model will be performed against recent
high-fidelity numerical simulations, available laboratory experiments, and
recent and ongoing field observations during storm conditions. Both the latter
data and its use in numerical modeling are quite novel and will establish a
unique model-field data comparison procedure as it requires initialization of
the phase-resolving model using a wave field reconstruction algorithm. The
robustness of the proposed breaking closure model will also be compared with
existing breaking models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.