* 1948591
* Neuroscience for Neuro-diverse Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Sheryl Burgstahler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,499,706.00

This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Washington will provide
technology-rich, hands-on experiences in neuroscience disciplines for high
school and early postsecondary students (ages 16-21) identified as “neuro-
diverse” learners—those with academic challenges related to conditions such as
dyspraxia, dyslexia, and, autism spectrum disorder and disseminate findings to
teachers of courses that are related to neuroscience and, more broadly, science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The project also provides
activities for educators, parents, and other stakeholders who work with neuro-
diverse learners. The project is led by the University of Washington’s
Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking, and Technology (DO-IT) Center and
the Center for Neurotechnology (CNT). The goal is to enhance student interest in
and skills to successfully pursue STEM fields, as well as empower educators to
serve these students more effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Washington project takes a student-centered approach that embraces cutting-edge
neuroscience, the social model of disability, social justice education,
disability as a diversity issue, universal design, and a multi-faceted view of
student engagement and retention. The project will provide hands-on experiences
in neuroscience disciplines, networking opportunities, and resources to high
school and early postsecondary students identified as "neuro-diverse." The
project will have both a formative component—to field test materials, track
activities and progress toward project goal and objectives, and assess and
document program fidelity. In addition to hands-on and technology-rich
activities, the project will include team-building, problem-solving, communities
of engagement, and mentoring activities for neuro-diverse students; professional
development for educators; and resources for multiple
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.