* 1948286
* CRII:CHS:Promoting Connectedness and Wellbeing through Healthful Eating
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Chia-Fang Chung, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 190,989.00

This research addresses how to use communication about eating and health, among
the elderly, as a basis for promoting connectedness and wellbeing. In the United
States, more than 40% of older adults live alone, experiencing loneliness and
isolation. These feelings, along with the physical and psychological changes
associated with aging, can prevent people from engaging in managing or improving
their health and wellbeing. How to promote connectedness and relationship
building between older adults and their support group living apart from them, by
focusing on the social experience around eating and meal preparation, will be
investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research adopts the concept of healthful
eating – connected processes that constitute the social experiences of food
consumption – to examine how design can transform everyday practices to generate
meaningful experiences of social connectedness. The research seeks to positively
impact older adults’ engagement with everyday health activities, empower them to
exchange knowledge of health practices, and improve awareness of health and
wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has two aims: (1) identify
strategies of sharing and communicating healthful eating experiences through
participatory design; and (2) develop and evaluate systems to support social
connectedness and relationship bonding through the sharing of healthful eating
experiences. The research team will adopt participatory design approaches to
understand older adults’ eating and meal preparation experiences. The findings
will serve as the basis for generating a set of prompts and strategies to
motivate people to engage in collecting and sharing healthful eating practices
and defining a set of design principles for incorporating technology. The
research team will then focus on the iterative design, development, and
evaluation of systems in-situ. By leveraging the social aspects of eating and
meal preparation experiences, the research focuses on designs to supplement and
encourage older adults to share and exchange personal experience and stories
with the support groups who live apart from them. An expected output is a set of
evidence-based design principles for promoting connectedness and wellbeing
through healthful eating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts will be derived in
conjunction with intellectual merit through collaboration with the Indiana
University Center for Rural Engagement. The research team will participate in
community working meetings and lead MiniU sessions to translate and disseminate
research findings with older adults. Students from underrepresented groups will
be engaged through work with the IU Center of Excellence for Women in Technology
and Proactive Health REU site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.