* 1948256
* CRII: CIF: Generalizations for Matrix and Tensor Estimation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Christina Yu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Matrix and tensor estimation are core building blocks in data science and
machine learning for dealing with missing data. They have been used widely
across many domains, including social computing, computer vision, and
computational biology. This project seeks to advance these techniques to handle
model variations that are seen in real world datasets; in particular, data
collection is rarely uniform, and there is often a mix of interaction data and
covariate or feature information. As an example, a biological dataset might
contain known properties of individual genes, in addition to information about
how genes interact. The interaction data is collected from real experiments and
thus may be highly non-uniformly distributed. The techniques developed from this
project could enable more efficient predictions over this dataset given less
experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goals of this project
involve generalizing matrix and tensor estimation theory and algorithms beyond
uniform sampling models, and designing optimally efficient algorithms that
incorporate side information together with matrix interaction data. The approach
proposed focuses on similarity based collaborative filtering algorithms. For
each of these model variations, the researchers plan to characterize information
theoretic thresholds and minimax optimal estimation error rates, design and
analyze computationally and statistically efficient algorithms, and provide
confidence sets to quantify uncertainty of estimates. These results will greatly
increase the flexibility of matrix and tensor estimation methods to be used for
sequential decision making and high dimensional scientific data
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.