* 1948387
* CRII: CSR: Federated Resource Management in Mobile Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Hana Khamfroush, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 202,356.00

Smart cities are urban areas that use Internet connected devices, called the
Internet-of-Things (IoT), to collect and analyze large amounts of data to
increase the productivity and efficiency of city resources. Smart home sensors
and smartphones are examples of things used in the era of smart cities, each
creating a tremendous amount of data that needs to be processed. Edge computing
is an emerging technology used to process such large amounts of data in real-
time. Edge computing also poses new resource management challenges due to its
limited capacity. This project focuses on optimization of resource management in
edge and cloud computing frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes
to use concepts of federated learning and reinforcement learning to provide
optimal solutions for service placement and request scheduling in multi-tier
edge and cloud computing frameworks. This project will focus on new algorithms
and system design technologies to trade off the quality-of-service (QoS) and the
cost in edge computing systems. Three main thrusts include: 1) finding
theoretical bounds through mathematical formulation and algorithm design, 2)
finding more practical and adaptive solutions through multi-agent reinforcement
learning and the federated learning framework, and 3) comparison of practical
solutions with theoretical bounds through numerical analysis and implementations
on a mobile edge computing test-bed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
have impacts on the future IoT and smart cities applications by improving the
cost of providing such applications while maintaining certain QoS levels for
users. Algorithms and an optimization framework developed in this project will
contribute to the research in design and development of scalable and reliable
edge computing systems as building blocks of IoT applications. This research
will be integrated into classroom teaching as a special topics graduate level
course offered by the investigator. Specific outreach activities for middle
school, high school and Berea College students aim to increase participation of
underrepresented groups in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data
produced by this project including codes, experimental results, videos of talks,
and publications will be shared using the project page that will be maintained
during the lifetime of this project. Upon finalizing the two-year term of the
project, an archive of the project webpage and information will be digitally
stored and made available upon request by any researcher or entity if the
webpage is taken down. Link to the project repository:
http://www.cs.uky.edu/~khamfroush/fed-mec.php. This project is jointly funded by
the Computer Systems Research Program in the Division of Computer and Network
Systems and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.