* 1948739
* Collaborative Research: Cyanobacteria, Nitrogen Cycling, and Export Production in the Laurentian Great Lakes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Josef Werne, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 02/29/2024
* USD 670,171.00

Collaborative Research: Cyanobacteria, Nitrogen Cycling, and Export Production
in the Laurentian Great Lakes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Great Lakes hold about
20% of the freshwater on Earth and have been increasingly impacted by human
activities in recent decades. Lake Erie suffers from large, annually recurring,
toxic cyanobacterial blooms in summer, whereas Lake Superior experiences
smaller, localized cyanobacterial blooms after storm events. Cyanobacterial
blooms have harmful ecological, human health, and economic implications. These
blooms are a global phenomenon, observed in lakes and oceans, and can lead to
low oxygen conditions and the production of toxins, both of which can be harmful
for ecosystems. Understanding how different types of cyanobacteria influence
nutrient cycling remains a major knowledge gap. This project aims to provide a
deeper understanding of the long-term state of the Great Lakes ecosystem. The
research approach combines new and established methods. Project results and
implications will be shared with local and regional water interests in
partnership with the Pittsburgh Collaboratory for Water Research, Education, and
Outreach, the Great Lakes Commission Harmful Algal Blooms Collaborative, and the
Lake Erie Area Research Network. Education is a central part of this project and
training opportunities target next generation of scientists, including
postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students. The students and postdoc
will receive state-of-the-art training in the rapidly developing fields of
biogeochemistry and geomicrobiology, while working with an interdisciplinary
team of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will examine nitrogen
cycling, phytoplankton community composition, and the nitrogen isotopic
composition of chloropigments in order to evaluate cyanobacterial productivity
in the modern Laurentian Great Lakes as well as the historical record of
cyanobacterial blooms over the past several hundred years. The nitrogen isotope
composition of chloropigments is expected to provide a powerful new proxy for
understanding primary productivity and the relative importance of cyanobacteria
to export production and nitrogen cycling. This proxy would be valuable not only
for management of modern systems but has important implications for increasing
our understanding of the role of cyanobacteria throughout Earth history. This
project would test this molecular isotopic proxy in contemporary aquatic
ecosystems to assess its efficacy for: (1) determining the relative
contributions of cyanobacteria vs eukaryotic algae (e.g., diatoms) to primary
production; (2) evaluating export production of cyanobacterial productivity
(including blooms); and (3) constraining historical cyanobacteria productivity
in the sedimentary record. Comparison of a system characterized by
eutrophication and seasonal cyanobacterial blooms (Lake Erie) with one
characterized by picocyanobacteria productivity, but the near-absence of large-
scale cyanobacterial blooms (Lake Superior), will provide information about the
range of impacts that cyanobacteria can have on carbon and nitrogen cycling.
Further information regarding nitrogen cycling will be derived from analysis of
solid and dissolved nitrogen species throughout the annual cycle, as well as
seasonal studies of sediment processes to measure associated sediment nitrogen
removal rates through different processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.