* 1948511
* CRII: NeTS: Beyond PHY and Chanel Measurements in Millimeter Wave: Towards Low-Overhead and Resilient Multi-hop Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Morteza Hashemi, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 02/28/2023
* USD 174,214.00

The 5G-and-beyond technologies will enable an unprecedented proliferation of
applications with ultra-low latency and extremely-high data rate requirements
such as mobile AR/VR applications. There is also an ever-increasing trend in the
number of wireless devices that is now already over 8.6 billion and is expected
to grow to 12.3 billion by 2022. The increasing density of wireless devices with
high data rate requirements has caused spectrum crunch in the sub-6GHz bands.
Millimeter-wave (mmWave) frequencies between 30GHz to 300GHz can alleviate the
spectrum scarcity and provide major potentials for future cellular and emerging
WiFi networks with Gbps data rates. Current studies have mostly focused on
understanding wireless channel impairments and propagation characteristics at
high frequencies. While such efforts are essential, there are gaps in developing
network protocols tailored for mmWave. This project takes a system-level
approach to develop and implement algorithms for reliable mmWave networking with
guaranteed end-to-end performance. It also provides great opportunities for
curriculum enhancement by introducing new trends and challenges in future
wireless networks, training students from under-represented populations at
different levels, and attracting young minds, including high-school students, to
the STEM areas via appealing demos of mmWave applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significant differences between mmWave and sub-6GHz
call for a radical rethinking of the design principles across all the layers of
the protocol stack. Currently, the upper layers of the protocol stack remain
largely unexplored and the existing protocols are not tailored for mmWave
communication. This project develops protocols and implements a testbed for low-
overhead and resilient multi-hop mmWave communication with mobility and link
blockage. The proposed research will be conducted across three inter-related
thrusts: (1) Low-overhead Beam Alignment for Multi-hop Settings: Leveraging
multi-armed bandit (MAB) frameworks, this thrust will develop an efficient beam
alignment algorithm that considerably reduces the angular beam search space and
overall beam alignment overhead, which is essential for dense mmWave networks
with multi-hop topologies; (2) Fault-Tolerant Multi-hop Routing to Combat
Blockage: In order to guarantee reliable and robust mmWave communication under
blockage, this thrust will resort to network and routing layer solutions to
develop an on-demand routing protocol that is able to quickly recover under a
link blockage; (3) Optimal Buffer Allocation in Multi-hop Networks: This thrust
will investigate the problem of optimal buffer allocation in multi-hop mmWave
networks with multi-users. The goal is to strike an optimal tradeoff between
delay and throughput performance and provide a fair allocation across different
data flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.