* 1948309
* Between culture and robotics: The making of social robots
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Nahoko Kameo, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 244,084.00

In this project, how social robots are designed and how such design affects
people’s interaction and experience with social robots is investigated. Social
robots are autonomous robots that are used around humans and that socially
interact with them to help their objectives. Such robots are increasingly common
in a variety of everyday settings, including nursing homes, retail stores,
banks, educational settings and medicine. The social implications of their
introduction, however, are still unknown. The design and interactional features
of such social robots are likely to be crucial because, once implemented, the
design may lock in cultural assumptions. The focus of this project is on how
roboticists’ conceptualization of extant social problems and possible
technological solutions, as well as their broader cultural assumptions, shape
the kind of robots they make, and how this design in turn affects the
interactions between humans and social robots. A better understanding of the
relationship between social and cultural demands, robotics research, and its
applications will contribute to knowledge on how to create social robots without
inadvertently reinforcing cultural biases and imbalances across
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research methods are used in this project.
First, 40 open-ended interviews are conducted with a sample of cutting-edge
university researchers engaged with social robotics. Data are coded for primary
patterns of the relationships between roboticists’ research goals related to
social problems, their cultural assumptions about the solution to such problems,
and their designs of social robots. Second, ethnographic observation is
conducted on the everyday research activities in a social robotics research lab,
including lab meetings, design sessions, coding, and field research. Third,
video recordings of robot-human interactions, taken during the roboticists’
field research, are analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.