* 1948628
* Collaborative Research: Neotoma Paleoecology Database, a Multi-Proxy, International, Community-Curated Data Resource for Global Change Research
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Suzanne Pilaar Birch, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 53,989.00

The recent geological record can offer useful insight into how species adapt (or
fail to adapt) to large and rapid environmental change. Understanding past
global changes necessitates the assembly and analysis of many individual
records, collected by many scientists, from many parts of the world. This
project will continue the support and development of the Neotoma Paleoecology
Database, a community data resource in which experts contribute their data,
curate these data to meet community standards, and freely access and use the
data in research and teaching. Examples of research that uses the Neotoma
resource include understanding the causes and consequences of past extinction,
assessing the sensitivity of species to large environmental changes that
accompanied past ice ages, and measuring how quickly species adapt to past rapid
environmental changes. Neotoma’s open data access will also facilitate new forms
of education and outreach, by giving students and teachers direct access to
research-quality data and empowering them to run their own analyses of past
climate and biodiversity dynamics. This will help train the next generation of
the scientific workforce, with crossover skills in both geological and data
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neotoma has become a research resource in
paleoecology, paleoclimatology, macroecology, biogeography, and environmental
archaeology, with rapid growth in data volume, kinds of data supported, and
active third-party and externally-supported research projects. Gathering
thousands of site-level records into high-quality, global-scale, data networks
requires substantial effort. Datasets must be carefully checked, taxon names
harmonized, age-depth models updated, and uncertainties quantified. Neotoma will
continue to address these challenges through a model of centralized
infrastructure and distributed data governance. Priorities for this project are:
1) establishing international coverage for data types and research communities
that now have critical masses of trained data stewards and data volumes in North
America (pollen, diatoms, ostracods, testate amoebae, vertebrates), and 2)
establishing critical masses of data and data stewards for recently added data
types (specimen-level stable isotopes, organic biomarkers). Cyberinfrastructure
improvements will include: 1) a web-based interface for bulk-uploading metadata
and data from many sites, 2) better support for specimen-level isotopic
measurements, 3) better visualization and analytical support for
micropaleontological species-environment calibration datasets, and 4) a rebuild
of Neotoma’s home webpage. Sustainability priorities include: 1) support for the
recently launched non-profit EarthLife Consortium Foundation, and 2) a workshop
in which leaders from Neotoma and other community data resources will receive
training in building strategic sustainability plans, learn tools to manage
finances and plan for the future, develop strategies to diversify their funding
base, and enhance communication skills. These updates and improvements to
Neotoma will enhance the existing data resource for current users, and will help
early-career researchers, for whom data availability and data-science training
can open new career pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.