* 1948237
* SBP: A Perfect Match?  How Job Demands Shape Gender and Minority Differences in Hiring
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Katherine Weisshaar, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 02/28/2023
* USD 267,529.00

Continued status differences in occupational attainment prompt concerns
regarding whether and to what extent such differences are a function of bias in
the hiring process. A critical point in this process is when job applicants
either do or do not receive call backs—request for interviews or more
information—after applications have been submitted, and whether such differences
vary by social status. This project will examine whether and how job demands –
the required skills and expectations associated with a job opening – influence
gender and racial differences in offering callbacks. The project will examine
whether employers are more or less likely to decline callbacks for women and
minority job applicants when the job demands are vague vs. quantified, feminine-
typed vs. masculine-typed, and when applicants meet or do not meet the required
job demands. The project will additionally examine how such patterns, and the
association with job demands, depend on job level and upward vs. downward job
mobility. Biases faced by women and minorities are costly, not only to the
applicants but to companies and the broader economy that may be missing out on
matching talented individuals to appropriate jobs. By elucidating the specific
mechanisms and conditions under which biases occurs, this research will
demonstrate how interventions by employers and government leaders can reduce
inequality in the labor market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study how job demands
affect gender and racial inequality levels, and how demands relate to bias
across job level and upward or downward job mobility, the project will field a
large-scale audit study. This field experiment study will involve varying
applicants by perceived race and gender, signaled by name. The project will
submit approximately 20,000 job applications to online job openings, recording
callbacks – requests for interviews or more information – across experimental
condition. The scope conditions will be limited to four occupations:
accountants, software engineers, sales professionals, and human resource
managers. Approximately 5,000 job applications will be submitted to each
occupation, dividing applications between entry-level and mid-level positions,
and between applicants who are in early- or mid-career stages to represent
attempts at upward vs. downward job mobility. The job openings in the audit
study will then be matched to proprietary skill data on online job postings. By
merging these data, the project will identify and characterize the bundle of job
demands for each unique job opening. Computational text analysis techniques such
as topic models, together with information in the dataset, will be used to
create variables to categorize demands by level of vagueness, associations of
masculinity or femininity, and the extent to which applicants meet the demands.
Logistic regression models predicting callbacks will be used, modeling
interaction effects with the job demand variables and applicants’ race and
gender. The project will assess whether and how job demands affect bias within
occupations and job level, and whether demands mediate the relationship between
bias and job mobility. Findings will inform sociological theories regarding
status differences in the operation of labor markets, particularly for
professional occupations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.