* 1948341
* CRII: III: Learning Predictive Models with Structured Sparsity: Algorithms and Computations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Miju Ahn, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 132,024.00

Recent advances in predictive modeling technology have greatly reinforced human
decision-making processes by extracting hidden trends and gaining valuable
knowledge from the past events. Predictive modeling for sparse representation is
a fundamental methodology in machine and statistical learning that aims to
produce robust outcomes by exploiting domain knowledge, formulating mathematical
programs with observed data, and solving the problems with computational
resources. For example, if experts believe there are some parts of data that are
insignificant, the model should be able to detect and avoid involving such data
to increase prediction accuracy. If features of the data possess hierarchical
relationships, e.g.,availability of medical measurements depends on which tests
were given to the patient, an accurate model must reproduce the structure for
practical applications. Achieving such desired conditions through proper
modeling is critical to integrate prior understandings of the problem, and
adhere to procedural and operational restrictions. This project aims to expand
current knowledge of predictive modeling with structured sparsity by introducing
a unified framework for many existing problems and providing computational tools
through mathematical optimization methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sparse
patterns in the model variables can be formulated exactly by utilizing the
discrete property of the indicator function, and approximately by using
surrogate functions. The project aims to investigate effectiveness of imposing
such conditions by enforcing them as hard constraints. The main objectives
include 1) formulating existing problems as constrained optimization problems,
which minimizes the model's loss with respect to the provided data while obeying
pre-determined sparsity conditions, 2) developing e;fficient and robust
algorithms that are capable of effectively handling resulting nonconvex
constraints, and 3) studying numerical performance of the new method compared to
the latest sparse modeling technologies used in practice. Based on the prior
work, the investigator aims to develop deterministic and randomized algorithms
that compute stationary solutions with desirable theoretical properties through
iterative procedures. Specific research tasks include implementing the proposed
method applied to simulated and real data, and investigating robustness of the
model in terms of prediction accuracy, ability to identify significant
components of data, and successful reproduction of desired sparse patterns in
the repeated experiments. The outcome of this project including data and
implemented products will be shared with the public through open-source
communities and online repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.