* 1948159
* CRII: CIF: A Machine Learning-based Computational Framework for Large-Scale Stochastic Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Zhijie Dong, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Scott Acton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 251,609.00

Modeling optimization problems under uncertainty is known as stochastic
programming (SP). It has a variety of important applications, including disaster
management, supply chain design, health care, and harvest planning. Most real-
world problems are complicated enough to generate a very large-size SP model,
which is difficult to solve. Quickly finding the optimal solutions of these
models is critical for decision-making when facing uncertainties. Existing
optimization algorithms have a limited capability of solving large-scale SP
problems. Without being explicitly programmed, machine learning can give
computers the ability to "learn" with data by using statistical techniques. The
goal of this project is to create a machine learning-based computational
framework to solve large-scale stochastic programming problems effectively and
efficiently by integrating machine learning techniques into optimization
algorithms. The project will broaden the scope and applicability of machine
learning in operations research. Furthermore, this research will support the
cross-disciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students in
engineering and computer sciences, as well as the development of new curricula
in the interface of machine learning and optimization
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be the pioneering study of
applying machine learning into stochastic programming, while existing works
usually focus on using stochastic programming to improve the efficiency of
machine learning algorithms. Motivated by the challenges from practices and
limitations of current optimization algorithms, two research objectives are
proposed: efficient sample generation and convergence acceleration, by taking
sample average approximation and L-shaped algorithm as examples. The first
research objective is to design a semi-supervised learning algorithm based on
solution information to efficiently generate samples for sample average
approximation. The second research objective is to develop a supervised learning
algorithm to estimate a tight upper bound for expediting convergence of L-shaped
method. The two research objectives will be achieved through five tasks: (1)
semi-supervised learning-based scenario grouping; (2) supervised learning based
representative scenario selection; (3) performance analysis for sample
generation; (4) supervised learning based upper bound prediction; and (5)
performance analysis for the machine learning-based L-shaped method. The
successes of this project will generate a new class of theoretical optimization
methods that facilitate various real-world applications in disaster management,
supply chain design, health care and harvest planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.