* 1948067
* CRII: CHS: Restoring Justice: New Designs for Moderating Social Media Platforms
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Niloufar Salehi, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2023
* USD 191,000.00

This project investigates how to address harassment and abuse in social media.
Current approaches to moderation of social media either remove content or ban
users. However, neither of these approaches give perpetrators the opportunity to
be held accountable and to repair harm, nor do they enable communities to
address systemic problems. This project lays the intellectual groundwork to
design moderation of online spaces informed by a model of justice that focuses
on repairing harm, a model called restorative justice. The project will
investigate the potential of technology to support restorative justice
approaches. This research will create structures for repairing online harm and
sets the stage for the design of online spaces where everyone can participate
equally and benefit from the full potential of
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate potential roles
of technology to support restorative justice practices in moderating social
media platforms. The research invokes a situationally appropriate research
methodology of participatory design, in order to generate new understandings of
online community membersâ€™ needs and requirements. A new social media prototype
will be designed to address these needs through experience, interaction, and
computing. Intellectual merit is expected through (1) a qualitative study that
generates data as the basis for a model of social media moderation based on
principles of restorative justice; and (2) a prototype platform for moderation
on Twitter based on applying these principles in conjunction with human-computer
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.