* 1948025
* Collaborative Research: Defining the role of the pan genome in Emiliania huxleyi ecology and biogeography
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Harriet Alexander, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 442,232.00

Emiliania huxleyi is a numerically and ecologically important phytoplankton
species in the ocean known for its cosmopolitan distribution and ability to form
large blooms in coastal and open ocean regions. Studies of E. huxleyi variants
in culture have found differences in growth, function and activity potential
among them. The E. huxleyi variants also differ in some of the genes they carry.
It has been hypothesized that this genomic variability may underlie the global
success of this phytoplankton species by allowing adaptation of variants to
diverse environments. Yet, the direct connection between genomic content and
ecological success remains unclear. This project investigates how the conserved
and variable portions of E. huxleyi genome may be connected to its success and
its dynamics under varied environmental conditions. This work is critical to our
understanding of how this important phytoplankton species may shift and respond
to future changes. This project also supports the development of a series of
hands-on activities designed to teach middle school students advance
computational data analysis in ocean science. These activities are in
collaboration with the Girls Who Code Club at the Our Sisters School, ‘a
tuition-free, non-sectarian, independent school for girls from low-income
families’ located in New Bedford, MA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
phytoplankton diversity and phenotype are driven by changes in the environment
is crucial for better predicting carbon cycle dynamics in the future ocean.
While much work has investigated competition among phytoplankton species,
intraspecific diversity and dynamics remain largely unknown for many eukaryotic
phytoplankton. The overarching goal of this project is to define the role of the
pan genome (set of variable genes) in E. huxleyi ecology and biogeography
through a series of genomic analyses, computational field surveys, and
laboratory-based experiments. This project is sequencing the genomes of several
E. huxleyi isolates from across the global ocean and combining them with
existing genome sequences to constrain the core and variable portions of the pan
genome. Using this new pan genome reference database and leveraging global scale
metagenomics and metatranscriptomic surveys, this project is estimating ecotype
diversity of E. huxleyi across ocean regions to identify patterns of
environmental selection. This project additionally focuses on identifying the
physiological and transcriptional responses of a selection of sequenced strains
and their responses to shifts in their nutrient environments in controlled
laboratory studies. As E. huxleyi plays such a significant role in marine
ecosystems and the global carbon cycle it is important that its pan genome and
its impact on the biogeography and ecology of E. huxleyi is taken into
consideration. It is likely that these dynamics are acutely important to
predicting how this genus, and perhaps others, respond to changing environmental
conditions in the future ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.