* 1948422
* Green chemistry degradation of cotton waste for circular economy textiles
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Gary Halada, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 314,998.00

1948422 (Kim). The clothing industry is one of the most polluting industries in
the world, producing 1.2 billion tons of carbon emissions per year, with a
truckload of clothing discarded globally every second. Diverting high volume
cotton textile waste is a promising route to minimize pollution and energy and
water-intensive production of new clothing. Green chemistry strategies to
breakdown natural fabric waste into feedstocks for reconstituted fibers has
tremendous potential to move towards zero waste economies based on cradle to
cradle design strategies. About one third of the cotton muslin used at
educational fashion institutions (e.g. FIT) in the fashion design sewing,
draping and pattern making classes, goes to waste. The cotton muslin used in the
classrooms is undyed and unbleached, making it an excellent resource for
developing green methods to breakdown natural fibers to cellulosic feedstock.
This project seeks to elucidate the chemistry and surface science crucial for
optimizing an environmentally-benign degradation process to reconstitute muslin
waste to produce precursor materials for textiles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objectives of the work include: 1) Optimization of an environmentally-
benign method for the regeneration of cellulosic feedstock from cotton waste. 2)
Macro to nanoscale characterization of degradation/regeneration mechanisms to
identify new opportunities for reduction of the textile waste stream. This
project is a collaborative opportunity for student-driven realization of
circular economy and sustainability leadership at the intersection of science
and design. It also provides a conduit for project-based STEM education as a
tool to address pressing global challenge. Successful outcomes of the project
will provide a method for cotton muslin waste green chemistry degradation
procedures. Investigation of environmentally-benign wet chemistry routes to
muslin breakdown will be coupled with a suite of chemical analysis tools,
including spectroscopy and microscopy, to understand the interaction between
process chemistry and cotton molecular structure. The research will focus on
expanding the utility of the chemical approach beyond muslin waste to cellulosic
textiles and dyed fabrics in general. This work could highly impact the
development of accessible models for circular economy materials and offers a
conduit for ecological design and systems thinking in a STEM framework. Non-
traditional science students from FIT (especially women and minorities) will
perform research activities at Stony Brook University through the Institute for
STEM Education (I-STEM), the Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program,
Undergraduate Research &amp; Creative Activities (URECA), Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) programs, and the Center for Inclusive Education (CIE)
as well as at FIT. Undergraduate students from both Stony Brook University and
FIT will receive academic credit, either for independent research or in the
context of project work in one of the interdisciplinary courses or programs
(e.g. Designing with Emerging Materials, The True Cost: Product Life Cycle
Assessment).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.