* 1948066
* CRII: OAC: Scalable and Integrated Data Collection Platforms for Connected Vehicle Data
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jinwoo Jang, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,912.00

By 2030, nearly 146 million connected vehicles will be in operation in the U.S.
Each vehicle will generate 25 gigabytes of data per hour; however, traditional
data analytics systems are not capable of handling the high amount of data. This
will require the development of novel computational and scientific tools to
shape our future connected vehicle cyberinfrastructure. The project aims to
create a new data mining engine embedded at the vehicle level to collect and
process the streams of data in a highly efficient and scalable way. Harnessing
novel data science tools, this project will address important fundamental
questions of how to efficiently decide what information to collect, what to
filter, and what to process within a vehicle. In turn, having an efficient in-
vehicle data collection engine will improve our capabilities to build a high-
impact cyberinfrastructure for connected vehicles. This cyberinfrastructure will
open up new research capabilities and provide social benefits in the fields of
intelligent transportation and smart cities. The data will tell us how to
improve traffic congestion, how to create safer streets, and how to better
design our cities, resulting in improved mobility, economic improvements, and
lives being saved. This project embraces education and workforce development to
educate our future data scientists and engineers through the creation of
interdisciplinary learning environments, courses, and research-intensive
programs. This project will also broadly promote undergraduate research, K-12
educational outreach activities, and STEM education in underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate novel approaches to
understand connected vehicle data, comprised of spatio-temporal trajectories and
non-spatial sensor data, and develop scientific tools that can compress, impute,
partition, and summarize connected vehicle data, while addressing important data
challenges and scalability issues associated with the large scale of the
database. First, the data collection platform will minimize data redundancy at a
vehicle level through a proximity-based data sampling mechanism. Second, the
platform will improve the integrability of connected vehicle data by capturing
map-consistent trajectory points. Third, it will link dispersed connected
vehicle data with map data by harnessing the special characteristics of new
trajectory data formats. This scientific investigation centers on matrix
decomposition, optimization, and spectral clustering techniques and includes
city-wide vehicle sensor deployment to validate the proposed effort based on
real-world and large-scale connected vehicle data. Results of the project will
challenge the scientific gap between trajectory data analytics and the matrix
decomposition techniques. Finally, this project will advance scientific
knowledge in 1) trajectory data compression based on non-spatial sensor data, 2)
the matrix decomposition techniques for the location inference of connected
vehicle data, 3) the spectral graph partitioning methods for trajectories and
non-spatial sensor data, and 4) large-scale trajectory data
mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.