* 1948127
* CRII: FET: Embedded neuromorphic circuits for real-time closed-loop biosensor data processing
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Gina Adam, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/29/2024
* USD 208,992.00

In the last decade, there has been a revolution in biosensor devices producing a
wealth of new data from patients. Increased density of sensors, for example
embedded in implantable organ-conformal bioelectronic platforms, can provide
high-definition spatial and temporal data for increased accuracy of detection
and diagnostics. However, gathering a large quantity of data is insufficient if
it is not matched by powerful circuitry to process the data and apply a
therapeutic response in sometimes as fast as milliseconds. The next generation
of biomedical technologies requires novel computing that can be embedded non-
intrusively and can translate large quantities of time-sensitive biomedical data
into a life-saving response rapidly and energy-efficiently. Distributed
neuromorphic computing can provide faster, lower-power and more compact
implementations than conventional computing, especially if implemented with
emerging device technologies like resistive switches or memristors. Such
neuromorphic chips designed for distributed computing can be co-located with the
sensors and actuators for closed-loop diagnostics and therapy. This project will
provide the fundamental investigations into the requirements and architecture
for such distributed closed-loop computing. This technology will impact research
in biomedical engineering, opening the path to computing of large amounts multi-
physics data gathered in-vivo from organs and artificial tissue. Long term, this
work could benefit healthcare, when embedded neuromorphic chips are integrated
in a stand-alone implantable system that can enable real-time diagnostics and
painless therapy for patients. These findings are also directly transferable to
other applications in need of embedded computing hardware such as microrobots
and Internet of Things (IoT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
neuromorphic computing solution that can be reliably embedded with existing
sensor and actuator organ-conformal platforms. The proposed technology is based
on hybrid neuromorphic chips organized in a cellular neural network with
recurrence. To demonstrate its potential, the computing platform is be
prototyped and tested for the analysis of cardiac wavefronts, which have
stringent time constants of milliseconds. Initially, theoretical investigations
will focus on developing a hardware-mappable algorithm that can distinguish
electrical storms from normal electrical wave patterns. Then, experimental work
focuses on taping out a cellular neural network processing unit in a hybrid
memristor / transistor (CMOS) technology and testing a small distributed network
of such units. This work benefits from the use of cardiac animal and human data
for testing, thanks to collaborators in the Biomedical Engineering Department at
George Washington University. The prototype demonstration and the supporting
simulations serve as hands-on materials in a class on neuromorphic hardware and
in various outreach efforts planned as part of the new GWU Center for Women in
Engineering. A PhD student is being recruited, and an undergraduate student and
a high school student are to be involved in the design and testing of this
computing platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.