* 1948788
* Consequences of kin structure in benthic marine systems
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Scott Burgess, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 600,712.00

In marine systems, the production, dispersal, and recruitment of larvae are
crucial processes that rebuild depleted adult stocks, facilitate changes in
species geographic ranges, and modify the potential for adaptation under
environmental stress. Traditionally, the tiny larvae of bottom-associated adults
were thought to disperse far from their parents and from each other, making
interactions among kin improbable. However, emerging evidence is challenging
this view: larval dispersal does not always disrupt kin associations at
settlement, and a large fraction of invertebrate diversity on the seafloor
contains species in which most larvae disperse short distances. Limited
dispersal increases the potential for interactions among kin, which has
important consequences for individual fitness across many generations, and
therefore the productivity of populations and the potential for adaptation. But
when these consequences occur, and how exactly they manifest, remains largely
unexplained. The key challenge now is to explain and predict when kin
associations are likely to occur, and when they are likely to have positive or
negative ecological consequences. Therefore, the key questions addressed by this
research are: 1) how and when do kin associations arise and persist, and 2) what
are the consequences of living with kin for survival, growth, and reproduction.
This concept-driven research combines genomic approaches with experimental
approaches in lab and field settings using an experimentally-tractable and
representative invertebrate species. The project trains and mentors PhD students
and a postdoctoral scholar at Florida State University (FSU). Field and
laboratory activities are developed and incorporated into K–12 education
programs and outreach opportunities at FSU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial
proximity of relatives has fundamentally important consequences at multiple
levels of biological organization. These consequences are likely to be
particularly important in a large range of benthic marine systems, where
competition, facilitation, and mating depend strongly on the proximity and
number of neighbors. However, explaining and predicting the occurrence,
magnitude, and direction of such effects remains challenging. Emerging evidence
suggest that the ecological consequences of kin structure are unlikely to have a
straight-forward relationship with dispersal potential. Therefore, it is crucial
to discover new reasons for when kinship structure occurs and why it could have
positive, negative, or neutral ecological consequences. This research aims to
provide a new understanding of how dispersal and post-settlement processes
generate spatial kin structure, how population density and relatedness influence
post-settlement fitness, and how the relatedness of mating partners influences
the number and fitness of their offspring (inbreeding and outbreeding). The
research combines genomic approaches, experimental progeny arrays, and
manipulative experiments in field and lab settings to test several hypotheses
that are broadly applicable across species. By focusing on an experimentally
tractable species to test broadly applicable hypotheses, the project achieves
generality and a level of integration that has been difficult to achieve in
previous work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.