* 1948938
* Collaborative Research: River Morphology Data and Analysis Tools (RiverMorph): A Web Platform for Enabling River Morphology Research
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Venkatesh Merwade, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 428,197.00

Information on river shape, bed morphology and sediment load are critical to
help inform research and management issues related to river channels. However,
such information is not easily accessible or available in the public domain.
This project will create a web platform, entitled RiverMorph, to aggregate,
store, share, and analyze river-related scientific data. RiverMorph will also
support management of current and future issues related to the nationâ€™s water
resources. The data and tools developed for RiverMorph will create digital
representations of three-dimensional river morphological structures of most U.S.
rivers, which can support fundamental research and practical needs related to
stream rehabilitation, infrastructure design, and food risk mitigation. This
project will demonstrate how the RiverMorph platform can improve river flow
forecasts and produce accurate flood inundation maps that subsequently can help
save lives and expense related to flood damages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
RiverMorph web platform will be designed and developed through collaborations
with an extended team of community partners, including state and federal
agencies, who are responsible for managing U.S. water resources. RiverMorph will
be: 1) open, integrated and platform independent; 2) flexible and adaptable to
new types of data and operational capabilities; 3) easy to use in order to
encourage contributions from a wide variety of stakeholders; 4) responsive to
the needs of multiple end users with diverse technical backgrounds; and 5)
interoperable and scalable for sustainability beyond the project duration. The
prototype RiverMorph resource will be developed by carefully assessing the
availability and accessibility of river data and the needs of potential
stakeholders. The usability and adaptability of RiverMorph will be demonstrated
through specific science test cases that will address the following research
questions: 1) How does channel morphology change over decadal time scales, and
how can the underlying processes be modeled to assist with water resources
engineering and management decisions? 2) How can river geometry be best
described across spatial scales ranging from low order single streams to large
stream networks for accurately simulating river hydrodynamics and flooding? 3)
How can data-driven approaches improve the understanding of streamwise and
river-floodplain-watershed connectivity for supporting modeling approaches over
large spatio-temporal scales? Implementation and adoption of RiverMorph will be
facilitated by engaging with stakeholders and the broader earth sciences
community over the course of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Geoinformatics, the Hydrologic Sciences, and the
Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics programs in the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.