* 1948399
* CRII: SCH: III: Novel Data-Driven Methods to Analyze Heterogeneous Healthcare Data
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Sanjay Purushotham, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 06/30/2023
* USD 174,879.00

The long term goal of this project is to improve the standard-of-care of
patients and build clinicians’ trust in utilizing advanced machine learning and
artificial intelligence tools for computational healthcare. The national push
for Electronic Health Records through the 2009 Health Information Technology for
Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act and the recent advances of wearable
sensor technologies has resulted in an exponential surge in volume, detail, and
availability of digital health data. This provides an exciting opportunity for
researchers, healthcare professionals, and the patients alike to infer richer,
data-driven understanding of health and illness. However, unlike other data
types, healthcare data is inherently noisy, has missing values, and comes from
multiple heterogeneous sources such as lab tests, doctor notes, medical images,
and monitor readings. These data properties make it very challenging for most
existing machine learning approaches and statistical models to discover
meaningful patterns of diseases or to make robust predictions. To address these
challenges, this project will develop and validate novel data-driven methods
based on powerful deep learning techniques to model the complex correlations and
patterns present in the healthcare data. In particular, the proposed data-driven
methods will learn disease-specific and patient-specific feature patterns from
heterogeneous and limited healthcare data. The effectiveness of the proposed
data-driven methods will be showcased on challenging and important healthcare
prediction tasks such as early prediction of sepsis and predicting the outcome
of Intensive Care Units patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advocate a model-based data-driven paradigm shift for computational healthcare,
and it will focus on addressing the main challenges of analyzing healthcare
data, i.e., heterogeneity and limited dataset size, by developing novel data-
driven methods. The proposed data-driven methods will accelerate medical
discovery and aid in clinical decision making in several ways: (a) connect and
learn from the disconnected heterogeneous piles of healthcare data; (b) yield
new representations of illness/diseases, and (c) build clinicians’ trust in the
data-driven models. The technical aims of the project are divided into three
thrusts. The first thrust will focus on developing a novel deep learning
framework to learn shared feature representations from heterogeneous healthcare
data. Specifically, the researchers will employ machine learning approaches,
such as multi-view learning and correlation analysis, to exploit the correlation
structures present within and across different healthcare data sources. In
addition, adversarial training based domain adaptation techniques will be used
to learn joint feature representations from multi-cohort patient populations.
The second thrust will focus on feature learning from limited healthcare data by
utilizing patient or task similarity networks and a few-shot learning framework.
In particular, multi-task learning and embedding techniques will be used to
learn feature representations from limited data available for a specific patient
cohort or healthcare task. In the third thrust, model uncertainty of the
proposed data-driven methods will be studied using ensembles and regularization
techniques. The adequacy of the proposed data-driven solutions will be validated
on real-world healthcare datasets for multiple clinically relevant prediction
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.