* 1948261
* CRII: SaTC: Graph-based Probabilistic Cyber Risk Modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Unal Tatar, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 03/31/2023
* USD 191,000.00

Cybersecurity risk analysis is one of the primary tools for managing the
consequences of cyber incidents. There are several limitations of the current
cybersecurity risk analysis methods. First, cyber risk is often treated as an
information technology problem rather than a vital part of enterprise risk
management. Another deficiency of the cyber risk analysis methods is the
insufficiency of the utilized metrics to support investment decisions.
Qualitative metrics and operational terms are often used as cyber risk
indicators rather than quantified financial measures that guide investment
decisions. Besides these, the lack of quantification of how investments in
specific controls change risk level is another limitation of the current cyber
risk analysis methods. This project aims to develop a probabilistic quantitative
cybersecurity risk analysis model to relate asset-level risk to organizational-
level risk and supply chain level risk to respond to the aforementioned
deficiencies of the current cyber risk analysis methods. The results from this
research enables effective and accurate supply-chain cyber risk assessment,
which, in turn, increases economic competitiveness by enabling more effective
and efficient mitigation of cyber risks and well-informed cybersecurity
investments. The project provides training opportunities for students at
different levels and from under-represented groups. Education materials
developed in the project will be shared nationally through the National Security
Agency supported CLARK repository of cybersecurity learning
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research problem of this study is what
kind of a probabilistic quantitative cybersecurity risk analysis model can be
developed to relate asset-level risk to organizational-level risk and supply
chain level risk. This project employs probabilistic attack graphs, which are
based on known vulnerabilities in computer software and network topologies. The
dynamic risk assessment capabilities are augmented in the attack graph using
Bayesian Belief Networks. A graph-theoretical functional dependency model is
also developed to model the ripple effects of cyber-attacks on enterprise
missions to failures in supply-chains. Simulations and sensitivity analysis are
conducted on a smart grid testbed to validate the developed risk analysis
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.