* 1948441
* Collaborative Research: Keystone chemicals: Identifying general and universal molecules of fear
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Delbert Smee, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 261,204.00

Many prey species use chemicals released in predator urine to detect imminent
danger and respond appropriately, but the identity of these ‘molecules of fear’
remains largely unknown. This proposal examines whether prey detect different
estuarine predators using the same chemical or whether the identity of the
chemical signals varies. Experiments focus on common and important estuarine
prey, mud crabs and oysters, and their predators including fishes, crustaceans
and marine snails. Bioactive molecules are being collected from predators and
prey and characterized. The goal is to determine if there are predictive
relationships between either the composition of prey flesh or the predator taxon
and the signal molecule. Understanding the molecular nature of these cues can
determine if there are general rules governing likely signal molecules. Once
identified, investigators will have the ability to precisely manipulate or
control these molecules in ecological or other types of studies. Oysters are
critical to estuarine health, and they are important social, cultural and
economic resources. Broader impacts of the project include training of
undergraduate and graduate students from diverse backgrounds and working with
aquaculture facilities and conservation managers to improve growth and survival
of oysters. One response to predator cues involves creating stronger shells to
deter predation. Determining the identity of cues used by oysters to detect
predators can provide management options to produce oysters that either grow
faster or are more resistant to predators. Project personnel is working with
oystermen to increase yields of farmed oysters by managing chemical
cues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For marine prey, waterborne chemical cues are
important sources of information regarding the threat of predation, thus,
modulating non-consumptive effects of predation in many systems. Often such cues
are produced when the predators consume the flesh of that prey. In nearly all
cases, the specific bioactive molecules responsible for modulating these
interactions are unknown, raising the question whether there is a universal
molecule of fear that prey respond to. Thus, the focus of the project is to
determine the generality of fear-inducing metabolites released by predators and
prey in estuarine food webs. The project combines metabolomics analysis of diet-
derived urinary metabolites with bioassays to identify the bioactive molecules
producing responses in two prey species from different taxonomic groups and
trophic levels (oysters, mud crabs). Metabolites are sampled from three types of
predators, fish, gastropods or crustaceans. This project aims to: 1) identify
bioactive molecules produced by several common estuarine predators from
different taxa; 2) compare cues from predators that induce defenses in prey vs.
changes in prey behavior; and 3) contrast the identities and effects of
predator-released cues with fear-inducing molecules from injured conspecifics.
By identifying and contrasting the effects of waterborne molecules that induce
prey responses from six predators and injured prey, this project is yielding
insights into the mechanisms that mediate non-lethal predator effects, while
addressing long-standing questions related to predator-prey interactions. In
addition to the search of a universal molecule of fear, the experiments are
exploring the role of complementary and distinct chemical information on the
specificity of prey responses to different types of
predators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.