* 1948971
* CSBR:Curation, Digitization, and Georeferencing of the Ichthyology and Herpetology Collections at Southeastern Louisiana University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Kyle Piller, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 409,200.00

Natural history collections often represent the centerpiece of biodiversity
studies. For decades, large state or national collections have provided
specimens for taxonomic or phylogenetic studies, but small, regional university
collections also have the ability to make strong contributions to biodiversity
discovery. Unfortunately, small regional collections often lack the needed
resources or are inaccessible to the general scientific community because these
collections are not integrated with online databases. The overall goal of this
project at Southeastern Louisiana University is to improve curation of existing
museum specimens and tissue samples, digitize and georeference specimen data,
and integrate these data with online repositories, thereby making the data
available to the general scientific community. In addition, this project will
revitalize interest in the natural world by using natural history collections to
highlight the unique organismal diversity here in Louisiana and beyond.
Southeastern personnel will develop a travelling fish, reptile, and amphibian
program termed "The Bone Sheaux". This outreach program will be used to
stimulate interest in organismal biology to K-12 students in southeastern
Louisiana, which includes some of the most impoverished parishes (counties) in
Louisiana. In addition, a permanent loan will be made available to
Southeastern's field station, Turtle Cove, which hosts more than 3,000 visitors
annually for public outreach and teacher training workshops. Finally, a natural
history museum course will be developed for Southeastern's undergraduate
students and provide them training in museum curation and specimen
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southeastern Louisiana University possesses
ichthyology and herpetology collections that initially were developed for
teaching and research in the 1950's. The bulk of the collection is comprised of
fishes, with the majority of the specimens from the Lake Pontchartrain Basin in
southeast Louisiana, and more recently from throughout Mexico and Central
America. In addition, it also possesses an ever-growing herpetology collection,
a portion of which was recently obtained from the orphaned Tulane University
herpetology collection. The objectives of this project are as follows: (1) to
curate the ichthyology collection through ethanol changes, and lid and jar
replacement to ensure the long-term viability and persistence of the collection;
(2) to integrate the Tulane herpetology collection including isopropyl to
ethanol changes, re-labeling and re-jarring, and integration of these specimens
into the Southeastern collection; (3) to increase accessibility of the
ichthyology and herpetology collections to the external community by digitizing
and georeferencing the databases; and (4) to integrate Southeastern's collection
data with publicly available data repositories, including iDigBio.org.
Completion of these tasks will make Southeastern's collection data available to
the scientific community and facilitate greater external usage of the
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.