* 1948669
* Preventing Civil War through International Action
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Peter White, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 479,874.00

A large literature suggests that conflict management activities—such as
mediation and peacekeeping — contribute to reductions in violence and the
resolution of long-running civil wars. Many of the same actors that engage in
these activities — including the United Nations, regional organizations, non-
governmental organizations, and national governments — also express a commitment
to working to prevent violence from occurring in the first place. There is much
less academic research on whether, how, and in what contexts conflict prevention
can work. This project presents the first systematic study of the effect of
conflict prevention actions in a wide range of intrastate disputes. The
project’s findings will contribute to understanding of why civil wars happen and
whether and how international actors can work to prevent them from occurring.
The results of the study will both help to inform scholars seeking to understand
these dynamics and policymakers interested in determining how and when to work
to prevent violent conflicts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project identifies
whether, how, and in what contexts international actors can prevent civil war in
disputes that are not currently violent, but have the potential for escalation.
Drawing on literature on state-dissident interactions, the project presents a
theoretical framework examining the strategic interaction between these two
actors and how international actors can influence this interaction, before mass
mobilization or civil war breaks out. This framework focuses on two ways that
conflict prevention can work: by convincing dissidents and states to use
nonviolent means in these disputes, and by helping dissidents resolve these
disputes peacefully. This research will produce the first global dataset on
conflict prevention efforts for disputes that are primarily nonviolent but can
escalate to civil war. These data will be used to test implications of the
theoretical argument and to examine whether international action can lead to a
reduced likelihood of civil war, and if so, which actions are most effective in
various contexts. The statistical approach will use matching methods to compare
disputes that are generally similar in the likelihood of escalation to civil war
and to examine the effect of actions in these disputes. These quantitative tests
will be supplemented with qualitative analysis designed to more directly examine
the underlying mechanisms and effects of preventive actions on dissident and
state decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.