* 1948255
* Efficient THz Emission Using Thin Black Phosphorus Photoconductive Absorber and Loss-free Dielectric Light Trapping
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Hugh Churchill, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 480,070.00

The proposed project aims at advancing the technology of antennas at high
frequencies in the terahertz band from 100 GHz to 4000 GHz. The proposed
research will use new materials, design and fabrication tools to deliver
advanced and more efficient terahertz antennas. The anticipated new antennas
will be capable of providing increased radiated power that will advance several
applications of significant importance to society, such as cancer detection,
homeland security, communications, and education. The new terahertz antennas
will likely advance the imaging of breast cancer tumor margins that remains
clinically limited due to the lack of adequate radiated power from terahertz
antennas. The new antennas will potentially impact homeland security by
providing powerful antennas for the detection of explosives, non-metallic
weapons, and drugs that could be hidden in clothing. The proposed terahertz
antennas will also likely impact future 5G wireless communications systems where
antennas are envisioned to operate at frequencies greater than 100 GHz to
support higher data demands from a vast number of applications. For education,
the proposed research will offer unique training opportunities to prepare the
next generation of leading scientists and engineers, including minority and
first-generation college students. Interactive laboratory demonstrations will be
developed based on several scientific efforts involved in the proposed research.
Furthermore, outreach activities on antenna education will be engaged in the
project to target school districts and other educational programs serving
underrepresented and minority students in Arkansas. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Terahertz (THz) photoconductive antennas (PCAs) are devices with the
attractive capability to emit broadband pulses that provide frequencies up to 6
THz but suffer a primary challenge of low power conversion efficiency of 10-5
from pump laser to terahertz emission. The proposed research aims at advancing
this technology by replacing the low temperature gallium arsenide (GaAs)
semiconductor with thin layer of black phosphorus (BP) covered with loss-free
nanospheres acting as a light trapping layer. The goal is to increase the
radiated terahertz average power by a factor of ten and bandwidth by a factor of
two over the conventional PCA technology. The first task is to fabricate and
model PCAs utilizing the thin multi-layered semiconductor BP, which is strongly
light absorbing and has a high saturation velocity. This new material has a
potential to increase the carrier generation in the device and has not been
investigated in THz thin film emitters yet. The second task is to incorporate
low-loss dielectric nanophotonic structures to provide a performance boost
beyond what has been achieved with lossy plasmonic elements. The idea is to
avoid parasitic absorption or reflection in metallic layers by using transparent
dielectric structures to engineer light transport into thin layers via
evanescent waves or other photonic waveguiding. The third task is to measure the
broadband terahertz emission spectrum of the fabricated devices, iteratively
optimize their performance through modeling, and benchmark the new platform
against conventional technologies. The measurements will be conducted on a THz
time-domain spectroscopy system in which the emitter is the proposed device
while the detector and the rest of the system will be obtained from a commercial
system. This task will also test the transfer of the developed BP-PCA device
into commercial systems in the future. The research results will be disseminated
in archived papers and conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.