* 1948108
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Linking physiological thermal thresholds to the distribution of lobster settlers and juveniles
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Markus Frederich, University of New England
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 312,150.00

Temperature is one critical factor that determines the distribution of marine
organisms. However, in many cases temperature ranges (thermal tolerances) are
only known for adults, but not for the immature stages that transition from the
plankton to the bottom. This study is testing how temperature affects where
larvae are settling. The American lobster (Homarus americanus) in the Gulf of
Maine is serving as a model system to measure the thermal tolerance of the
larvae and link this to the distribution of young lobsters in the field.
Presently, lobster larvae are more likely to experience relatively cold
temperatures than heat stress and larval settlement appears to be restricted to
warmer shallow waters by a sensitivity to temperatures below 12°C. As water
temperature has increased, settlement and juvenile distribution have expanded
into deeper waters suggesting a release from cold stress. This project is
advancing the understanding of shifting species distributions in response to
increasing ocean temperatures by exploring thermal sensitivity in wild-caught
larvae for the first time. This information is providing thermal thresholds for
modeling larval viability in response to climate change scenarios. Understanding
the larvae’s responses to temperature is fundamental to predicting the impact of
climate change on one of the most valuable commercial fisheries in North
America. The project is supporting training of undergraduate interns and a
master’s student from small colleges (Hood College and University of New
England) and connecting them with a research institution (Bigelow Laboratory for
Ocean Sciences). Teacher training is occurring in collaboration with the Marine
Science Center at the University of New England. Results from this study are
being shared with stakeholders and contributing to science-based management of
the lobster fishery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first to examine
how thermal stress on a larval stage determines juvenile distributions using a
combination of correlative and experimental approaches that includes measuring
biochemical stress indicators in larvae deployed in natural field habitats. The
central hypothesis is that the physiology of individual planktonic larvae
controls meso-scale settlement patterns in the field. The goal is to ascertain
if there is a causal relationship between the underlying physiology and thermal
sensitivity of the organism and the distribution of early life stages. Larval
supply, settlement and juvenile abundances will be assessed at different depths
with temperatures above and below the proposed minimum temperature threshold of
12°C for larvae. Laboratory experiments using conventional methods are
determining thermal tolerances in wild-caught larvae and how they change with
ontogeny. The upper and lower thermal optima are being resolved using multiple
physiological parameters such as measurements of oxygen consumption and aerobic
scope, and biochemical assays of thermal stress (HSP70, AMPK, and SIRT). To link
physiology to settlement patterns, caged stage IV larvae and V juveniles are
being deployed in the field at sites with temperatures above and below 12°C.
Lethal and sub-lethal effects on caged lobsters are being evaluated through
measures of growth, mortality and biochemical markers of thermal stress. This is
the first study to focus on the thermal tolerance of wild larvae, which has
broad implications for understanding settling in marine invertebrate
larvae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Biological
Oceanography (OCE) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.