* 1948181
* Collaborative Research: CIBR: The OpenBehavior Project
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Mark Laubach, American University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 648,138.00

In recent years, the field of neuroscience has benefited from open source tools
such as the computer language Python, off-the-shelf methods for 3D printing,
low-cost microcontrollers such as Arduino, and public repositories for computer
code and hardware designs such as GitHub. Many labs are using these tools, but
most do not share their code and designs. As a result, it is not possible to
systematically track the use of open source tools and their revisions and there
is no central repository for open source tools or benchmark materials, such as
video recordings of animal behavior. This award will allow these issues to be
addressed by creating a database for open source research tools used in the
field of neuroscience as well as a repository of benchmark and training
materials for using the tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the
project are to create a taxonomy for open source tools used in neuroscience
research, use the taxonomy to create and curate a database of open source tools,
including creating Research Resource Identifiers (RRIDs) for all tools in the
database, and disseminate information on open source tools and the skills
required to use them. A special focus of the initial funding period (Aim 3) will
be methods for video analysis of animal behavior, which are extremely popular in
recent years. Activities in the third aim include creation of a database of
video recordings of commonly used behavioral tasks, an open data analysis
competition using a common set of benchmark videos (developed through the
project), and the development of training materials and in-person and virtual
workshops on making and using the most popular open source tools used for
neuroscience research. Broader impacts of this project will be to increase
public awareness of neuroscience research through the OpenBehavior website
(https://edspace.american.edu/openbehavior), social media, and participation in
Society for Neuroscience (SfN) sponsored advocacy and outreach events. The
project will facilitate discussions of open source tools through a dedicated and
moderated discussion topic in the SfN sponsored Neuronline forums and provide
curated itineraries on open source tools for attendees of the annual SfN
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.