* 1948942
* The Kansas-Missouri-Nebraska-Iowa State Conference in Partial Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* George Avalos, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 02/28/2022
* USD 20,000.00

This project will partially support participation of the diverse group of early
career mathematicians in the two-day Conference entitled, "The KUMUNU-ISU
Conference in PDE, Dynamical Systems and Applications", to be held April 25-26,
2020, at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL). (The Conference website is
https://www.math.unl.edu/kumunu-2020.) This Meeting will be the sixth in a
series of Meetings put together by the KUMUNU-ISU contingent; i.e., mathematics
faculty from the Universities of Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, and Iowa State
University. The KUMUNU-ISU 2020 will feature world-acclaimed researchers in
Partial Differential Equations (PDE's) and Applied Mathematics, as well as those
who are in the relatively early stages of their career, and/or are
representatives of groups that have historically not had great representation in
Applied Mathematics. The organizers will put an effort to recruit participants
from institutions where opportunities to attend large Research Conferences might
be limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will include world-class experts
who work on the Navier-Stokes Equations and other modelling PDE of fluid and
fluid-structure dynamics. Within the framework of KUMUNU 2020, the research
interests of such nonlinear fluid PDE researchers will be juxtaposed with those
of mathematicians who are interested in the asymptotic behavior of solutions to
general nonlinear evolution equations. The conference will also feature speakers
and participants with interests in scientific computation and PDE Control
Theory; these will include researchers who have documented interest in applying
their results and methodologies to problems which involve the Navier-Stokes and
other fluid and fluid-structure PDE's. Subsequently, there are expected
collaborative efforts among these KUMUNU 2020
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.