* 1948921
* Collaborative Research: River plume-cape interaction - Plume separation from the coastal wall, vorticity generation and fresh water retention
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Piero Luigi Mazzini, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 313,743.00

This project will examine the interaction of a stratified coastal plume with a
cape, using a combined observational and modeling approach. High-resolution
shipboard surveys and moored instrumentation near Point Reyes, CA, will measure
the circulation and evolution of the San Francisco Bay Plume under a range of
wind and river discharge conditions. Combined numerical model simulations and
observations will quantify the dynamical balances and residence times of the
Plume downstream of the Cape. Idealized simulations will permit expansion of
results across parameter space, to understand both the controlling dynamics and
conditions affecting plume separation and retention times of stratified plumes
in the lee of capes in the coastal ocean. Coastal plumes are a key component of
shelf circulation, and important conduits for transport of pollutants,
nutrients, water masses and the organic carbon they contain. Understanding the
factors influencing plume separation and retention times will contribute to
understanding fates of such societally important ocean
constituents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex coastal geometries, such as capes and
submarine banks, can lead to significant hydrodynamic disturbances of buoyant
coastal flows. Such plumes are key components of shelf circulation and coastal
ocean biogeochemistry and marine ecosystems, so their dynamics and fate are
critical to understand. This project will quantify the interaction between the
San Francisco Bay Plume in the vicinity of Point Reyes, CA, under a range of
wind and river discharge conditions, using shipboard, moored, and drifter field
observations, combined with realistic and idealized numerical modeling studies.
The main objectives are to: (1) obtain detailed measurements of plume
hydrography, along- and cross-stream velocities and transports near a cape,
under a range of river discharge and wind-forcing conditions, (2) identify the
conditions for plume separation from the coast and eddy generation in the lee of
a cape, (3) quantify the retention time scales downstream of the cape associated
with the generated eddies, and (4) investigate the dominant momentum balances
that control far-field dynamics as the plume interacts with a cape. Although
plumes encompass a small area of the ocean surface, they are the boundary
condition for larger scale shelf circulation, and thus their evolution is
critical to understand and represent realistically in models. This project will
result in better understanding of the fate and transport of pollutants,
nutrients and water masses in the ocean, contribute observational datasets,
models, and analysis tools to the science community, and will provide critical
research capacity for two early career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.