* 1948568
* CRII: NeTS: Power Efficient Millimeter Wave Data Delivery for Remote Invasive Species Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Yao Zheng, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2023
* USD 174,911.00

The growing data resolution in remote sensing spurs the adoption of millimeter-
wave (mmWave) communication modules on energy-harvesting devices to increase the
data delivery bandwidth. The energy conditions on these devices are not always
satisfiable to initiate or maintain the mmWave links and require systems to be
capable of anticipating communication failures and take preemptive actions to
minimize energy expenditures. Fortunately, the environmental information
provided by remote sensors contains sufficient knowledge to enable the design of
such systems. The goal of this project is to develop algorithms and tools to
exploit this information and augment the solar-harvesting remote invasive
species monitoring system in the State of Hawaii with mmWave data delivery
capability. The work in this project will enable researchers, industry, and
students to realize high bandwidth real-time remote sensing with power-
constrained devices in real-world applications. The results of this research
will impact fields across scientific, industrial, and military interests,
including agriculture, ecology, meteorology, infrastructure, and public utility
monitoring, etc., where timely communication of high-resolution sensory data is
essential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental intuition of the proposed
approach is that environmental factors, such as weather conditions, signal
blockages, can be recognized via the inherent capability or interactions between
the remote sensors. Knowledge of these factors can be utilized to optimize
device awakening, beam scanning, and signal amplification, etc., at the physical
layer. Three complimentary research thrusts are pursued: 1) extracting the
correlation between solar harvesting conditions and mmWave signal attenuations;
developing models and circuits to estimate the mmWave signal attenuations at
specific solar conditions; 2) designing a distributed sensing architecture to
detect mmWave beam blockage and accelerate beam alignment, by exploiting the
low-power decimeter band communication implemented by the existing system; 3)
formulating and solving a constrained route placement problem for an autonomous
aerial data collector to optimize its mmWave signal reception as it maneuvers
between sensor clusters and flight restricted regions. All products of this work
will be made freely available to the research community, along with
documentation and tutorials. The in-lab testbed to be established during the
project will be made available online for remote testing. The hardware schematic
of the sensor platform, deployment profiles, data traces, and important meta-
data will be posted online to spur further use, test, and research to advance
the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.