* 1948696
* Academic Career Enhancement for Underrepresented Faculty in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Stephanie Adams, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 09/30/2020
* USD 142,688.00

The current lack of faculty diversity in engineering poses serious threats to
the replacement of an aging faculty, the retention of underrepresented minority
(URM) students, the development of a diverse workforce and the well being of the
nation. This challenging issue has been addressed over the past few decades with
limited success, due in part to the complex and interrelated factors that
influence the career advancement of underrepresented minority faculty.
Strategies are needed to increase the numbers and career success of
underrepresented minority faculty, to ensure diversity in engineering and
national competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals and activities are
closely aligned with NSF's mission to broaden the participation and success of
underrepresented populations in engineering. Faculty of color represent an
alarmingly small, untapped and underserved population in the academic ranks
within engineering. This state of affairs informs the goals of the proposed
project, which is to enhance the presence, socialization, retention and
advancement of junior and mid-career faculty from underrepresented populations
in engineering. The project seeks to achieve these goals via the following
objectives: 1) development and implementation of a holistic array of career
development initiatives for underrepresented early and mid-career faculty; and
2) implementation of research on practices and policies impacting the
progression and advancement of these faculty members. The project includes a
professional/leadership development component, informed by existing knowledge on
the factors that help underrepresented faculty members succeed. There is also a
research component that is intended to add to the national knowledge base on
issues of career progression. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key features of the project
include: an annual professional/leadership development symposium, the formation
of an on-line community (e.g., using the NSF-funded National Institute for
Faculty Equity website, webinars, etc.), organized networking at professional
society meetings, the active engagement of senior scholars and opportunities for
multi-year participation. Additionally, the symposium will be used as a forum to
implement a mixed-methods study of the factors influencing underrepresented
faculty members' experiences in academia. In this vein, the project will explore
the following research questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RQ1. What individual and
systemic factors are facilitating and/or hindering the progression and
advancement of URM faculty members?&lt;br/&gt;RQ2. What are the salient
intragroup differences in the experiences of URM faculty? (e.g., How do foreign-
born Black faculty members experience the academy differently than their US-born
peers? How do the experiences of Hispanic faculty members differ based on their
country of origin?)&lt;br/&gt;RQ3. How do URM faculty members' past professional
development experiences impact their present day responses to challenges and
opportunities?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the success
and advancement of minority faculty in engineering, thereby enhancing their
participation and retention, and increasing their ranks. The increased presence
of these minorities enhances faculty diversity and provides the role models and
self images that contribute to the enhanced recruitment, retention, and ultimate
success of all students -- especially those from groups underrepresented in the
engineering workforce -- which is necessary to build a diverse science and
engineering workforce required to maintain national competitiveness and
prosperity.