* 1948374
* CRII: SaTC: Empowering Elastic-honeypot as Real-time Malicious Content Sniffers for Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Xu Yuan, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 02/28/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Spam messages, misinformation, disinformation and outright fraud are rampant on
social networks. To separate out such malicious content from benign and useful
content and protect social networks, there is a need for robust content
classification systems. However, before such systems can be designed, there is a
need for data that train the classifiers. Honeypots are a good way to obtain
such data about malicious attacker behavior. Conventional honeypots rely on
manually created artificial user accounts as lures to trap attack activities.
However, such honeypots are often identified easily by smart attackers. They
also suffer from lack of deployment flexibility, feature variability, network
scalability, and system portability. This project develops a novel and
lightweight honeypot-based malicious content capturing system that cannot be
easily bypassed by attackers. The honeypot is then used to intelligently gather
and automatically classify contents into likely malicious and likely benign. The
goal is to mitigate the adverse effects of malicious contents and sanitize
social environments, significantly elevating the security and trust of social
networks. Research datasets and software toolkits are shared with the broader
research community. The research findings are transitioned into educational
materials in the form of book chapters and hands-on classroom materials,
delivered to students at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette and also
shared with other universities worldwide. The project also involves
undergraduate and under-represented students for research experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a novel and lightweight honeypot-
based malicious content sniffing system, named the elastic-honeypot sniffer, to
overcome drawbacks in conventional honeypot-based solutions. Two core components
constitute the elastic-honeypot sniffer: (1) real-time data gathering and (2)
elastic-honeypot detector. Using robust learning techniques on existing spam
datasets, the project identifies features and behavior profiles of users who are
found to be lucrative targets for spammers. For real-time data gathering, the
elastic-honeypot dynamically deploys artificial user accounts as lures based on
the learnt vulnerable user profiles to trap attackers intelligently. The main
advantages over conventional honeypot technology are node availability,
deployment flexibility, features variability, network scalability, and system
portability. The data captured by the elastic-honeypot sniffer is used to design
robust classification techniques to differentiate between malicious and benign
content that are resilient against adversarial
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.