* 1948578
* Collaborative Research: Internal Swash zones and boundary-interior exchange: High-accuracy modeling and field observations
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Erika McPhee-Shaw, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 430,890.00

This project will examine how strongly non-linear internal waves (i.e., waves
developed at the interface of two fluids with different density) induce mixing
near the bed and at the interface of the two fluids. In-situ observations will
be carried out in a north-south oriented finger-lake (Lake Cayuga, NY), a
natural laboratory with conditions analogous to those found at the edge of the
outer continental shelf near the slope during summertime (i.e., warm surface
layer overlying a colder layer of water). The analysis of the experimental data
combined with sophisticated numerical experiments will provide information that
will fill the gap between laboratory work and the most up-to-date oceanographic
studies. This work may improve parameterization of boundary fluxes in the ocean,
which are important to lateral dispersion of buoyancy, heat, and potentially of
organic carbon offshore of productive shelf systems. The work may advance
interdisciplinary activities as it may improve communication between physical
oceanography and physical limnology. In addition, results may also be pertinent
to water quality issues in lakes and coastal areas. Lake Cayuga has been plagued
by late-summer algal blooms, while supplying drinking water for the city of
Ithaca NY, and for Cornell University. Although this problem is not the direct
subject of the study, the data collected will be useful for addressing this
societally important issue. The project will support the training of two
graduate and one undergraduate student and provide research material that will
be integrated in the classroom activities of the principal
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines modeling and
observations to investigate how nonlinear internal waves (NLIWs) affect near-
boundary mixing and boundary-interior exchange events. The objectives are to: 1)
explore, in the parameter space of incident internal wave nonlinearity, the
mechanisms of NLIW instability, and assess the roles of bottom shear stress,
convective/shear instability in the wave front, or bottom boundary layer
separation in the wave footprint; 2) quantify and contrast the contribution of
each instability type to diapycnal flux generation and boundary-interior
exchange (intrusion generation) as a function of incident NLIW energy; 3)
determine the role of temporal variability of the advective swash zone and the
resulting cyclically incident NLIWs and potential wave-wave interactions, in
establishing episodic turbulence, mixing, horizontal transport, and re-
stratification of near-bed water. The numerical model is based on high-accuracy
spectral element methods, to enable the high- resolution study of internal wave
breaking over variable bathymetry. The southern slope and shelf of Lake Cayuga,
New York, provides an exceptional natural laboratory for the project field
studies, serving as a simpler analog system for the ocean. This lake mimics
conditions seen on many summer continental shelves and slopes with a warm
surface layer intersecting the shelf, overlying a stratified layer extending
down over a steeper bathymetric slope. A low-frequency seiche advects the
pycnocline back and forth across the shelf/slope, and hosts higher frequency
NLIWs which break near boundaries, mixing the stratified fluid and contributing
to expulsion of boundary layer fluid into a basinâ€™s stratified interior. Better
understanding of the basic physics will be relevant to a wide range of fields
and contribute to better parameterization of the relevant
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.