* 1948914
* Importance of Riverine Discharge on the Benthic Flux of Alkalinity to Continental Margins
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Martial Taillefert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 04/30/2024
* USD 623,516.00

Importance of Riverine Discharge on the Benthic Flux of Alkalinity to
Continental Margins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean acidification is the process that
lowers the pH of the ocean over time due to uptake of atmospheric carbon
dioxide. This project investigates how chemical reactions in marine sediments
exposed to high riverine sediment loads influence ocean acidification in coastal
waters. Although we know that ocean acidification affects marine life and
commercial fisheries in coastal waters, little is known about how acidification
processes in the water column are influenced by reactions occurring in sediments
on the sea floor. The role of large sediment deposits from rivers in these
processes has also never been investigated. This study will be conducted in the
Mississippi River and Gulf of Mexico. The Mississippi River transports a high
sediment load to the continental shelf in the Gulf of Mexico and plays an
important role in the economy of the southern coast of the United States.
Results from this study will be useful to the oceanographic community for
increasing understanding of ocean acidification processes in delta and shelf
environments. It will also benefit decision makers interested in predicting the
role of sediments on the nutrient -rich Louisiana shelf for discharge control
purposes. This project also has an important educational component by training
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students, providing experiences at sea
for undergraduates, and conducting outreach activities with K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geochemical and microbiological processes
responsible for the transformation of particles deposited on the seafloor will
be characterized near the Mississippi River mouth and along the nearby
continental slope. The release of acids (CO2) and bases (alkalinity) from the
sediment will be quantified using autonomous instruments deployed on the
seafloor to determine whether sediments contribute to the acidity of the
surrounding water column or instead provide bases to buffer the water column
from atmospheric CO2 inputs. As the Mississippi River discharge during the later
Winter and Spring provides much more sediment to the coastal zone compared to
the rest of the year, research cruises will be taken twice a year to determine
how seasonal variations in riverine discharge affect the release of acids and
bases into the water column. Mathematical models will then be used to predict
the effect of seasonal variations on acids or bases release to the water column.
This study will therefore provide a quantitative understanding of the role of
large sediment depositions to the seafloor on sediment geochemical and
microbiological processes and their feedback to the overlying waters.
Simultaneously, a large data set will be generated and used to calibrate
mathematical models and better characterize benthic-pelagic interactions. Such
efforts are needed to predict how continental margins respond to constantly
increasing stress from anthropogenic activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.