* 1948667
* The Mechanisms that Drive Summer Teleconnections: Patterns Associated with High Surface Temperatures
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Steven Feldstein, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 688,685.00

The large-scale atmospheric circulation is characterized by circumpolar flows
that navigate around high- and low-pressure centers distributed across the
globe. This circulation varies in time, ranging from a few days to well over
decades. When averaged over a season, the climatological circulation features
appear fixed geographically as stationary waves of constant amplitudes. Within a
season, the large-scale atmospheric circulation can be thought of as comprising
of these stationary waves and evolving patterns that deviate from them (i.e.,
anomalies). The recurring and persistent anomalous patterns are referred to as
teleconnection patterns. They can appear naturally as a part of our chaotic
atmospheric system and can be excited by events like sustained regional heating
over the unusually warm ocean surface. The interference between teleconnection
patterns and the attendant stationary waves can intensify high- and low-pressure
centers leading to extreme weather and climate events such as droughts and
floods as well as unseasonably cold and warm spells. In recent decades, the
occurrence of summertime extreme events has increased and its attribution to
global warming is unclear. To date, the mechanisms behind the excitation and
maintenance of the summertime teleconnection patterns are not well
understood.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to understand the physical
mechanisms that excite summer teleconnection patterns associated with extreme
surface temperature signatures. The investigators hypothesize that the inter-
decadal increase in the heat wave frequency has coincided with an increased
occurrence of particular teleconnection patterns (initiated by diabatic heating)
during the boreal summer. The investigators plan to examine the possible impact
of interference between these teleconnections and stationary waves on surface
temperature. They will assess if there has been any long term (greater than a
decade) changes in the frequency and intensity of the summer teleconnection
patterns and, if so, explore possible causes of these long-term changes. The
research methods include cluster analysis of the combined upper tropospheric
geopotential height and surface air temperature fields, various diagnostic
analyses of the resulting cluster patterns, surface energy budget analysis, and
numerical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.