* 1948824
* Collaborative Research: In Situ Oxidation Rates of Methane Injected from Seafloor Gas Seeps
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Christopher Martens, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2024
* USD 695,236.00

Thousands of natural gas seeps have been discovered as streams of bubbles rising
up from the seafloor just offshore from coastlines around the world. Extensive
fields of seeps, largely releasing the same methane gas that we use to heat our
homes, have recently been found about a hundred miles east of North Carolina’s
Cape Hatteras at water depths as shallow as 300 feet. It is estimated that at
least tens of thousands of these hydrocarbon-rich seeps occur on continental
margins around the world. The seeps, usually seen as large rising plumes by
sonar systems on research ships, inject huge, but poorly quantified, amounts of
methane into overlying waters as they rise through the water column. A primary
question is how much of the methane, a potent greenhouse gas, actually reaches
the atmosphere. This question is the subject of much current research funded by
several Federal research agencies including the National Science Foundation and
the Department of Energy. Oceanographers believe that the methane (and other
gases included in the bubble streams such as ethane and propane) are either
transported away by ocean currents or consumed by microorganisms specially
adapted to live with hydrocarbons as their main carbon source. This proposal
seeks to determine the importance of microbial consumption in controlling
methane distributions in the deep ocean and how the consumption rates depend on
concentrations of methane, oxygen and other chemicals, as well as in situ
pressures and temperatures. Previous studies in laboratories aboard research
ship using samples returned to the surface suggest that microbial consumption of
methane from the seeps may lag for a week after its injection into the water
column and thus that physical dispersion by currents may dominate deepwater
methane dynamics through dilution. However, other measurements suggest that
there is no lag before aggressive microbial oxidation of injected methane
begins. We have proposed to conduct in situ measurements of microbial methane
consumption and related microbial community structure in bottom waters at
several coastal and continental margin sites off the North Carolina coast and
the northern Gulf of Mexico, where numerous natural seeps have also been
observed. We will use new technologies developed after the release of massive
quantities of methane during the Deepwater Horizon disaster in the Gulf. The
sites offer varying concentrations of methane and other chemical and physical
conditions such as oxygen concentrations and temperature that will allow us to
test specific hypotheses about the role of microbial processes. Through
performing the experiments with instruments right on the seafloor next to the
seeps we can remove much of the uncertainty surrounding previous shipboard
measurements. We will use newly developed seafloor landers equipped with
advanced laser methane sensors that are capable of multi-week measurements while
assaying dissolved oxygen, dissolved inorganic nitrogen and the microbial
community for the presence of methane-consuming methanotrophs and their activity
using advanced genomics techniques that can reveal the nature of methanotrophic
responses to ambient methane concentrations. Successful collection of in situ
methane consumption rate data and associated microbial community changes should
prove important for modeling ocean methane dynamics over a range of
oceanographic conditions including seep-enriched bottom waters and bottom waters
impacted by accidental hydrocarbon releases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and
undergraduate students supported by the project will gain critical skills in
laboratory and field settings and will also benefit from frequent interactions
with established researchers from diverse fields. Team members will participate
in hands-on undergraduate education and training through developing
individualized research projects leading to honors theses, presentations at
national meetings and excellent graduate school placements. Graduate and
undergraduates will also participate in K-12 science outreach efforts that help
to attract and inform the next generation of oceanographers. The team will work
with the University of North Carolina Morehead Planetarium and Science Center
and participate directly in the North Carolina Science Festival. Through media
contacts made from TED talks, exciting results will be broadly disseminated to
the public. The project will have immediate relevance for understanding
microbially mediated responses to hydrocarbon inputs from accidental releases
along the Southeast Atlantic margin where oil and gas exploration are a constant
topic of state and national policy discussions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hundreds of recently discovered gas
seeps along the continental margin offshore of Cape Hatteras, North Carolina
plus thousands in the northern Gulf of Mexico, inject huge amounts of dissolved
methane into overlying shelf and slope waters through dissolution of rising
bubble plumes. The fate of the methane is largely controlled by a balance
between microbial oxidation and advective transport away from seep sources. The
efficacy of microbial oxidation likely depends on concentrations of methane,
oxygen and ambient dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN), as well as in situ
pressures and temperatures. Recent shipboard aerobic methane oxidation rate
(AMOR) measurements suggest that microbial consumption of seep methane may lag
for a week and thus physical dispersion could dominate deepwater methane
dynamics through dilution. However, methane stable carbon isotopic measurements
in bottom waters suggest that there is no lag before aggressive oxidation of
injected methane begins. We propose to conduct in situ measurements of AMOR
while simultaneously investigating its microbial drivers at representative North
Carolina and Gulf of Mexico continental margin sites featuring numerous active
bubble seeps. These sites offer varying concentrations of methane and DIN;
performing the experiments in situ will remove much of the uncertainty of
shipboard rates. We will conduct the measurements utilizing newly developed
benthic lander systems equipped with advanced laser methane sensors that are
capable of multi-week AMOR measurements while assaying dissolved oxygen, DIN and
the microbial community for the presence of methanotrophs (through metagenomes)
and their activity (through metatranscriptomes) that can reveal the nature of
methanotrophic responses to ambient methane
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test key hypotheses about
deep-sea methane dynamics including determining if there are significant lags in
microbial responses after exposure to elevated methane concentrations,
determining the relationships of AMOR to methane and DIN concentrations and
investigating the response times and magnitude of methanotrophs to spatial and
temporal variability in methane concentration. Successful collection of in situ
AMOR and associated microbial community data will prove important for modeling
ocean methane dynamics over a range of oceanographic conditions including seep-
enriched bottom waters and accidental hydrocarbon
releases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.