* 1948653
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Biocultural Approach to Evaluating Psychosocial Stress Mediators in Vulnerable Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Lee Gettler, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 01/31/2024
* USD 25,153.00

Disruptions in living arrangements create vulnerabilities for individuals whose
day-to-day security is affected by displacement. Residence in temporary
settlements presents a range of difficulties and vulnerabilities that may have
long-term implications for health and resilience. How do displaced individuals
negotiate control and regularity over their daily lives in the context of
persistent uncertainty and limited availability of critical resources. This
project, which trains a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, tests the hypothesis that
displaced individuals regain control and enact resilience by engaging in routine
activities. The importance of routine in helping people structure their daily
lives, impart a sense of control and normalcy, and weather day-to-day stressors
has been noted across research settings. Therefore, understanding the role of
Routinized Social Practices (RSPs) on well-being is critical for developing
programs that may improve long-term health outcomes among vulnerable populations
affected by displacement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-sited research will
be conducted among vulnerable populations consisting of individuals negotiating
displacement in the context of precarity. These populations face different
specific contexts leading to displacement, opening the opportunity to discern
both specific and general ways that RSPs may affect health and well-being.
Specifically, this study will explore whether participation in RSPs is
associated with healthier profiles for biological markers related to stress
physiology and immune function. The researchers will also investigate the ways
in which RSPs may help vulnerable individuals to maintain livable lives and
negotiate their vulnerability following temporary residence in novel
communities. The researchers will conduct surveys, collect information on RSPs,
sources of stress, and lived experiences, and gather data on stress markers
(cortisol, Epstein-Barr virus antibody levels, and blood pressure). Findings
from this research will provide insights into the role of routine action in
health and stress mediation by examining the extent to which RSPs make everyday
life structured and regulated in transitional residential
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.