* 1948163
* Interactions between phytoplankton and bacterioplankton mediated by volatile organic compounds
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Stephen Giovannoni, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 684,996.00

Communication amongst plants and animals often occurs through molecules that
readily evaporate at normal temperatures, called volatile organic compounds
(VOCs). Some VOCs that are produced in the ocean and then enter the atmosphere
as gases have been seen to play an important role in climate. Since marine
microbes both produce and consume these compounds they affect the concentration
of VOCs in the surface ocean. The investigators found that as much as 20% of the
carbon resulting from photosynthesis leaked out of microscopic plants in the
form of VOCs. These molecules were then used by bacteria as a source of carbon
and energy. This suggests that VOCs may play a more important role in the flow
of carbon in the marine environment than previously thought. This project
examines how microscopic plants and bacteria produce and consume different VOCs.
It supports professional development training workshops for Oregon high school
teachers from rural areas in OSU’s Science &amp; Math Investigative Learning
Experiences (SMILE) program. SMILE’s mission is to close the achievement gap for
underserved students by increasing their STEM-content knowledge, preparing them
to succeed in higher education, and inspiring them to pursue STEM careers. This
project also contributes to three workshops per year, training teachers and
engaging students with hands-on learning activities on the topic of Carbon
Cycling by Marine Microorganisms such as “Clouds in a Bottle”. One graduate
student, one post-doctoral scholar, and at least six undergraduate researchers
are being trained by participating in research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field observations suggest that volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) produced by phytoplankton are either rapidly consumed by bacterioplankton
in the surface ocean or emitted into the atmosphere. VOCs are an understudied
path for carbon transfer in microbial food webs throughout sunlit marine
ecosystems because these compounds require specialized detection methods. Using
a new system to study VOCs in suspensions of live plankton cells, 20% of
photosynthetic carbon fixation was seen to be transferred as VOCs from a diatom
to SAR11 bacterioplankton in co-cultures. Many of these transferred VOC
compounds were not known to be growth substrates for bacterioplankton. Both the
magnitude and complexity of the observed VOC transfer were surprising. This
project extends these observations to a larger set of phytoplankton and
bacterioplankton through controlled studies of cultures, co-cultures, and
mesocosms. VOC are detected via proton transfer reaction time-of-flight mass
spectrometry and isotopic labeling is used to measure the impact of VOC exchange
on rates of photosynthesis and bacterial production. VOC production by
phytoplankton is measured in response to nutrient-driven variation in growth
rates, and over day-night cycles to discern the relationship of VOC production
to photosynthetic metabolism and other cellular processes. These experiments
enable a better understanding of field observations, in which bacterial
consumption of VOCs can appear to significantly outpace production, while
temporal variability in VOC production across daily to seasonal scales can cause
VOCs to accumulate transiently to pM-nM concentrations in the surface ocean.
This project contributes to close the significant gap in knowledge about the
range and quantity of VOCs produced by phytoplankton, and about the roles played
by these compounds in phytoplankton metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.