* 1948953
* Submesoscale instabilities in the ocean bottom boundary layer: A new pathway for energy dissipation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Jacob Wenegrat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 382,681.00

One of the long standing questions in physical oceanography is how the energy
input to the ocean circulation is eventually dissipated, a problem with far-
reaching implications for both our basic understanding of ocean circulation and
for developing accurate ocean models. Recently it has been suggested that
instabilities in the bottom layer and topographic wakes provide an important
source of turbulent mixing, however the dynamics and energetics of these
instabilities remain largely unexplored. At relatively small scales, where the
rotation of the Earth is no longer the dominant factor, called submesoscales,
instabilities in the ocean bottom layer modify the extraction, and dissipation
of energy from the flow, and hence may alter classic conceptions of bottom
turbulence. This research will use theory and idealized high-resolution
numerical models to determine how submesoscale instabilities near the bottom,
over and downstream of topography, modify turbulent mixing. These instabilities
are believed to be common feature near the bottom, but are poorly understood in
this setting relative to the surface layers. Likewise, these processes are
currently absent in most large-scale ocean models, underscoring the need to
develop a quantitative understanding of their impact and dependence on
controlling parameters. This understanding is central to problems such as how
dense water is brought to the surface in the abyssal overturning circulation,
and the exchange of nutrients and other biogeochemical tracers between the
bottom and interior layers. Results of this work will improve our understanding,
and eventual parameterization, of dynamics along topography, and in particular
how these boundary layer processes modify the larger-scale ocean circulation and
energetics. This project will also enable the training of a postdoctoral
researcher, and support the establishment of the initial research group of a
junior faculty member.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results suggest that
submesoscale instabilities in the bottom boundary layer (BBL) open a new pathway
for dissipating kinetic energy, and further modify the turbulent mixing of
buoyancy near topography, believed to be a key aspect of how dense water is
brought back to the surface in the abyssal overturning circulation. These
results suggest that classic conceptions of how flow-topography interaction
generates turbulence are incomplete, and the role of submesoscale instabilities
needs to be considered. This project will investigate the energetics of
baroclinic, symmetric, and centrifugal instabilities generated by flow along
topography. Large-Eddy Simulation (LES) will be used to examine how these
instabilities modify the partitioning and flux of energy between eddy and mean
kinetic and potential energy terms, and the irreversible dissipation of kinetic
energy and mixing of buoyancy. Reynolds-averaged simulations with variable
topography will also be used, in conjunction with the LES, to determine how the
upstream BBL evolution influences the energetics of topographic wakes. This work
will provide a more complete description of the physical processes, and
parameter dependencies, which determine how submesoscale instabilities affect
the energetics of the ocean circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.