* 1948997
* Collaborative Research: OpenTopography - A Cyberinfrastructure Facility for Advancing Geoscience Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Viswanath Nandigam, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,536,243.00

This project will continue support and development of the OpenTopography
cyberinfrastructure platform that provides web-based access to high resolution
topography from airborne light detection and ranging (lidar), terrestrial laser
scanning, radar, and photogrammetry at a range of scales in support of surface
Earth process research, training, and education. The availability of high
resolution digital topographic data and shallow water bathymetric data has been
revolutionary for Earth and environmental sciences and engineering, contributing
to the study of Earth surface processes (e.g., earthquakes and volcanos,
landslides, riverine sediment transport), vegetation dynamics, and human
modification of the Earth's surface. This project will enhance access to data
and processing tools that improve efficiency and economic competitiveness, in
addition to continuing to facilitate the use of OpenTopography resources in
K-12, undergraduate, and graduate STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
community-focused OpenTopography data facility will continue to grow the amount
of high resolution topography data available to the community and expand data
access pathways and processing tools, while also strengthening interoperability
and ensuring scalability via cloud and high performance computing in order to
meet the growing demands of the Earth science research and education community.
OpenTopography will also continue its education and training efforts by
conducting workshops and training courses along with building supporting tools
like computational notebooks and reproducible workflows. These computations and
analyses will support academic, educational, and applied use and reuse of the
OpenTopography data holdings. Detailed usage metrics will be captured to
demonstrate the impact of the resource and return on investment of the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Geoinformatics
and the Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics programs in the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.