* 1948624
* Collaborative Research: Forced drivers of trends in ocean biogeochemistry: Volcanos and atmospheric carbon dioxide
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Galen McKinley, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2024
* USD 348,445.00

The world’s oceans play an important role in the global carbon and oxygen
cycles. In addition to their importance in the natural cycling of carbon, the
oceans have absorbed approximately 40% of the carbon dioxide that has been
emitted by fossil fuel burning. Understanding the processes that cause spatial
and temporal variations of ocean carbon and oxygen concentrations is critical to
predicting how these ocean cycles will develop into the future. Recent
measurement-based estimates and computer models agree that ocean carbon uptake
increased significantly in the early 1990s and then slowed over the rest of the
decade. Observations and models also indicate significant oxygen variations. One
possible driver of these patterns that has not been explored is the influence of
large volcanic eruptions, specifically Mount Pinatubo in 1991. With the
eruption, small particles were forced to great altitude where they spread
through the upper atmosphere, reflected sunlight back to space, and led to a
temporary cooling of global climate. This project will explore how this
temporary cooling influenced ocean circulation, and air-sea carbon and oxygen
exchange, by comparing Earth system model simulations that do and do not include
the effects of Mt. Pinatubo’s eruption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the
framework of NCAR’s Community Earth System Model Large Ensemble (CESM-LE)
effort, the team will complete a new experiment that explicitly excludes forcing
from Mt. Pinatubo (CESM-LE-NoVolc). By difference from the existing CESM-LE that
includes all forcing, the investigators will directly identify the effects of
Mt. Pinatubo and put these effects in context with observed carbon and oxygen
change. Specifically, they propose to address two hypotheses:
&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 1: Trends in surface fluxes and interior distributions of
anthropogenic carbon and oxygen since the 1990s have been significantly impacted
by Mt. Pinatubo.&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 2: After the initial uptake anomaly due to
Mt. Pinatubo, thermocline anomalies that are cool and anomalously high in
tracers return to the surface. These anomalies suppress air- to-sea fluxes for
up to a decade after the eruption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work has also
indicated that variability in the growth rate of atmospheric carbon dioxide has
a first-order effect on variability of ocean carbon uptake. The investigators
will also do preliminary analysis using one new run of the CESM ocean-ice
hindcast and a stratified analysis of CMIP6 models to further explore this
issue. Specifically, they propose a third hypothesis: &lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis 3:
By including the seasonal cycle and latitudinal distribution of atmospheric
carbon dioxide in simulations, variability of the globally integrated air-sea
carbon flux is increased and becomes more comparable to observationally-based
estimates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By creating CESM-LE-NoVolc, this work will
allow for investigation of the forced impact of Mt. Pinatubo on a wide range of
ocean biogeochemical and physical processes. Model runs will be made easily
available under the CESM-LE project umbrella. Under this research project,
graduate and undergraduate research will be supported. The team will continue to
our long-standing efforts to attract underrepresented students to science, and
to explain ocean and carbon cycle science to the general public and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.