* 1948882
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mental Health and Recidivism Rates in American Jails
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Philippe Bourgois, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 10,584.00

America's largest jails are also the country's largest providers of
institutional mental health care. The overrepresentation of mental illness in
jails has been a persistent challenge for public officials, even as major cities
have pursued reforms to make jails more therapeutic and reduce their size.
Jails, like prisons, have both punitive and custodial functions; in fact, jail
and prison inmates are the only group in the United States who have a
constitutional right to health care. Since they primarily confine those who are
being tried in court, jails affect a large population and are dynamically
related to wider processes of crime, police, and the law. Amidst that rapidly
changing population, however, people diagnosed with serious mental illness are
incarcerated longer and are more likely to be reincarcerated upon their release.
Moreover, despite efforts by some counties to reduce the size of their jails,
many of these counties have witnessed an increase in the rates of mental illness
in their jails. Understanding the factors causing this trend is critical to
guide criminal justice and mental health practice. In addition to providing
funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project would enhance
scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to officials and
stakeholder groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in the
New York City and Los Angeles jail systems. These are not only two of the
largest systems in the county, but also two that have undergone major reforms in
recent years. Legal and political pressure at both sites has sparked public
debate about the adequacy of the jails to meet the needs of those incarcerated
as well as overall jail size. However, while New York has witnessed a
significant decline in its jail population, Los Angeles has achieved only modest
declines. The investigators, who have done ethnographic research at both sites
and are situated in clinical and social scientific training programs, are
particularly well suited to study this simultaneously clinical, legal, political
and cultural phenomenon. In examining the meaning of mental health care in these
institutions, the investigators will focus their ethnographic attention on jail
clinical teams. Complementing an analysis of how courts have arbitrated the
constitutional right to jail care, the investigators will observe how clinicians
interpret and enact that mandate in practice. The study will involve
institutional ethnography, including participant observation, semi-structured
interviews, and mapping, and legal analysis of public oversight hearings. They
will also explore what factors influence diagnosis and treatment in these
settings, as well as how social workers identify resources for inmates upon
their release. These ethnographic findings will offer guidance to mental health
advocates and clinicians, jail administrators and policy makers regarding the
context-dependent variables that shape institutional care delivery and the
capacity of counties to respond to serious mental
illness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.