* 1948622
* Using novel ecosystem-scale experiments to quantify drivers of reef productivity in a heavily impacted coastal ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jacob Allgeier, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 675,164.00

Tropical coastal marine ecosystems (e.g., coral reefs, seagrass beds, and
mangroves) are among the most productive ecosystems in the world providing
important services, such as fisheries, to millions of people. Despite this, they
are also among the most impaired ecosystems, necessitating improved
understanding of the mechanisms that underpin their productivity. This project
seeks to understand the key factors that drive ecosystem production in a
degraded coastal ecosystem in Haiti using artificial reefs. Past research has
shown that artificial reefs have substantial potential to increase the number
and diversity of plants and animals, but the extent to which this can be
achieved at scales relevant to society remains unknown. This project is
constructing clusters of artificial reefs to test how (1) spatial arrangement
and (2) fishing pressure (fished/not fished) influence the productivity of
seagrass, coral, and fish over the course of four years. The fishing treatment
is being implemented through collaborations with local fishers whereby small-
scale no-take zones are created around three of the six artificial reef
clusters. A unique aspect of the research is that it capitalizes on the
experimental design to simultaneously achieve an important conservation
initiative, while testing ecological theory. Community engagement and outreach
are integrated directly into the research and local fishers are being surveyed
to assess the extent to which fishing occurred on any of the artificial reefs.
This research represents a novel effort to integrate experimentation with
cutting-edge community-based conservation initiatives in one of the most
impoverished regions of the world. The project is improving strategies for
conservation and reef management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the factors
that regulate the structure and function of ecosystems is a fundamental
challenge for ecological theory and applied science. This challenge is often
framed within the context of Top-Down (TD) versus Bottom-Up (BU) regulation, but
the extent to which this framework can predict processes in complex, real-world
ecosystems is not fully understood. It is now widely recognized that TD/BU
factors do not act in isolation. For example, in many ecosystems, consumers
contribute to both TD (via consumption) and BU (via excretion) pathways.
Environmental factors, including human-induced change, can further alter the
nature of these interactions. Quantifying the strength of TD and BU pathways and
the extent to which they regulate the structure and function in highly dynamic
ecosystems requires an experimental system that is sufficiently tractable that
all its components can be quantified, while still being representative of real
ecosystems. To address this challenge, this research project creates a unique
ecosystem-scale artificial reef (AR) experiment in Haiti to test how two factors
(AR structure, and fishing pressure) alter the strength of independent and
interactive TD and BU pathways to regulate the structure and function of real-
world reef ecosystems. Over the course of four years, the production of seagrass
(surrounding the ARs), coral (transplanted onto the ARs), and fish (in and
around the ARs) is being measured, providing a quantitative assessment of
ecosystem-level production across the two treatments. Linear and structural
equation models are used to measure the independent and interactive strengths TD
and BU pathways, and to identify the suite of directional relationships between
each trophic level that best predict overall ecosystem production. Harnessing
the ability to use ecosystem-scale experiments and quantify production across
all trophic levels in a highly complex, real-world system enables an
unprecedented test of TD/BU theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.