* 1948283
* Collaborative Research: The importance of particle disaggregation on biogeochemical flux predictions
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Matthew Rau, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 05/31/2023
* USD 414,530.00

Collaborative Research: The importance of particle disaggregation on
biogeochemical flux predictions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle settling is one of
the major ways that material in surface waters reaches the deep ocean.
Particulate matter in the open ocean consists primarily of organic material from
plankton and other biological detritus, which can readily aggregate to form
large flocs. A combination of physical, chemical, and biological processes
transforms these flocs as they settle, redistributing material throughout the
water column and potentially sequestering elements such as carbon in the deep
ocean. The impact of these transformations is affected by the sinking speed of
these flocs, with larger and denser particles settling faster than smaller,
less-dense ones. One of the key questions facing oceanographers today is what
controls particle settling speed (for example, particle size, shape, and
density). There is considerable evidence that particles readily break apart as
they settle, decreasing their average size and settling speed, but it is not yet
understood what conditions cause these disaggregation events. This work will
measure the breakup characteristics of organic settling particles both in the
laboratory and at sea to quantify the importance of these breakup processes
relative to particle transport. The work will be done at the Pennsylvania State
University in collaboration with the University of Georgia to target the
development of future marine particle disaggregation models for use by the
oceanographic community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will play an
important role in determining the importance of disaggregation on the vertical
transport of particulate matter in the ocean. The project will quantify the
breakup of organic marine aggregates due to fluid forces caused by turbulence or
swimming organisms. Phytoplankton will be cultured and formed into aggregates in
the lab prior to disaggregation using calibrated turbulence. The size, shape,
and structure of these aggregates before and after breakup will be quantified
using high-speed visualization and holographic imaging. In addition to the
laboratory measurements, a deployable instrument that can disrupt particles in-
situ and measure their size and shape will be built and deployed in the North
Atlantic during the spring bloom of phytoplankton. Detailed measurements of
particle concentrations, breakup characteristics, organic content, and ambient
turbulence as a function of depth in the water column will be collected. This
work will represent the first study of marine aggregate breakup in-situ.
Specifically, the project will clarify: (1) under what conditions disaggregation
is important, (2) how strong different types of natural marine aggregates are
and how their strength varies with size, composition, and morphology, and (3)
how aggregate size, composition, and structure influences the distribution of
its breakup mass. This project will advance the career of a doctoral student and
engage numerous undergraduate researchers with the field of ocean
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.