* 1948599
* Collaborative Research: Mesoscale Drivers of Oxygen in the Tropical Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Mark Merrifield, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2024
* USD 495,164.00

The tropical Pacific Ocean is home to rich marine biodiversity and abundant
fisheries. It is also the most oxygen-deficient basin in the world, hosting the
world’s largest oxygen minimum zones (OMZs). The northern and southern tropical
Pacific OMZs are separated by oxygen-rich waters along the equator that provide
important habitable space for open ocean fisheries whose feeding behavior is
limited by the depth at which oxygen levels decrease below uninhabitable
thresholds. Characterizing the processes that control the depth of this low
oxygen threshold is important to understanding ecosystem dynamics and to
predicting and managing fisheries in this region. The primary goal for this
project is to understand the role of regional physical processes in setting the
3-dimensional structure of oxygen in the equatorial Pacific and its changes on
seasonal and interannual time scales. The investigators will use a combination
of computer models and existing observations to describe the role that regional
circulation patterns play in maintaining the volume and oxygen content of the
Pacific OMZs. These include global models of ocean circulation and biological
and chemical processes controlling the OMZ, as well as models that focus on
regional scale features of ocean circulation (such as eddies) and that are
informed by observations. The oceanic oxygen cycle integrates physical,
biological, and chemical phenomena, making it an ideal curriculum topic for
applying Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) into K-12 classrooms. In this
project, the investigators will work closely with NGSS early implementers from
the local school districts to introduce this project’s research questions,
knowledge, and relevant data and visualization tools into the lesson plans,
exposing students and teachers directly to the scientific process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major knowledge gap concerns the role of the
equatorial current system (ECS) and tropical instability vortices (TIVs) in
ventilating the OMZs, and the extent to which oxygen supply by these ventilation
pathways is compensated by their effects on nutrient transport, productivity,
and respiration rates, motivating the following questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. How
does the equatorial current system and its interaction with mesoscale eddies
modulate the boundaries and ventilation of the OMZs? &lt;br/&gt;2. What governs
the seasonal to interannual variability of OMZ ventilation in this region?
&lt;br/&gt;3. Through what physical and biogeochemical mechanisms do TIVs
influence equatorial Pacific oxygen? &lt;br/&gt;A central hypothesis for this
proposal is that lateral transport by the Equatorial Undercurrent and TIV-
mediated fluxes play a dominant role in setting the mean oxygen structure and
variability of the upper equatorial Pacific. These questions will be examined
using a hierarchy of models of various configurations, including an eddy
resolving and coarse global model, an eddy resolving data-assimilating regional
model of the tropical Pacific, and Lagrangian analysis. The work is expected to
i) elucidate the mechanisms coupling oxygen to ocean circulation and climate
variability in the tropical Pacific, ii) inform drivers of OMZ biases in models,
and iii) guide observing needs including the on-going Tropical Pacific Observing
System (TPOS 2020) efforts and future deployments of biogeochemical (BGC) Argo
floats in this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.