* 1949632
* CRII: SaTC: Vetting and Improving the Usage of Trusted Execution Environments for Authentication in Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 08/12/2019,12/31/2021
* Antonio Bianchi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 12/31/2021
* USD 174,972.00

In mobile devices, authentication protocols are used to ensure that users'
intentions are communicated untampered to the applications' backend servers.
Unfortunately, traditional authentication protocols do not defend against "root-
attackers," i.e., attackers able to fully compromise the main operating system
of a victim's device. Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs), specific hardware
components available in modern mobile devices, can be used to mitigate this
threat, since they run a separate, smaller codebase than the main operating
system. This project explores how it is possible to use TEEs to implement "root-
resilient" authentication protocols, i.e., authentication protocols effective
against root-attackers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is divided into three
main tasks. The first task consists in performing a comprehensive study of the
existing Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) that developers of mobile
apps can use to interact with TEEs. This study will concentrate on understanding
if and how these APIs can be used to implement root-resilient authentication
protocols. The second task focuses on developing an automated analysis system
that will be used to perform a large-scale study assessing the security of TEE-
based authentication protocols implemented by existing applications. The third
task consists of implementing an authentication framework helping developers in
using TEEs for authentication purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the
potential to improve the security of millions of mobile device users by enabling
root-resilient authentication in thousands of mobile application programs. By
performing a large-scale analysis of such mobile "apps", this project will
identify weaknesses in existing programs. Additionally, the authentication
framework developed by this project could potentially allow thousands of
developers to implement root-resilient authentication protocols with reduced
effort. The developed software, techniques, and findings will be disseminated by
releasing the source code of the implemented software, publishing academic
articles, and presenting results at academic
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, produced software and data will
also be shared on a dedicated website
(http://homepage.divms.uiowa.edu/~bianch/mobiletees/). After project completion,
produced software and data will be available for at least three
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.