* 1949912
* REU Site:  iCER ACRES: iCER Advanced Computational Research Experience for Students
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Arjun Krishnan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2024
* USD 401,234.00

The Advanced Computational Research Experiences at Michigan State University
offers undergraduate students from a wide variety of backgrounds the opportunity
to conduct cutting-edge research in computational and data science. In addition
to research, students participate in a variety of technical training activities.
Such activities include Python programming, data analysis and visualization,
supercomputing, and scientific software development. The program also provides a
variety of professional development activities, targeting presentation skills,
technical writing, and discussions relating to graduate school and a wide range
of career opportunities. This ten-week summer program trains students in
computational and data science, gives them the freedom to explore a range of
subject areas and career paths, and provides research opportunities to students
from under-represented groups in STEM and from non-research-intensive colleges
and universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Advanced Computational Research
Experiences Research Experience for Undergraduates (ACRES REU) at Michigan State
University (MSU) offers students the opportunity to conduct cutting-edge
research in computational and data science under the supervision of faculty who
are recognized experts in their disciplines. This 10-week summer residential
program includes MSU faculty from a wide variety of STEM fields whose research
focuses on algorithms pertaining to, and applications of, computational modeling
and data science. In addition, peer- and near-peer mentoring, professional
development, and technical training are key components of the program. One of
the strengths of this REU site lies in the rich interdisciplinary collaborative
research environment fostered between student teams consisting of pairs of REU
students, their mentors who have expertise in conducting research in
computational science, data science, and high-performance computing, and
technical trainers. These elements combine to empower undergraduates to conduct
meaningful original research focused on the development and enhancement of
algorithms for computational modeling and data science, as well as the
application of these algorithms to cutting-edge applications in a wide range of
STEM fields. In addition, this project will broaden the participation of
underrepresented populations in STEM research. Furthermore, it will provide
early exposure to high performance computing to students from institutions with
limited access to HPC resources, especially women and other underrepresented
groups, and will motivate students to pursue careers in computational
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.