* 1949622
* Isotopic Analysis to Understand Long Term Human Movement
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Jason Kirk, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 236,616.00

Researchers wish to understand mobility and interaction at a site from antiquity
that offers a rare opportunity to scientifically study changes over time in a
ritual space and the potential impact of pilgrimage on regional interactions and
societal stability. This research aims to produce a significantly more detailed
and nuanced understanding of interaction over time at this religious site to
address topics such as from where the sacrificial animals and offerings were
coming, and how this sanctuary may have inspired and impacted the later
development of interregional communal cult places. Archaeology is well placed to
provide answers to these questions through strontium isotope analysis and
radiocarbon analysis of heavily burnt animal bones, as well as chemical and
petrographical analyses of ceramics to systematically examine the diversity of
potential origins of offerings left at the shrine. An important result will be
the mapping of strontium isotopes across the broader region, by far the most
extensive and systematic to be done in the area. This research will contribute
valuable and versatile strontium isotope datasets reflecting a commitment to
international scientific pursuits. The project is also committed to supporting
female scientists. Women will carry out the analysis of the animal bones, the
ceramics, and a significant portion of strontium isotope analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of researchers will analyze the strontium taken
from a selection of heavily burnt animal bones from the sheep and goats
sacrificed at the site. They will also do radiocarbon dating on these bones to
obtain an absolute date. Strontium isotope analysis is widely applied in
paleomobility and provenance studies because plants, animals, and people
utilizing resources from geologic units of different ages have distinct
strontium isotopic compositions. Because these different geologic units are
spread over the landscape, it is possible to define the strontium signature of a
particular location; therefore, the interaction of people and animals between
geographically separate sites can be constrained. In addition, the chemical and
petrographical analyses on a selection of ceramics from the site will shed light
on their origins, thus contributing to the reconstruction of the sanctuaryâ€™s
network and potential fluctuations through time. The resulting products will
include the creation of a strontium isotope map of the larger region, and a
geological database that characterizes regional clay sources. Pilgrimage has
often been studied using primarily textual evidence, but archaeological evidence
is being incorporated more and more, allowing one to understand these journeys
in a more nuanced way. Some results which may be gleaned about pilgrimage from
the archaeology include evidence for affirmation of social identities,
participation in economic exchange, and incorporation of feasting or other
performative aspects, indicating behavior beyond the strictly religious sphere.
The proposed project will be highly interdisciplinary in nature, with an aim of
answering fundamental humanistic questions about the ancient past using
archaeometric and geological techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.