* 1949649
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: BaitBuster 2.0: Keeping Users Away From Clickbait
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Naeemul Hassan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2024
* USD 244,401.00

Social media sites such as Facebook are popular platforms for spreading
clickbait, links with misleading titles that do not deliver on their promises.
Not only does clickbait waste users' time, it often directs users to phishing
sites and sites containing spyware and malware. A large number of users fall
victim to scams on social media, including those spread through clickbait, due
to both a lack of awareness and a lack of appropriate warnings on social media
platforms. These users are vulnerable to identity theft, online hacking, and the
exposure of sensitive information to adversaries. Thus, it is critical to limit
the impact of clickbait on users' security. This project is developing novel
techniques to detect various forms of clickbait, especially video-based
clickbait, and study user behavior on social media to design effective warning
systems. The findings from this research are being incorporated into an open-
source browser extension called Baitbuster 2.0, building on the original
Baitbuster tool for detecting text-based clickbait. To enhance the impact of
this tool, the researchers will design new training methods to raise security
awareness and help users avoid clickbait in social media. The project also aims
to engage underrepresented groups via outreach efforts and through developing
videos to encourage women to consider cybersecurity as a
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting clickbait is a major challenge,
particularly as video becomes a more prominent form of media online, undermining
efforts to detect misleading text. To address this challenge, the research team
will take an integrated approach examining the effects of techniques used to
attract clicks from users, presentation and distribution of clickbait,
personalization of clickbait through crawling users’ personal information (i.e.,
targeted clickbait), automatic generation of face-swapping clickbait, and risk
perceptions and security awareness of users. As a first step, the researchers
are collecting and analyzing clickbait datasets to explore ways of identifying
clickbait on social media. Using these datasets, they are developing novel
applications of state-of-the-art machine learning techniques such as optical
character recognition and video understanding to automatically identify video
clickbait. In another thrust of this project, the researchers are studying
users' clicking behavior and corresponding security mental models to better
understand their vulnerability to clickbait and examine the effects of a wide
range of social engineering techniques used to attract clicks from users. The
findings are being used to design warning systems, which will be integrated into
BaitBuster 2.0, to warn users intelligently and effectively to avoid clickbait.
Finally, the usability and efficacy of the warning system and BaitBuster 2.0 are
being evaluated through in-depth user studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.