* 1949858
* SG: Eco-evolution in a concrete jungle: how rapid urbanization affects host-parasite interactions in the Galapagos Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Sarah Knutie, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 272,632.00

Human population size is increasing exponentially and, in turn, the urban
environment is one of the few ecosystems that is rapidly expanding. A recent
example of urbanization is in the Galapagos Islands, which is home to the iconic
Darwin’s finches. The Galapagos currently hosts 225,000 tourists each year and
is home to over 21,300 permanent residents. Consequently, humans have altered
the natural habitat and introduced parasites to the Galapagos, such as a
parasitic nest fly (Philornis downsi), which causes significant mortality to
baby finches. However, recent work shows that small ground finches (Geospiza
fuliginosa; a species of Darwin’s finch) in urban areas are healthier and less
affected by the parasite compared to finches in non-urban areas, which suggests
that birds are better defended against the parasite in urban areas. The goal of
the research is to determine why Darwin’s finches in urban areas are less
affected by the parasitic nest fly than finches in non-urban areas. The research
will first explore what specific immune responses are being produced by the
urban finches to lower their parasite burden. The work will then determine
whether these heightened immune responses are driven by: 1) the environment,
such as through urban food supplementation that could increase allocated energy
to immunity, or 2) heritable genetic changes to the immune system within the
urban population. Overall, the research seeks to understand bird-parasite
interactions in response to urbanization by identifying the potential
environmental or evolutionary basis of immunity to a novel parasite in a novel
environment. The proposed work will also include broader impacts from a local to
international scale through the development of in-class K-12 activities, public
presentations, and online videos related to the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use a series of experimental
field studies to determine the immunological changes potentially occurring in
Darwin’s finches in response to urbanization and whether these changes are
driven by environmental conditions or adaptive evolution. First, the work will
determine what mechanisms of immunity differ between urban and non-urban finches
by experimentally manipulating the parasite and characterizing gene expression
of candidate immune genes in the finches across locations. Second, the research
will determine whether environmental factors, such as increased food
availability, in the urban area are driving differences in finch immunity by
experimentally supplementing urban and non-urban finches with human-based food,
then determining finch immunity and parasite burden. Lastly, the research will
determine whether urban finches have adaptively evolved immunity to the parasite
using a common garden experiment, whereby urban and non-urban finch young will
be cross fostered in their original or new area, then their immunity and
parasite burden will be quantified. The Galapagos system is powerful to address
fundamental questions in urban eco-evolution because of the significant amount
of established groundwork, the ability to perform experiments in the field, and
the relatively recent urbanization of the islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is co-funded by the Evolutionary Processes cluster in the Division of
Environmental Biology and the Symbiosis, Defense and Self-recognition Program in
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.