* 1949958
* Collaborative Research: LTREB Renewal: Soil Warming and Forest Ecosystem Feedbacks to the Climate System
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Serita Frey, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2025
* USD 299,009.00

Soils are the largest repository of carbon (as organic matter) in the
terrestrial biosphere. If this stored soil carbon is transferred to the
atmosphere by a warming-induced acceleration of organic matter decomposition, it
will result in a self-reinforcing (positive) feedback to the global environment.
Despite the potential importance of this soil feedback, there is incomplete
understanding of the mechanisms that affect the temperature response of organic
matter decomposition. This project is quantifying the soil and ecosystem-level
responses to nearly three decades of experimental soil warming and documenting
the magnitude of soil carbon feedback to global environmental processes.
Extensive training of undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers will be another feature of this project. Data analysis from the
study will also be incorporated into courses taught by the project leaders, and
will be used to refine terrestrial ecosystem model
projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is investigating the mechanisms
underlying feedback from forest ecosystems to the climate system resulting from
more than two decades of in situ soil warming. Specifically, we are quantifying
the biogeochemical and microbial responses to chronic soil warming, with an
emphasis on soil organic matter (SOM) dynamics. This research is testing the
hypothesis that long-term warming causes cycles of SOM decay punctuated by
periods of structural and functional changes in the soil microbial community.
Three ongoing warming experiments at the Harvard Forest Long-term Ecological
Research (LTER) site have experienced 5 degrees C above ambient soil
temperatures for 13, 16 and 28 years. Together, these sites represent a dynamic
time-series based on a common perturbation in a single ecosystem type. Research
activities to complete the decadal plan of this LTREB project are organized
around four targeted research questions which are being addressed through (1)
continuation of core data measurements; (2) temperature manipulations both in
situ and under laboratory conditions to examine the underlying mechanistic basis
for the observed pattern of temporal non-linearity in the soil respiration
response to long-term warming; (3) measurements of SOM chemistry and microbial
community dynamics to determine if long-term warming enables and accelerates
decay of recalcitrant soil carbon due to a fundamental shift in the structure
and/or function of the microbial community; (4) measurements of N mineralization
and above-ground carbon storage to determine if long-term warming will continue
to accelerate the N cycle and stimulate carbon storage in trees; and (5) data
integration activities, including cross-site data syntheses and microbial trait-
based and ecosystem modeling efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.