* 1949493
* Collaborative Research: Middle School Teacher and Student's Experiences with Artificial Intelligence via Computational Cameras
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Dawn Robinson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 702,826.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) technology applied to images and video is
transforming society with broad applications to many social and economic
sectors. To develop a citizenry that will participate in this technological
revolution, it is essential to develop learning experiences for K-12 learners on
the foundations of AI literacy in order to adequately prepare the workforce of
the future. Supporting the teaching of AI concepts in the K-12 curriculum
requires integrating knowledge from multiple disciplines. This project will
develop and implement technology-infused summer workshops for middle school
students in grades 6-8 in the areas of computer vision and machine learning
through a program called ImageSTEM. The program uses computational cameras to
integrate computer science, math and design thinking in teaching visual AI
concepts while also drawing inspiration from media arts to enhance science
learning experiences. Learning technology modules to be developed include color
and lighting for physics-based vision to understand the interface between the
physical world and image sensing; image classification pipelines that teach the
basics of visual feature extraction, machine learning classification, and the
collection and training of data; and use of machine learning for synthetically-
generated visual media. Underrepresented students, including predominantly
Hispanic/Latino students from Phoenix, Arizona and African-American students
from a rural area in Georgia, will gain understanding and explore future careers
in AI and STEM. The ImageSTEM program will disseminate knowledge and research
findings on necessary skills and factors that underlie image-based visual AI
technology for future STEM workforce development in industry, education,
transportation, and healthcare. This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will
investigate the design and deployment of computational camera technology into
the science and math curriculum of grades 6-8. Project objectives include (1)
conducting six workshops across the two collaborating institutions of Arizona
State University and the University of Georgia, co-creating the curricular
material for the workshops alongside 36 middle school teachers, (2) deploying
and testing in both the on-site workshops as well as in teachers’ classrooms
during the academic school year, (3) gathering evidence to advance and deepen
the field's understanding of students' development of computer science knowledge
and practices in the areas of computer vision, machine learning, and artificial
intelligence, and (4) assessing the impact of these experiences on the adoption
and strengthening of STEM identities of teachers and students during the year
after participation in the workshops. Research into the cognitive skills,
scientific identity, and workforce development will be conducted for teachers
and students participating in the ImageSTEM program using a mixed-methods
approach. Affect control theory-based survey instruments, semi-structured
interviews, teacher reflections, and researcher observations will be used to
assess changes in STEM identities and STEM educational and career aspirations.
The project outcomes include deployment of the workshop lessons into the middle
school curriculum by teachers during the academic year, and contributions to
teachers’ knowledge of visual AI technology, and how students learn and engage
in problem-solving activities through visual AI applications. The project team
will disseminate learning modules based on findings in the workshops and
research activities through online and multimedia formats to the broader
community of schools and teachers for greater impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.