* 1949833
* Improving Secondary Physics, Mathematics, Chemistry, and Computer Science Teacher Preparation Through a Sequence of Active Teaching Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* A. Marm Kilpatrick, Drake University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2025
* USD 791,498.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high-quality secondary STEM
education. It will do so by preparing science and mathematics teachers for
diverse classrooms that include students of color, students from low-income
families, emerging bilingual students, and/or students with special needs. Many
students from these groups have less access to grade-appropriate assignments,
quality instruction, deep engagement, and high expectations from teachers. A
growing body of evidence suggests that active teaching improves student learning
outcomes, student engagement, and student attitudes. Thus, this project aims to
prepare STEM teachers who can teach STEM topics in equitable, rigorous, and
active ways. The project design is expected to help preservice teachers: (i)
develop greater confidence in their abilities to teach college preparatory STEM
courses in engaging and active ways; (ii) gain the necessary content knowledge
for teaching physics, chemistry, mathematics or computer science; and (iii)
learn how to implement innovative strategies for teaching diverse populations of
students in culturally responsive ways. Preservice teachers in the project will
be supported during their first year of teaching via seminars and ongoing
mentorship. It is expected that these activities will help the new teachers
overcome challenges and continue to improve their instruction. The anticipated
outcome of this project is to prepare at least 24 highly qualified secondary
STEM teachers who will teach in high-need school districts throughout the
Midwest, thus partially addressing critical teacher shortages. Over time, this
project has the potential to improve secondary student learning outcomes by
addressing factors that contribute to learning opportunity gaps in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Drake University includes
partnerships with Des Moines Public Schools. The project will prepare, support,
and graduate at least 24 new physics, mathematics, chemistry, and computer
science teachers by embedding innovative, active learning teaching experiences
within their teacher preparation program and associated field-experiences in Des
Moines Public School district. The project's preservice teachers will include
both undergraduate STEM majors and STEM professionals with a STEM baccalaureate
degree. The preservice teachers will complete a coherent three-semester sequence
of active teaching experiences across a variety of settings within their
preparation programs. Throughout this progression, the project will assess
changes in preservice teachers' pedagogical content knowledge and confidence
levels for teaching. By prioritizing the critical role that specialized content
knowledge plays in supporting active teaching strategies, this project seeks to
understand how self-efficacy, pedagogical content knowledge, and teaching
effectiveness improve through experiences designed to target and grow new
teachersâ€™ knowledge using established quantitative and qualitative data
collections tools (e.g., STEBI; CoRe; RTOP). This project has the potential to
provide insight about the relationship between pedagogical content knowledge and
teaching effectiveness and how pedagogical content knowledge develops over time.
The project aims to use project activities to increase the level of active
learning in secondary and undergraduate STEM classrooms, as well as, the
engagement of underrepresented students in these STEM classrooms. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.