* 1949454
* Developing STEM Identity in Rural Audiences through Community-based Engineering Design
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Tameshia Baldwin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,401,591.00

This project will develop and study an innovative community-based engineering
education model to support science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) knowledge, identity, and career awareness of rural, economically
disadvantaged students. The project leverages strategic partnerships between
North Carolina State University, Edgecombe School District, and local industry
to create an Engineering Design and Exploration course. The course will engage
middle school students (grades 6 to 8) in authentic engineering design
experiences built around advanced manufacturing technologies and processes
utilized by local manufacturing facilities. In the course, students will
research, design, and build advanced manufacturing systems that simulate actual
industrial manufacturing processes. Students will be supported by mentoring from
undergraduate engineering students from underrepresented groups and by STEM
industry professionals at North Carolina State University and by STEM industry
professionals. This project will help prepare economically disadvantaged middle
school youth to more fully participate in STEM and career pathways by providing
technology-rich, hands-on STEM experiences in real-world contexts. These
experiences will also prepare students to research, design, and solve problems
in STEM contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine how an
engineering-focused community-based instructional model can help develop rural
students' interest in STEM. The team will use a quasi-experimental mixed-methods
embedded design to answer three research questions. 1) How and to what degree
does the engineering design-focused program impact students' disciplinary-based
knowledge and practices in STEM and career awareness? 2) How and to what degree
does the engineering design-focused program impact students' STEM interests,
STEM identity, and STEM self-efficacy? 3) How and to what degree does the
program impact teacher content and pedagogical knowledge and awareness of STEM
educational pathways and occupations? Research data to be collected include
student interviews, surveys, and artifacts created by students during the
course. Changes in students' content knowledge and career awareness will be
measured through state-wide science test scores, pre to post-surveys on STEM
knowledge and skills, and on a pre to post career awareness surveys. Interest in
STEM, STEM identity, and STEM self-efficacy will be determined through student
artifacts, observations, and focus groups. The team will also examine teacher
STEM knowledge, pedagogy, and STEM career awareness through pre to post surveys
and focus groups. Project evaluation will examine the overall achievement of
program goals and objectives. Project results will be disseminated widely at
national conferences, through submissions to refereed journals, and on Edgecombe
County public schools websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices that increase youth
motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of science, technology,
engineering, or mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.