* 1949873
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Governing Sustainability through Place-making
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* James Murphy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 13,446.00

This doctoral dissertation research project assesses the potential for
neighborhood initiatives to make cities more environmentally and socially
sustainable. It examines initiatives that aim to create, manage, and govern
cities in more sustainable ways through community bike-shares, renewable energy
cooperatives, etc. These initiatives are proliferating as cities play an
increasingly significant role in addressing global environmental issues. These
initiatives are significantly shaped by the places in which they emerge and are
engaged with and this research examines where and how local neighborhood
initiatives and governance processes shape transitions to urban sustainability.
The research focuses on ecodistrict planning initiatives where civic, private,
and government stakeholders collaborate to develop and test more environmentally
resilient and socially responsible mechanisms for delivering vital community
services. Project findings will be disseminated to scholars, policy makers, and
community members through academic and professional publications, reports, and
presentations. The project also provides support for the training of a doctoral
student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project asks three interrelated questions.
(1) What relationships, values, and practices characterize ecodistrict
governance, and how do these develop?; (2) How is the establishment of
ecodistricts impacted by these governance processes, and at what scales?; and
(3) How is the governance of ecodistricts related to regional sustainability
governance? Data will be collected using a mixed methods approach, including
participant observation, interviews, and review of archival documents and
analyze to explain the influence of various stakeholders to foster sustainable
development. The insights resulting from this research can inform economic and
infrastructural development, social equity, and environmental well-being of
cities in the United States and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.