* 1949200
* Resource Center: STEM Learning and Research (STELAR) Center - Supporting Research and Development of STEM and ICT Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Joyce Malyn-Smith, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 05/31/2024
* USD 3,863,801.00

The STEM Learning and Research (STELAR) Center, as the resource center for the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) Program,
will support current and prospective ITEST community members in the design and
research of innovations that ignite interest in and prepare PreK-12 youth for
future Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) and Information
Communication Technology (ICT) careers. STELAR will partner with other national
organizations to build a community of educational researchers and practitioners
whose collective efforts move the nation toward a diverse and technologically
literate workforce that is prepared to excel in STEM/ICT careers of the future.
Through a series of activities designed to promote collaboration and effective
dissemination, STELAR will support ITEST grantees as they advance knowledge and
practice in transformation-focused STEM education initiatives. STELAR's highly
targeted dissemination plan will bridge the research-to-practice cycle, and it
will increase awareness and use of findings from the ITEST program portfolio
among formal and informal STEM education professionals, industry and policy
stakeholders, and STEM education researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
approaches grounded in social learning theory and the theoretical construct of
communities of practice, the STELAR Center will support the goals of the ITEST
program by advancing innovative and transformative educational approaches that
prepare underrepresented and underserved youth for the STEM/ICT workforce of the
future. To build capacity among current and prospective ITEST awardees, STELAR
will convene expert knowledge generation groups, host regional and national
summits, and foster collaboration among other organizations dedicated to the
transformation of STEM education. To provide technical support for current and
prospective ITEST awardees, STELAR will launch a proposal development course and
sustain national and local communities of practice through informal online
gatherings and webinars. To disseminate results and materials related to the
ITEST program, STELAR will implement a strategic communications plan to raise
awareness and increase use of major, unique ITEST resources and findings. This
communications plan will target formal and informal STEM education
practitioners, industry and policy stakeholders, the STEM education research
community, potential ITEST PIs, and the public. To broaden participation, STELAR
will engage individuals and institutions currently underrepresented in the ITEST
portfolio. STELARâ€™s partners and advisors will ensure productive, synergistic
collaborations with national communities of STEM practitioners and stakeholders.
The external evaluation of STELAR will advance understanding of appropriate and
rigorous methods for evaluating resource centers, particularly the unique
application of capacity assessment tools, value-creation stories regarding the
value of the learning enabled by STELAR, and network analysis assessing the
impact of resource centers. This project is funded by the ITEST program, which
supports projects that build understandings of practices, program elements,
contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and
interest in STEM and ICT careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.