* 1949661
* SBIR Phase II:  Using Metal-Organic Framework Materials to Increase Sustainability of Indoor Farming
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sorin Grama, Transaera, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2024
* USD 907,624.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is the ability to sustainably produce more food with
fewer water and energy resources. Indoor agriculture has the potential to
transform the way we grow and source our food, enabling locally-sourced crops at
higher yields. Food crops can be grown sustainably year-round near all major
urban centers, if greenhouse energy and water consumption can be reduced. This
research will lead to the creation of a new class of energy- and water-efficient
indoor climate systems, thereby making indoor agriculture environmentally
sustainable and economically viable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase II project will advance the development of a novel
metal organic framework (MOF) material enabling a new class of compact, energy-
efficient cooling and dehumidification systems for commercial and residential
air conditioning applications. This project will advance a novel MOF material
with unprecedented water adsorption capacity. Moreover, the MOF material may be
quickly synthesized from low-cost, bulk commodity chemicals using a flow
synthesis process. A dehumidifier operating with this material can harvest waste
heat to provide optimal humidity conditions in applications such as controlled
environment agriculture or residential comfort cooling. The goal of the proposed
R&amp;D is scale the manufacturing of this novel material, develop composite
structures that embed this material, and integrate these structures into air
conditioning devices for commercial and residential
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.