* 1949097
* I-Corps:  An Integrated Hardware/Software System to Predict Cognitive Outcome in Neurosurgery Patients
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Bradford Mahon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to create a
turn-key software platform, that supports cognitive behavioral testing of
patients with brain lesions, integrates maps of brain function and structure
with the results of behavioral testing, and returns real-time actionable
predictions about patient outcome to clinicians. This software platform will be
developed in the specific niche of awake craniotomies - neurosurgical procedures
where the patient is not under anesthesia for part of the surgery in order that
s/he can participate in cognitive testing. By developing this technology in the
setting of awake craniotomies (~2,000/year at 200 major US medical centers), it
is possible to identify the most informative data to improve real-time
predictive models about long-term patient outcome. While the predictive
analytics at the heart of this platform eventually will be tested for
generalization in a wider range of clinical populations (e.g., stroke)
development within the neurosurgery market capitalizes on the projected growth
of this market from $13B in 2016 to $27B by 2026 (with an 8.2% compound annual
growth rate). This technology will provide clinicians with quantitative
predictions about future cognitive function in patients, allowing doctors to
increase the likelihood of successful treatment while protecting a higher
quality of life in patient outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
will support a deeper understanding of the clinical market and where and how the
proposed technology can address impediments currently faced by neurosurgical
teams when managing complex cases. During the I-Corps program, the goal is to
speak with a variety of potential customers, users, influencers and recommenders
who the technology may touch, including: neurosurgeons, neuro-anesthesiologists,
neurologists, neuropsychologists, neurophysiologists, neuro-radiologists,
physician assistants, nurses, technical staff, patients and hospital purchasing
administrators. Ultimately, this technology holds tremendous potential to change
neurosurgical practice by providing surgeons with real-time insights in the
operating room about a patient's future quality of life. A prototype of the
software platform has been piloted with 35 patients across 3 surgeons at a
single major US medical center. A key goal of the this I-Corps project is to
understand differences across medical centers and clinicians in workflow and how
different clinicians manage the specific challenges that can arise during awake
craniotomy procedures. This is critical for developing a product that is agile
and robust and which can be integrated with existing clinical protocols across
the country to support personalized predictions of patient
outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.