* 1949620
* Gaining new insights into the magmatic and tectonic processes at Kilauea Volcano from analysis of data recorded by the 2018 RAPID OBS array
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Yang Shen, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 253,253.00

In 2018, Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii underwent a series of major events including
more than a 500-meter collapse of the summit, lava eruptions, and a magnitude
6.9 earthquake and its numerous aftershocks. The consequences of these events
were extensive damage to infrastructure and property. In early July 2018, a team
funded by the NSF Grants for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) program deployed 12
ocean bottom seismometers (OBSs) offshore Kilauea. Eleven of the twelve OBSs
were recovered in mid-September. All but one of the recovered OBSs had useful
seismic and hydroacoustic data for the full recording period. During the two-
month OBS recording periods, around 16,000 magnitude 1 and larger earthquakes
were located by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Hawaiian Volcano Observatory
(HVO), many occurring offshore or near the coast. Because all HVO seismic
stations are on land, many offshore earthquakes were likely missed or poorly
located in the USGS HVO catalog. Preliminary data analysis shows that the OBS
deployment successfully captured a significant portion of abundant aftershock
activity and spanned the termination of active lava eruption. It was the first
time that such events are observed by concurrent onshore-offshore seismic arrays
and these events provided an extraordinary opportunity to observe the interplay
between magmatic and tectonic processes in exceptionally rich detail and
dimension. This project is to analyze the OBS data to obtain a better
understanding of the plumbing system and faults at Kilauea Volcano. The analyses
will be done in collaboration with scientists at the USGS Hawaii Volcano
Observatory, Western Washington University, and Rice University. The project
supports the training of one graduate and two undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will analyze the data
collected by the offshore OBSs to gain new insights into the magmatic and
tectonic processes at Kilauea Volcano, focusing on four main scientific
questions: (1) What structures within Kilauea's south flank were activated
during the 2018 events, and what deformation did they accommodate? (2) What are
the physical properties of the main faults? (3) How does deep magma migrate in
space and time? And (4) What are the stress states of the submarine south flank?
These are long-standing questions about the magmatic and tectonic processes at
Kilauea Volcano and oceanic shield volcanoes in general. The answers will
provide constraints on flank deformation and deep magma migration and will have
implications for seismic hazards, submarine landslides, and tsunami risks. The
data analyses will include detecting and locating earthquakes and determining
the physical properties of major faults and stress states of the Kilauea south
flank. The expected results include a catalog of offshore earthquakes and
refined offshore velocity models, which will enable the development, with
support by the USGS, of new offshore seismicity monitoring capabilities with the
potential to enhance societal preparedness and resilience against such
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.