* 1949185
* Understanding Electric Field Oscillations in Narrow Bipolar Events
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Paul Krehbiel, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 183,898.00

The lightning research community has made significant strides in determining the
steps that occur during a lightning flash. However, the processes that lead to
the exact moment of initiation of a lightning stroke are still under
investigation. This research will bring together the lightning and signal
processing communities to apply advanced techniques to interpret the copious
amount of lightning data that has been collected over years of observations. The
researchers aim to improve the understanding of lightning initiation, which is
important for public safety. The next generation of research scientists will
also be trained in cross-disciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
context of the studies is lightning initiation, and in particular, understanding
the transition process between fast streamer breakdown and the initiation of a
stepped leader. It is not known how fast positive breakdown, which does not lead
to a conductive channel, transitions into a stepped leader or otherwise
facilitates leader development. Understanding the physical processes that occur
immediately after the initial fast positive breakdown process is important. The
specific focus of this project is on Narrow Bipolar Events (NBEs), which are
waveforms that are associated with the strongest source of radio frequency
radiation from lightning. Oscillations in the electric field during NBE events
occur during between the initial breakdown event and the later development of a
stepped leader, making the NBE an important aspect of the still unknown exact
process of lightning initiation. This research project will use terabytes of
interferometer data, a lightning model, and advanced signal processing
techniques to study three main hypotheses: 1) The oscillations are caused by a
standing electromagnetic wave along the path of breakdown in the NBE; 2) The
oscillations are caused by plasma waves along the breakdown path; and 3) The
oscillations are caused by ion acoustic plasma waves propagating downward along
the breakdown path in response to ongoing negative breakdown at the top of the
channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Physical and
Dynamic Meteorology Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.