* 1949877
* Building Capacity to Produce Quality STEM Teachers in Alabama
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Lauren Grimley, Spring Hill College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2022
* USD 74,972.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing quality STEM teachers
for multicultural classrooms and high-needs school districts. Spring Hill
College is in a region of Alabama that has a high need for qualified STEM
teachers to serve the needs of local students. The project intends to help meet
this need, starting with planning how to increase interest in teaching careers.
To this end, the project will survey early STEM undergraduate majors about their
career goals, interests, and awareness of opportunities in teaching. The
resulting data are expected to assist the project in identifying effective
strategies to promote teaching careers. In addition, the project intends to
increase the interest of high school students in STEM teaching. The development
of hands-on opportunities for high school and college STEM students to engage in
teaching experiences and results of the project the evaluation are expected to
guide development of the College's teacher preparation pathways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Spring Hill College includes partnerships
with Mobile County Public Schools, a high need district with approximately
58,000 K-12 students. Spring Hill College intends to develop and test how
curricular and outreach programming, including community outreach events that
engage students and families in hands-on STEM experiences, may help students
explore STEM teaching opportunities. Ultimately, the aim of these efforts is to
elevate the value of STEM teaching careers, thus building capacity to attract
and develop a new pipeline of highly capable secondary mathematics and science
teachers for the region's schools. This Capacity Building project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.