* 1949486
* Understanding the Social Reception of Energy Infrastructure in the Developing World
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Hadden, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 163,662.00

This project examines the social reception of proposed energy projects in
developing countries. Promoting access to affordable, reliable, and modern
energy -- especially in critical regions of South Asia and Africa -- is an
important foreign policy priority of the United States. Despite the scale of
unmet demand, social protest and contestation have become a barrier to project
realization in many communities. Yet the origins and impact of such contention
are poorly understood. Having a better understanding of the factors that drive
protest will enhance American economic competitiveness and inform foreign
policy. As American public institutions and private firms commonly provide
funding and technology for energy ventures abroad, the research is disseminated
through targeted publications and a public conference with relevant
governmental, industry, financial, and non-governmental stakeholders. In
addition, this study contributes to education and research infrastructure.
Specifically, it generates public data sets and documentation of the associated
methodology that will be useful to other researchers. It also trains
underrepresented undergraduate and graduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances scholarly knowledge by
contributing to the comparative politics of infrastructure siting and social
protest. It offers three main advances. First, it pioneers a method for the
global comparative study of protest events, demonstrating how traditional and
social media records can be leveraged to gather reliable data about social
contestation. Second, it combines original data on protest with existing data on
proposed coal projects all over the world, developing insight into how the
politics of project siting may differ in the developed and developing world.
Third, it offers a multi-faceted treatment of how protest affects outcomes,
including consideration of the potential for protest to impact both project and
community-level outcomes. The project employs a multi-method approach to data
collection and analysis that includes statistical methods, focus group
discussions, and qualitative case studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.