* 1949968
* REU Site: Bioinformatics Research and Interdisciplinary Training Experience in Analysis and Interpretation of Information-Rich Biological Data Sets (REU-BRITE)
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Gary Benson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 402,696.00

This REU Site award to Boston University, located in Boston, MA, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020- 2022. It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be trained in
the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. The program will
help train a diverse group of future bioinformatics scientists, who understand
and can easily manipulate a wide range of computational, mathematical, and
statistical techniques to analyze and model the very large data sets produced by
contemporary biological experiments. Research outcomes from the program are
expected to create new knowledge-based resources for biological research.
Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool.
Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will focus on computational and
mathematical analyses of biological data. Students will conduct full-time
research with a Boston University Bioinformatics faculty mentor in one of a
broad range of biological research fields, including the microbiome in humans
and the environment, the linkage between genetic variation and phenotype, gene
regulatory networks, biomolecular interactions, and ecological forecasting.
Students will learn how to analyze high-throughput data, gain experience in
statistical and machine learning methods, and assist with the development of
computational tools and methodologies. Components will include: 1) workshops on
bioinformatics computing, 2) workshops on creating a scientific abstract and
poster, 3) poster presentation at an undergraduate research conference, 4)
educational outreach to community elementary and middle school students, 5)
scientific enrichment and career networking at Boston University Bioinformatics
sponsored symposia, 6) training in preparing a competitive graduate school
application, 7) training in scientific ethics, and 8) cultural and social
enrichment in the Boston area. Participants will be selected by the Principal
Investigator and potential faculty mentors after completion of an online
application. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://sites.bu.edu/britereu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Gary Benson at
gbenson@bu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.