* 1949379
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Evaluating the Effects of Financial and Temporal Scarcity on Farmer Decisions to Engage in Conservation
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Robyn Wilson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2022
* USD 29,820.00

Water quality challenges exist across the globe, with many of these issues tied
to land use and land management decisions, such as those related to runoff from
urban development and fertilizer use in agriculture. These issues have come to
the forefront in the Midwestern United States where there is a tension to both
enhance food production and protect ecosystem services. Decisions across this
largely agricultural landscape influence downstream water quality in both the
Great Lakes and the Gulf of Mexico. On-farm conservation practices are one way
to combat the environmental issues associated with agricultural production.
However, using these practices involves a farmer accepting some level of risk
and uncertainty in the short-term to achieve long-term on-farm benefits; a
challenge that is further exacerbated by factors like climate change and
commodity market fluctuations. Despite large investments to encourage landowner
conservation use, adoption of conservation practices on private lands remains
relatively low and stagnant over time. This dissertation research seeks to
better understand the likelihood of engaging in conservation practices on
private lands through the theoretical framework of scarcity by asking the
question: Is engagement hindered by annual seasonal cycles that limit a farmerâ€™s
ability to follow through on commitments to
conservation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite substantial research examining farmer
conservation decision-making, many commonly examined predictors have low
explanatory power. Moreover, there is a continued gap between farmer
conservation use intentions, which tend to be high, and actual conservation
behavior over time, which tends to be low. In response to these challenges,
there is a need for a broader perspective that more explicitly considers the
context in which farmer decisions are made, and may prevent a well-intentioned
individual from following through on those intentions. This research project
fills this gap by assessing the role of financial and temporal scarcity in
farmer decision making. Scarcity can cause a reduction in cognitive function
that leads to altered decision making. This project seeks to determine if
financial or temporal scarcity is a salient issue for farmers and to evaluate if
scarcity impacts distinct groups of farmers in different ways. The work connects
scarcity to conservation decisions by examining the effect of seasonal scarcity
on cover crop adoption, a particularly risky, uncertain, and complex practice.
The research team recruits farmers to participate in interviews and a cognitive
task at three times throughout the year to understand their experience of
scarcity and their use and perceptions of conservation practices (e.g., cover
crops). Hypotheses are that farmers with larger operations and off-farm income
are less likely to be impacted by seasonal scarcity and that those farmers
experiencing seasonal scarcity will be less likely to use cover crops. The
research advances our theoretical understanding of conservation decision making
on private lands, while improving our understanding of scarcity by applying it
in a new setting and with a new behavior. Importantly, this work shifts the
current farmer conservation narrative away from a narrow focus on personal-level
attributes to a broader exploration of how such factors may interact with
contextual-level factors including scarcity and the seasonality of
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.