* 1949901
* GSA Graduate Student Research Grant Program (2020-2022): Achieving Success in Geoscience Research by Underrepresented Communities
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Vicki McConnell, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2023
* USD 708,342.00

This award partially supports the Graduate Student Research Grants Program
managed by the Geological Society of America (GSA). The program grants to
students are not intended to fully support their research costs, but are an
important supplement toward advancing discovery and knowledge within the broad
field of the geosciences and related fields by partially supporting graduate
student research at both the masters and Ph.D. levels. Applications are
evaluated on a competitive basis and are assessed based on the scientific merits
of the problems addressed, the capability of the investigator, and the
reasonableness of the budget. The program promotes graduate education in the
geosciences as well as geoscience research by women and students of diverse
backgrounds and grants are only awarded to individuals. GSA continuously
monitors and evaluates the program so it can continue to evolve to meet the
needs of the geoscience community. The current goals of the program are: 1)
Increase opportunities for students of underrepresented communities to achieve
success in research; 2) Build career skills of students through gainful
experience with grant writing, project management, and research; and 3) Support
graduate student research in the geosciences and strengthen the geoscience
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently the Graduate Student Research Grants
Program managed by the Geological Society of America (GSA) focuses on strategies
to strengthen Goal 1 in particular. The program aims to make a marked impact on
increasing diversity in the geosciences. The target is to achieve a 30%
submission rate by underrepresented minority (URM) students over the three years
of the award. GSA will also aim to increase submissions by students who fit into
GSAâ€™s broader definition of diversity, including women, persons with
disabilities, members of the LGBTQ+ community, first-generation students, non-
traditional students, students from additional racial groups (Asian, Pacific
Islander, Two or more races, etc.), and others. GSA will take strategic actions
to provide more opportunities for students to achieve success in research. The
program actions will be increasing outreach and recruitment to focused audiences
and organizations, developing professional development opportunities to
strengthen applications submitted by URM students and others, increasing
training for Review Committee members to address any biases, and modifying the
rubrics for application and grant review to remove obstacles and support a more
equitable program. Results will be assessed annually and adjustments to the
program made when relevant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.