* 1949963
* Theoretical Studies of Quantum Systems with Strong Interaction: Geometry and Topology of Quantum States and Flows
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Pavel Wiegmann, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental
research and education in the properties of electrons inside what are called
"topological" solids. Whereas in metals, electrons interact with each other only
weakly, so that their motion resembles that of molecules in a gas, in these
newly appreciated materials, the electrons interact strongly, forming a "quantum
liquid." Just as the science of hydrodynamics can describe the turbulent motion
of water and other familiar liquids, this project develops a hydrodyanmics of
quantum liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last decade, materials physicists
have studied the topological nature of quantum fluids, referring to unusual
global properties, including resistanceless current flows around edges, that are
robust against sample imperfections and impurities. Most theoretical studies in
this subject are focused on properties of the ground (lowest-energy) state and
on linear-transport theory, according to which, for example, the electrical
current in a wire is proportional to the applied voltage. However, it has became
apparent that the fundamental features of quantum fluids lie in hydrodynamics,
beyond linear-response theory, and involve not just topology but also geometry.
Geometric, hydrodynamic, properties reflect a response of a quantum system to
local bending of the sample. The project aims to push forward two novel research
directions in quantum materials physics: (i) a geometric theory of quantum
topological fluids, specifically of the fractional quantum Hall effect, and (ii)
a hydrodynamic description of motions of such
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrodynamics is, perhaps, the most developed
branch of physics, where fundamental laws interwind with vast applications to
phenomena at all scales. At the same time, hydrodynamics hosts notoriously
difficult unsolved problems. One is turbulence; another is turning classical
hydrodynamics into a quantum theory. Both problems are commonly considered
intractable. At the same time, nature confronts us with experimentally
accessible and beautiful quantum fluids like superfluid helium, which flows
without resistance, and the fractional quantum Hall effect. Earlier attempts to
quantize hydrodynamics, going back to Landau and Feynman, led to the
semiclassical theory. Today, the emergence of electronic and atomic quantum
fluids calls for a full scope of quantization. This research brings advanced
methods of theoretical physics combined with methods of modern geometry to
material science with a focus on experimentally-measurable signatures of
geometric phenomena in flows. Graduate students will receive broad training in
theoretical techniques, advanced mathematical methods, and communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports research into two novel themes
in condensed matter theory: the geometric and hydrodynamic approaches to the
theory of quantum fluids. The motivating case study is the fractional quantum
Hall effect (FQHE). The theory targets precise quantization of transport
coefficients and the fundamental role of geometry in quantized fluids. The work
also aims to develop experimental settings for observing effects of geometry in
semiconductors, cold gases, classical chiral flows, and chiral metafluids.
Another theme of the work is the search for the local conformal symmetries in
chiral quantum liquids and at the same time in classical turbulent flows. A
related theme investigates physical applications of quantum anomalies, primarily
the gravitational anomaly, in chiral quantum flows. Finally, the work aims to
develop a hydrodynamic approach to non-linear flows in quantum systems with
topological characterizations and search for the relation with
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work exploits advanced methods of modern
geometry, conformal field theory, anomalies of quantum field theory, and
hydrodynamics adapted to study quantum materials. The foci of the project are
quantum systems with a topological characterization. The transport coefficients
in such systems are quantized with unmatched precision. A reason for that is
that these coefficients are topological invariants of holomorphic bundles.
Recent developments show that the quantization is related to the geometry of
quantum states, focusing on local properties. In turn, topological properties
are merely the global reflection of geometric properties. The geometric
properties describe a transformation of quantum states under a variation of the
underlying metric. As a result, they govern the motion of the quantum fluid and
in the end determine its hydrodynamics. The work will advance understanding of
non-linear aspects of non-equilibrium states in topological quantum systems.
There are many indications that the nature of flows in topological quantum
fluids is deeply connected with that of turbulent flows in classical fluids. The
work provides insights into the geometry of turbulent flows and builds a
platform for the engineering of topological metamaterials. Another target of the
project is the quantization of hydrodynamics, a long-standing fundamental
problem of quantum theory, often considered intractable. Recent understanding of
the role of the gravitational anomaly in the FQHE suggests a clear path to
overcoming difficulties of quantization. The project seeks to develop a
comprehensive scheme of quantization of hydrodynamics of two- and three-
dimensional chiral incompressible flows. The work adapts the methods of modern
geometry to materials science and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, forging
links between different disciplines. The proposed work has an interdisciplinary
character: it addresses fundamental problems of materials science and at the
same time contributes to the fields of hydrodynamics and modern geometry.
Education and mentoring are integral parts of the proposal. The work provides a
quality platform to attract and to train theoretically minded students and to
prepare them for careers in academia and science-related industry. Students will
receive broad training in a full scope of research: analytical reasoning,
mastering advanced mathematical methods by applying them to physical systems,
projecting theoretical research to realistic materials, and communication with
experimentalists and researchers in adjacent fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.