* 1949210
* Anisotropic imaging of the Alaska-Aleutian subduction zone from shear wave splitting analyses
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Colton Lynner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 223,138.00

The Alaska-Aleutians subduction zone is the most tectonically active convergent
margin in North America and represents an area of both scientific and societal
relevance. The region has hosted several large mega-thrust earthquakes, has a
lot of volcanic activity, and has the potential of generating a tsunami. The
region is also an ideal natural laboratory to study subduction systems due to
the long-term subduction of the Pacific Plate, volcanism associated with
subduction that builds the Aleutian Islands, and high earthquake activity. This
project will examine the mantle processes that drive subduction using both
onshore and offshore earthquake data. Mantle deformation will be examined within
the different portions of the subduction system. The techniques to be used are
complementary and when combined will provide a full picture of the subduction
zone region. This integrated view will allow an investigation of the operation
and interactions of the different subduction regions to create the Alaska-
Aleutians subduction zone that is seen today. This project will bring an
undergraduate student to the University of Delaware for a summer research
experience internship and will provide training for a doctoral student. This
project also will include collaborative outreach activities with the University
of Delaware Disaster Research Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
multi-faceted examination of seismic anisotropy throughout the Alaska-Aleutians
subduction zone (AASZ). Multiple datasets and techniques will be used in
sequence to gain insights into the interactions of the different parts of the
subduction system. Shear wave splitting analyses will be performed on a variety
of seismic phases that are each tailored to best assess a portion of the AASZ:
1) local-S splitting at island arc stations that target the mantle wedge, 2)
source-side splitting in geometries that isolate deformation within the
downgoing slab, 3) source-side splitting that targets dynamics in the sub-slab
mantle, and 4) traditional splitting at the ocean-bottom and onland stations.
Each set of splitting observations targets a specific subduction zone region,
with associated targeted questions, in such a way as to be easily integrated
together. Combining the suite of complementary techniques will create a complete
view of the deformation and active dynamics leading to the modern day AASZ.
These results will refine the understanding of slab deformation in the mantle,
the association of mantle wedge dynamics and along strike variations in arc
magmatism, and the overall evolution of mantle flow beneath the Pacific as it
morphs from a surface plate into a subducting slab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.