* 1949228
* Parenting Styles within and across Neighborhoods
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Matthias Doepke, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/29/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Income inequality has substantially increased in recent times in the US and
around the world. Research has also shown that higher inequality has changed
parenting styles: many parents spend a lot of time and effort pushing their
children harder to ensure that they have a better path to security and success.
The rising intensity of parenting has resulted in a growing "parenting gap"
between rich and poor families. Given that parenting is a key determinant of
skill formation, the parenting gap puts social mobility and the American ideal
of equal opportunity for all at risk. This research project will study how
economic inequality and parenting decisions interact to shape skill acquisition
of high school children. For these children, the direct influence of their
parents is usually less important than those of their peers in schools and
neighborhoods. Parents, however, continue to play an important role through
their impact on peer selection. For instance, parents can choose where to live,
which school children attend, and can encourage or discourage particular types
of friendships. This research project will study how peer formation and
parenting behavior evolve in a world of growing economic and residential
segregation, how these factors affect child development across different socio-
economic groups, and how they shape the effects of policies designed to narrow
the parenting gap. The goal is to identify the mechanisms underlying the vicious
circle between inequality, segregation, and parenting gaps, and to assess how
public policy should be designed to pursue the ideal of equal opportunity for
all. The results of this research will provide guidance on policies to increase
human capital formation while decreasing inequality, thus lead to faster
economic growth and poverty reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
examines the connections between parenting behavior, neighborhood
characteristics, and children's peer group formation from both empirical and
theoretical perspectives. The proposed research aims to go into the black box of
parenting decisions, going beyond investment in children's human capital to
study the different strategies parents may adopt to influence their children's
behavior. The research characterizes empirical relationships between parenting,
peer groups, and neighborhood and family characteristics using a variety of data
sets, including the Add Health, PSID-CDS, and ACS. Building on the empirical
results, the project will develop and estimate economic models that capture the
interactions between parents' behavior, children's behavior, and the
environment. The use of structural models will make it possible to assess the
implications of alternative policy scenarios for the evolution of parenting
styles, social mobility, residential segregation, and economic inequality. A
combination of empirical work with economic modeling is especially promising
given that neighborhood and peer interactions give rise to externalities and
general equilibrium effects, which are difficult to account for without an
explicit model of decision making and equilibrium interactions. Examples of
policies to be examined are school choice policies (e.g., the use of
neighborhood schools versus selective enrollment schools), affordable housing
policies supporting poor families with children, desegregation busing policies,
and policies that directly promote mobility of disadvantaged families from
poorer to richer neighborhoods. The results of this research will provide
guidance on policies to increase human capital formation, thus lead to faster
economic growth and poverty reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.