* 1949900
* REU Site: Think Globally and Act Locally in Building Research and Career Skills in Chemistry, Physics and Materials Science at the University of Oregon
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Geraldine Richmond, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2024
* USD 256,994.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to University of
Oregon, located in Eugene, OR, supports the training of a total of 26 students
for 10 weeks over the summers of 2021-2023. In this program, supported by the
Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate,
students engage in research projects in the fields of chemistry, physics and
materials science. In addition to conducting publishable research using state-
of-the-art instrumentation, the students participate in research seminars,
weekly research meetings, and social events. Weekly webinars with established
scientists and their students from Africa, Asia, and the Middle East afford
students a global environmental perspective. Workshops focused on career science
communication, applying for fellowships, and responsible research conduct
complement the research experience and prepare students for graduate school and
careers in the chemical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of the
students' projects are focused on topics broadly related to the environment.
From the development of new solar materials, to the synthesis of new catalysts,
to the creation of greener nanoparticle systems and the increased fundamental
understanding of oil dispersants, these projects allow students to address
scientific problems of current national need. While open to all students, this
site targets students that are less likely to have research and mentorship
opportunities at their home institutions, particularly students from primarily
undergraduate institutions and underrepresented groups. Ultimately, the research
training and professional development offered by this site serve to broaden
participation in the sciences and strengthen the technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.