* 1949660
* Hawaii Aerosol Time-Series (HATS):Quantifying Marine Dust Deposition and Composition in an Oligotrophic Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Clifton Buck, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,074,114.00

The chemistry of the ocean can be changed by the introduction and removal of
elements, including trace elements which are present at low concentrations. In
some cases, these elements are known to be vital to biological processes and
ocean food webs. Near the shore, rivers are a large source for material from
land to the ocean. Beyond the reach of rivers, and for most of the oceans,
material blown from land through the air is the largest source of trace elements
to surface waters. This material enters the oceans dissolved in rain or by
settling of dust particles. Understanding atmospheric sources of trace elements
to the oceans is thus important to understanding both global chemical cycles and
patterns of biological production. This project will sample the atmosphere and
the surface ocean near Hawaii over two years to gain a deeper understanding of
the sources and fates of trace metals in the ocean. The study will examine how
particles from the atmosphere interact with the surrounding water as they sink
through the ocean. The project will contribute to global synthesis and modeling
efforts. It will directly support graduate and undergraduate students. Results
of the project and their relevance will be communicated to the public through
campus open house events and a public lecture series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
processes that supply and remove trace elements in the ocean are ongoing areas
of research. An important focus is on understanding the sources and fate of
aerosol trace elements deposited to the ocean as this represents a major source
of micronutrients and contaminants into the open ocean. Field observations of
wet and dry atmospheric inputs are limited in number, and few methods are
available to transform readily measured aerosol trace element concentrations
into deposition fluxes. Thus, atmospheric fluxes of trace elements to most ocean
regions remain poorly constrained and their impact on ocean biochemical cycles,
including the marine carbon cycle, are uncertain. Directly quantifying
atmospheric fluxes of key trace elements to the ocean and identifying their
fates and chemical transformations after deposition are critical areas of
continued investigation and are included, for example, as a core component of
the GEOTRACES program. Similarly, aerosol fractional solubility and the flux of
bioavailable trace elements is not well understood. There is a corresponding
need to test and improve estimates of total dust deposition fluxes alongside
simultaneous observations of particle composition in the open ocean. This
project will address these needs through a two-year land-based sampling effort
and six seasonal cruises aimed at three tasks. (1) Use the deposition flux of
beryllium-7 measured from aerosols, precipitation, and the upper ocean inventory
to directly estimate dust and aerosol trace element fluxes to the Hawaii Ocean
Time-series Station Aloha, a representative and remote oligotrophic site. This
region is characterized by a predictable seasonal variability in dust
concentrations and precipitation and is an exceptionally applicable region for
testing the limits of dust deposition techniques by observing seasonal
variability in ocean-atmosphere coupling over a multi-year cycle. (2) Explore
the extent to which seasonal variations in aerosol trace element flux to the
surface of the North Pacific, and mineralogy of that input drive variability in
the composition and inventories of marine particles. (3) Investigate the extent
to which the fractional solubility of aerosol trace elements collected over the
North Pacific shows temporal variability and calculate flux rates of soluble
aerosol trace elements. The study will advance understanding of dust and soluble
aerosol trace element flux from the atmosphere to the ocean and link that flux
to upper ocean particle inventory, mineralogy, and chemical
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.