* 1949037
* The construction and evaluation of trust in a cryptomarket
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Dana Haynie, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 02/29/2024
* USD 450,797.00

The goals of this project are to identify the conditions that 1) allow illicit
online drug markets to emerge and evolve, 2) enable drug dealers to distribute
drugs to customers and 3) incentivize buyers to purchase illegal drugs on the
market. In less than ten years, we have witnessed an unprecedented rise and
spread of illegal online cryptomarkets, especially those that traffic in illegal
drugs, on the "darknet" -- an encrypted region of the Internet only accessible
via anonymous 'Tor' browsers. Unlike surface web markets, on the darknet
sellers' and buyers' identities are protected through encryption software and
the use of cryptocurrency. Such identity protection measures make the darknet
particularly appealing to those engaging in illegal behaviors, including
trafficking in illegal drugs. This project will advance knowledge in several key
domains by integrating insights from criminal, economic, and sociological
theories to understand the importance of trust for creating and maintaining
social order on illegal drug markets on the darknet, including: a) revealing how
trust is signaled, managed, and used by dealers and buyers engaging in illegal
drug trade, b) determining whether and how the importance of different trust-
signaling strategies enhance dealers' marketability or change over the career of
a drug dealer or with buyer experience, c) evaluating the effect of attacks to
dealers' reputations as trustworthy trade partners, as well as how dealers
resolve such moments of conflict when their trustworthiness is questioned, and
d) assessing whether and how trust can be leveraged to disrupt drug trade on the
darknet and reduce illegal online drug trade. The current study will provide
critical information that law enforcement can leverage when considering
strategies that have potential to disrupt the illegal drug trade on the darknet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these goals, longitudinal network and text data
will be collected from three popular drug cryptomarkets operating on the darknet
covering the time periods of October 2014—January 2020. Each of these
cryptomarkets include temporal information on all drug transactions occurring in
the market and the network of ties between dealers and buyers engaging in trade
as well as textual information from dealers’ landing page, reviewer comments,
and discussion board posts. Data will be analyzed by combining qualitative
discourse analysis, natural language processing, statistical methods for network
analysis including ERGMs and relational events models, growth-curve trajectory
models, and agent-based simulation models for assessing the consequences of
market disruptions. By leveraging a variety of data available from these
cryptomarkets, we can qualitatively identify the processes through which trust
emerges, cooperation evolves, and conflicts are resolved, and then quantify
these processes through computational text mining. The unprecedented level of
detail available in the collected data provides a novel opportunity to monitor
online drug market dynamics, as well as the opportunity to observe the real-time
consequences of changes in drug policy, the impact of drug epidemics, the
emergence of new psychotropic substances, the role of distributed trust for
facilitating market activity, and the effectiveness of different law enforcement
disruption strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.