* 1949266
* Supporting Science Inquiry, Interest, and STEM Thinking for Young Dual Language Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Caroline Parker, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) knowledge and skills are
essential for navigating the demands of life and work in the 21st century.
Although all young children are curious and highly-motivated explorers and
problem-solvers, children from marginalized communities, including Latinx Dual
Language Learners (DLLs), face early and persistent opportunity gaps that limit
their participation in the types of science experiences that support and sustain
their early STEM dispositions, identities, and interests when schools and
teachers do not recognize the STEM knowledge and practices of their families. In
order to address this issue, formal and informal science learning settings must
provide inclusive high-quality science and STEM experiences for young DLLs,
their families, and teachers that honor the role of language in science inquiry
and learning. This means centering family and community members as children’s
STEM advocates and role models; creating and sustaining mutually respectful and
responsive home-school-community STEM partnerships; building teachers’ capacity
to create classroom cultures of inquiry that support English and home language
development; and addressing the importance of diverse backgrounds, cultures, and
perspectives in STEM education and the workforce. All of the important adults in
children’s lives need to work together to nurture children’s STEM dispositions
and confidence in ways that will spark and sustain their interests in pursuing
future STEM opportunities. The Supporting Science Inquiry, Interest, and STEM
Thinking for Young Dual Language Learners project will build knowledge about
STEM learning systems for prekindergarten (PreK) Latinx DLLs through family,
teacher, and community supports. The project is designed to increase PreK DLLs’
participation in high-quality, language-rich science inquiry that promotes their
science/literacy learning and increases their STEM interest and self-confidence.
In collaboration with the Connecticut Science Center and the Connecticut
Consolidated School District of New Britain, this project led by the Education
Development Center will bring innovative technologies and learning experiences
that align with the district’s approach of guided play and family engagement as
pathways to expanding STEM opportunities for PreK Latinx
DLLs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to: (1) increase DLL
families’ perceptions of themselves as critical partners in their children’s
science learning; (2) build PreK DLL teachers’ capacity to provide rich
science/literacy experiences and partner with families; (3) increase children’s,
families’, and teachers’ knowledge of STEM careers; and (4) improve PreK DLLs’
science, language, and literacy skills and their interest and self-confidence in
doing science. The program includes collaborative parent/teacher workshops, Play
Lab drop-in sessions, science/literacy kits and digital resources, coaching and
professional learning communities, and STEM community helpers. Using an
iterative research design approach, the project team will develop and refine
each of the project components with input from families, teachers, and content
experts and conduct a quasi-experimental design pilot study to assess how
participation in project activities affects parents, teachers, and DLL PreK
children. The project will contribute knowledge to the field about how inquiry-
based, literacy-rich science increases DLLs’ cognitive and non-cognitive
outcomes. Research findings will provide an understanding of how families,
teachers, and community members can collaborate in ways to enrich DLLs’ science
inquiry. With its explicit focus on PreK DLLs, this project will broaden
participation and provide potential for DLLs’ active participation in the STEM
workforce of the future. It also has the potential to positively impact parents’
and teachers’ own sense of themselves as capable of doing, learning, and talking
about science and STEM. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.