* 1949634
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Collaborative Task Planning and Learning through Language Communication in a Human-Robot Team
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,09/30/2023
* Joyce Chai, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2023
* USD 798,710.00

When deployed in the field, robots will often encounter new situations or new
tasks they don't have any knowledge or experience about. Even given sufficient
knowledge, designing planners that can generate high quality plans and perform
efficiently across various domains remains an open challenge. To address these
issues, this project aims to empower robots to harness human expertise to
acquire new knowledge and to engage humans in the loop of plan generation so
that humans and robots can collectively arrive at a joint plan. The results will
lead to principles and computational models for enabling effective human-robot
teams that can adapt to new and changing environments and tasks, which will
benefit many applications such as manufacturing, service, assistive technology,
and search and rescue. This project will also provide new exciting training and
education opportunities for students through research mentoring and curriculum
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how humans and
robots strive to mediate goals, world models, and plans to establish common
ground for joint tasks. It will develop a computational framework that tightly
links language and dialogue processing with the robot's underlying planning
system to support collaborative task planning and learning in a human-robot
team. It further will evaluate collaborative model acquisition and plan
generation in terms of consistency of shared understanding, plan quality, and
situational awareness. The research will transform planning in a human-robot
team by integrating human expertise and knowledge in a collaborative process to
improve planning and task performance. It will endow the robot with an ability
to explain its internal states, goals and plans, and to continuously learn new
states, actions, and plans through language communication with human partners.
It will also advance language and dialogue research by providing a rich context
for studying grounded semantics of language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.