* 1949577
* The Effects of the U.S. Trade Engagements on the Demographic and Spatial Distribution of Employment and Earnings
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Richard Mansfield, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 367,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide insight into the labor
market implications of alternative trade policies by highlighting the roles of
multiple trade engagement channels, worker mobility responses, and price
adjustments. In particular, this project will generate a more comprehensive
account of the earnings and employment responses to recent changes in the
international trade environment among worker and firm types defined by
combinations of characteristics such as region, industry, worker prior earnings,
firm size and average pay. The project will also provide a set of novel stylized
facts about employment composition and earnings distributions among firms
featuring different types of trade engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will assemble a database that links the near universe of U.S. matched employer-
employee records featuring worker demographics and pay with both firm-level
customs records on all firms' export and import behavior. The project will also
develop a two-sided assignment model that accommodates a rich pattern of sorting
of workers to firms and market clearing in many interrelated labor markets
defined by a large set of imperfectly substitutable worker types. This model
will incorporate changes in the level and composition of labor demand among
import competitors but also exporters, downstream firms able to buy cheaper
inputs, multinationals able to reconfigure their supply chains, and employees
from non-trading firms that are affected indirectly through overlapping labor
markets. Finally, using the estimated model, this project will produce
simulations of counterfactual scenarios that isolate the equilibrium impact of
alternative trade policies on employment and the earnings distribution among
many worker and firm types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.