* 1949639
* CCSS:   Collaborative Research:  Towards Privacy-Preserving Mobile Crowd Sensing: A Multi-Stage Solution
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/14/2019,06/30/2020
* Linke Guo, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2020
* USD 27,915.00

Mobile devices, including smartphones and tablets, are becoming extremely
prevalent nowadays. Equipped with diverse sensors, from GPS to camera, and
paired with the inherent mobility of their owners, mobile devices are capable of
acquiring rich information of surrounding environment. However, the wide
adoption of mobile crowd sensing is largely hindered by its privacy concerns. To
facilitate the functionality of each stage of mobile crowd sensing, including
sensing task allocation, sensing data collection, and result aggregation,
sensing devices report their location information, sensing capabilities, task
preferences, and sensing results to servers that will potentially disclose their
daily routings, behavior patterns and even identities. With these concerns, the
overall goal of this project is to address privacy leakage issues from different
stages of mobile crowd sensing. Privacy-enhanced mobile crowd sensing will
attract more participants and thus accelerate the maturity of smart health care,
environment monitoring, traffic surveillance, social event observation, etc. In
addition, this project will also serve as a training ground for educating future
decision-makers and workforce on theory and tools.

The PIs plan to develop effective and efficient privacy preservation schemes for
different stages of mobile crowd sensing. It corresponds to three closely
intertwined research thrusts. Thrust I explores protecting user's sensitive
information, such as locations, sensing capabilities and task preferences, from
the server, while still allowing it to optimally or approximately solve task
allocation problems. Rather than highly computationally-intensive crypto-based
techniques, privacy preservation schemes will be designed based on decomposition
methods and distributed computing algorithms. Thrust II aims to provide user's
location privacy in the stage of data collection. Since locations of users, who
perform sensing over the same event within a certain geographic area, are highly
correlated, it deteriorates user's privacy achieved individually. To address
this issue, privacy preservation schemes will be developed by exploring
collaborations among users. Game theories will be adopted to further analyze
users' strategies and interactions. The objective of Thrust III is to protect
users' sensing data privacy during the stage of data analysis. The research is
featured by jointly considering the data imperfection that is caused by the
limited sensing capabilities at mobile devices and even the misbehavior of
lazy/malicious users. To achieve data privacy and service accuracy
simultaneously, novel schemes will be developed combining efficient matrix
completion methods and advanced crypto techniques.