* 1949067
* Water temperature in estuaries: river and ocean influences, effects of surface heat flux, and dynamical role of temperature stratification
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* James Lerczak, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 872,283.00

Estuaries are biologically productive areas of the ocean that support important
fisheries and coastal ecosystems. However, they are under stress from changing
river flows and weather patterns, nutrient loading, hypoxia, and harmful algal
blooms. Water temperature is a major influence on algal growth rates and affects
nutrient cycling rates. Increasing temperature results in lower dissolved oxygen
saturation values, and higher respiration rates of organisms, increasing
community respiration; therefore, warmer water can directly lead to worsening
hypoxia, which is already a nationally and globally increasing problem. At
higher temperatures, oysters are more susceptible to disease and less able to
tolerate freshening of the water column. Fish and crustaceans have thermal
tolerance limits, and some species of fish already experience thermal stress
during current warm water anomalies. The processes that control water
temperature in estuaries have received little attention in comparison to
salinity, which is the main control on the density field and estuarine
circulation. This project will determine how estuarine water temperature is
dynamically controlled and understand which processes, including estuarine basin
geometry, are more important. The study will use existing data and semi-
idealized numerical simulations from seven mid latitude estuaries. These are
ecosystems likely to experience increased thermal stress in coming decades, when
precipitation, river flow, wind, air temperature, and cloudiness patterns, all
of which impact estuarine temperatures, are forecast to change. This project
will support a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although temperature is as
important as salinity in its effects on the ecology of estuaries, the existing
physical oceanographic literature provides little to no framework for
understanding the temperature structure, variability, and dynamics of estuaries.
The major influences on water temperature in estuaries are (1) conservative
mixing of ocean and river waters with different temperature as water parcels are
advected through the estuary and (2) air-sea heat exchange. In rapidly flushed
estuaries, the water temperature is determined by conservative mixing, so
temperature could be predicted from the salinity field and the river and ocean
temperatures. In slowly flushed estuaries, however, these river and ocean end
member temperatures vary on time scales shorter than the transit time of water
parcels passing through the estuary, making conservative mixing less useful as a
basis for predicting temperature. Further, in slowly flushed estuaries, air-sea
heat fluxes cause the water temperature to depart from the conservative mixing
prediction. This project will determine what controls the structure and
evolution of water temperature in seven estuaries across a broad range of
parameter space and provide a framework for understanding other estuarine
systems. The investigators will develop an analytical framework for
understanding the dynamics that control estuarine water temperature and identify
non-dimensional parameters that govern the temperature structure. The new
framework will be tested by synthesizing existing long time series observations
of seven estuaries (the Delaware Bay, Chesapeake Bay, Hudson River, Merrimack
River, Columbia River, Alsea River, and Guadalquivir River) that span a range of
parameter space. As part of this research, the range of natural variability in
estuarine temperatures and forcing (i.e., air-sea fluxes and time-varying river
and ocean temperatures) will be determined and its relation to estuary depth and
transit time will be examined using idealized numerical model experiments. The
main hypothesis to be tested is that vertical temperature stratification has
substantial dynamical effects by modifying vertical mixing in regions of
marginal stability, changing the estuarine circulation and length of the salt
intrusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.