* 1949762
* RUI: Investigating the synthesis and unique activities of bactofilins with multiple isoforms
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* David Zuckerman, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 372,115.00

The cytoskeleton of a cell plays an important role in the organization of the
cell, its motility, and the movement of macromolecules within the cell. In this
project, the researcher will investigate the regulation of expression and
polymerization of the bacterial cytoskeletal protein, bactofilin. This project
will engage undergraduate students with training and experience in molecular
microbiology, studying the cell biology of bacteria, while increasing the
overall research capacity of Iona College. Undergraduates will be trained in
techniques that will allow them to engineer specific mutations into the genomes
of non-pathogenic bacteria and evaluate the influence on the overall activity of
the cells, and provide them with experiences that will enhance their readiness
to engage in STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
further our understanding of the contributions of the uniquely bacterial
cytoskeleton family, bactofilins, to the cell biology of Myxococcus xanthus. Two
isoforms of the bactofilin, BacM, are expressed by M. xanthus. The cellular
mechanisms that produce the two isoforms, the potential unique contributions of
each isoform to M. xanthus cell biology, and how widespread is the phenomenon of
multiple isoforms of bactofilins are all currently unknown. In addition, the
polarity of the filament as it is formed in vivo has not been established. To
address these research challenges, the PI will work with undergraduates using
PCR-directed mutagenesis, mutant protein expression in M. xanthus,
immunoblotting, immunofluorescence microscopy, and protein-protein interaction
studies, to generate multiple isoforms of the bactofilin BacM and study how each
isoform contributes to M. xanthus cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.