* 1949109
* RUI: Defining the thermodynamics of MarR family transcription factor interactions with DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Steven Wilkinson, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 311,265.00

MarR family proteins are found in most bacterial species. These proteins bind
very tightly to DNA and regulate the expression of genes that allow the
bacterium to respond to various forms of environmental stress, including noxious
chemicals and antibiotics. MarR proteins bind DNA with a common structural
motif, yet each is specific for a particular sequence. The energetic basis for
the affinity of these proteins for their target DNA sequences is not well
understand. This project seeks to determine the structural components of MarR
proteins that drive association with DNA. These studies will provide a detailed
understanding of how MarR proteins interact with DNA, and are also expected to
provide deeper insight into the energetics of sequence-specific protein-DNA
interactions in general. In addition, these investigations will provide the
first description of the roles of MarR proteins in regulating genes in the
pathogenic bacterium Clostridium difficile and offer insight into this
organism’s response to changing environmental conditions and stresses, including
its resistance to antibiotics and antimicrobials. The project will be conducted
at a primarily undergraduate institution and provide substantive training
opportunities for undergraduate students who will participate in all phases of
the project. This diverse group of students will conduct independent research
using modern techniques in biochemistry, which will prepare them for advanced
studies and careers in the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MarR proteins
associate with DNA through a winged-helix-turn-helix (wHTH) motif, with nearly
all interactions involving the wHTH “recognition helix” and “wing” which form
base-specific contacts with the DNA major and minor grooves, respectively.
However, the thermodynamics of these high-affinity associations is poorly
understood. While DNA binding proteins have traditionally been classified as
either major groove binders or minor groove binders, with each class being
associated with a distinct thermodynamic signature, MarR proteins do not fall
neatly into either category since they associate with DNA through extensive
base-specific contacts in both grooves. The first objective of this project is
to determine if there is a thermodynamic signature that characterizes MarR
family binding interactions with DNA and to parse the energetic contributions to
binding that stems from protein interactions with the major and minor grooves.
More broadly, these findings will test the prevailing view that such
interactions each have a characteristic thermodynamic signature. These
objectives will be met through a systematic analysis of DNA binding
thermodynamics involving six MarR homologs, including two which were previously
structurally-defined, as well as four previously uncharacterized MarR homologs
from the bacterium, Clostridium difficile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.