* 1949219
* Constraining properties of pyroclastic density currents with remote infrasound and seismic observations
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Josef Dufek, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2023
* USD 266,406.00

Pyroclastic density currents (PDCs) are hot mixtures of eruption-derived
particles and gas that move laterally along the ground. PDCs are commonly
generated by eruption column or lava dome collapse and are driven by negative
buoyancy. Due to their mobility, rapid velocities, and high temperatures, PDCs
are the most hazardous volcanic phenomena and are responsible for over 50% of
volcanic-related fatalities. PDCs are also challenging to observe directly. In
addition to their hazardous nature, PDCs occur infrequently and often are
located in remote and inhospitable places. Furthermore, direct visual
observations can usually only be made of the outer shell of the flow as the
complex internal dynamics are obscured by visually opaque fluid. Therefore, most
of our understanding about these multiphase, turbulent flows comes from
geological observations of PDC deposits, laboratory studies and numerical
models. This work extends knowledge of PDC dynamics by associating physical
processes with seismic and infrasonic waves. Geophysical observations
(infrasound and seismic) can be made at safe distances from PDC activity and can
provide high-resolution information about PDC dynamics. This project also
supports a postdoctoral scholar, who will engage in activities that bring STEM
and natural hazard resources to schools in the Cascadia
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project we will be developing a
quantitative framework to relate PDC properties and dynamics to geophysical
observables. The researchers will perform 3D multiphase simulations of PDCs and
compute the infrasound and seismic radiation. This will enable the investigators
to directly compare the simulation outputs with field data, which will provide a
way to validate and improve numerical models of PDC dynamics. The researchers
will perform a sensitivity analysis to understand what properties the
geophysical observables are sensitive to and will explore the geophysical
signals of different physical processes that have been shown to be important to
PDC dynamics, such entrainment and fluidization. The proposed work will increase
fundamental scientific understanding about the processes governing PDCs and will
aid in data interpretation and volcano monitoring efforts by developing
quantitative links between geophysical observables and flow
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.