* 1949122
* Enhancing Engagement and Conceptual Understanding of Fractions for Students with Learning Disabilities using the Model Mathematics Education Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Michelle Taub, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,391,542.00

The Enhancing Engagement and Conceptual Understanding of Fractions for Students
with Learning Disabilities using the Model Mathematics Education Curriculum is a
Developing and Testing Innovations (DTI) project in the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program. This project advances
efforts of ITEST program by developing an integrated curriculum for 4th â€“ 6th
grade students with learning disabilities and difficulties to increase
engagement in and understanding of fraction concepts. The project will impact
140 elementary and middle school students and their teachers in both rural and
urban settings in North Carolina and Florida who have been underrepresented in
STEM and have had limited opportunities to access and advance their STEM
knowledge. The project engages students in universally-designed competitive
gameplay and collaborative problem-solving challenges rooted in authentic STEM
and ICT careers that have executive function scaffolds, cognitive tutoring, and
dynamic assessments embedded within. The project will make use of models from
successful startup businesses to build the games, measure outcomes, and revise
them through testing with students. The project leverages industry and school
partners to infuse the game into elementary and middle school intervention
classrooms so that students can experience the game-based mathematics fraction
curriculum. This project will help address a critical need to increase diversity
of individuals in STEM through accessible learning environments that foster
foundational mathematical learning while growing interest in STEM/ICT careers.
This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a pretest-intervention-posttest
design with a comparison group to compare group differences in engagement,
conceptual understanding, and STEM interest through questionnaires, pre-
posttests, and game level trace data. Repeated measures with between-within
student interactions will be used to examine increases in student conceptual
understanding, engagement, and interest in STEM careers between Model
Mathematics Education and comparison groups. Linear regressions will be run to
assess associations of instrument/survey responses at pre and during with the
responses at posttest. Data analytics will be collected during gameplay for
students in the Model Mathematics Education condition. Mixed-effects models and
educational data mining techniques will be used to assess sequences of
interactions and relationships between event-level learning analytics and game
performance. Students in the Model Mathematics Education intervention are
expected to demonstrate higher levels of engagement, exhibit greater conceptual
understanding of fractions, and report higher interest in STEM/ICT careers than
students in the comparison condition after nine weeks of the curriculum. Main
products include the development and iterative refinement of the game-based
mathematics curriculum, pilot testing with students and their teachers, and a
viable web-based software and curriculum package. By working with students with
disabilities in intervention classrooms, this project will maximize the
potential for generating knowledge regarding features of curricula that broaden
participation among this population by increasing interest in STEM careers.
Dissemination efforts are twofold and include the project website, which will
provide free access to the curriculum, and professional development activities
as well as opportunities to interact and share feedback on the platform.
Feedback on the curriculum will be garnered through engagement of professionals
from computer science, industrial engineering, civil engineering, nursing, and
fire safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.