* 1949921
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Multi-disciplinary Training of Learning, Optimization and Communications for Next Generation Power Engineers
* CSE,OAC
* 08/10/2019,08/31/2024
* Zhen Ni, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 347,876.00

With the increasing adoption of interconnected power/micro grid infrastructures,
today's power engineering research professionals require broader knowledge and a
more diverse skillset. This project provides undergraduate and graduate students
in the Northern Plains region with access and opportunity to learn using state-
of-the-art smart grid cyberinfrastructure. The Northern Plains region sees
increasing use and potential in renewable energy, in addition to energy exports
to other areas, solidifying the importance of advanced training in power
engineering. The project thus serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's
mission: to promote the progress of science and to secure the national defense.
The resulting curriculum and instructional materials integrate advanced skills
from multiple areas into power engineering infrastructure education. Students
practice the multi-disciplinary skillsets needed for the power industry using a
unique, remotely connected smart grid cyberinfrastructure. They extend their
academic and research portfolios and strengthen their career competitiveness as
smart grid cyberinfrastructure professionals and cyberinfrastructure users for
regional and national levels. The cyber training model leverages resources for
underrepresented minority schools and schools with limited research
cyberinfrastructure to participate, either remotely or on-site. The mobile
microgrid laboratory demonstrations introduce K-12 teachers and students to
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes a new, remotely-connected
smart grid cyberinfrastructure platform between the collaborative institutes
using a real-time digital simulator, and sharing software licenses and hardware
resources. This project promotes the application of advanced cyberinfrastructure
techniques in power system monitoring, planning, operation and control, and
prepares the next-generation power engineers to face challenges in modern power
systems. This remotely connected power cyberinfrastructure provides an ideal
platform for interdisciplinary research and education of computational
intelligence, machine learning, control, communications, and data analytics in
the smart grid area. The project team collects heterogeneous smart grid
measurement data from this new cyberinfrastructure to conduct real-time
learning, event-detection and data integrity, online optimization and multi-
level decision-making process of intelligent systems. The project team
integrates results into existing undergraduate courses and expand graduate
courses from a frontier interdisciplinary viewpoint. The project team also
creates replicable project templates/demos with designated benchmark data so
other schools can easily adopt this new educational model with or without
specific resources. Feedback from an independent evaluator, institutional
stakeholders, national laboratory scientists and local industry partners
supports periodic improvement of the educational model and materials. This
project is funded by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering and the
Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.