* 1949922
* BCSER-IID: Foundations for a STEM What Work Clearinghouse for Broadening Participation Research in STEM Education
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Erin Lynch, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 10/31/2022
* USD 318,639.00

The proposed project will lay the foundation for a clearinghouse of broadening
participation STEM education research at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs). The clearinghouse is envisioned as an online platform that
will be populated with data collected through a systematic literature review
during this initial phase. The investigator used the Vitae Researcher
Development Framework to identify the STEM education research skills gaps that
will be the focus of a comprehensive professional development. The professional
development domains include knowledge and intellectual abilities; personal
effectiveness; research governance and organization; and engagement, influence
and impact. The goals will be accomplished by completing formalized training in
meta-analysis research design and methodology, acquiring training in database
foundations and data analytics, and receiving mentoring. The project will
position the investigator to contribute scholarship that informs effective
interventions at HBCUs and topics for future research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project will produce a meta-analysis of NSF-funded broadening
participation interventions at HBCUs by answering two research questions: (1)
What broadening participation research interventions work and for whom? and (2)
What are the mean corrected correlations between program traits in NSF-funded
HBCU broadening participation interventions and student success metrics at
HBCUs? The research design is a quantitative retrospective systematic review.
The rationale for this design selection is the power of meta-analytical studies
for researchers. The research will be guided by expert mentors and informed by
the expertise acquired through structured professional development activities.
The research project, in the long term, is expected to provide accessible
empirical data for investigators to conduct robust broadening participation in
STEM education research studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported
through the EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research
competition that is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high
quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.