* 1949696
* Gordon Research Conference on Chemical Separations: Separations Breakthroughs for Commodity and Specialty Chemicals, Environmental Science and Analytical Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2021
* David Sholl, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 02/28/2021
* USD 16,000.00

This NSF award will support speaker and attendee travel to the Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on Chemical Separations, held in Galveston, TX on January
26-31, 2020. Chemical Separations is a new topic for the well-respected GRC
conference organization. Separation steps are involved in producing nearly every
chemical product. Therefore, new ideas and improvements in chemical separations
are of vital interest to a variety of industrial sectors. New, non-thermal
technologies are desperately needed to decrease reliance on energy-intensive
distillation. This process often requires high temperatures, as distillation
separates liquids based on difference in their boiling points. Targeted chemical
separations are critical to management of radioactive waste. Similarly,
analytical separations that can be applied to complex mixtures are vital in
streamlining development of new drugs and detecting environmental contaminants.
The funds requested from NSF will be used to support travel for speakers,
especially distinguished female invited speakers, and travel for graduate
student, postdoctoral and early career professional attendees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemical Separations GRC aims to connect
chemists, materials scientists and chemical engineers in order to discuss topics
such as: translating separations science to applications, commodity scale
chemical separations, bioseparations, membrane separations, adsorption-driven
separations, intensified separation processes, selective capture of ions,
designer sorbents and solvents, and separations in complex environments. The
opportunity for attendees to hear from experts in a diverse range of application
domains will be attractive to both seasoned researchers and early career
professionals. The funds provided by NSF will be used to support travel for
speakers, especially distinguished female invited speakers, graduate students,
postdocs and early career professionals presenting a poster. At GRCs, these
poster sessions are a core part of the conference program and are well
attended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.