* 1949957
* Preparing STEM Teachers in Western Pennsylvania
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2026
* Adel Aiken, Geneva College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 615,550.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective and qualified
STEM teachers. To do so, the project intends to recruit undergraduate STEM
majors to pursue both STEM degrees and certification in secondary STEM
education. These students, who may not have otherwise considered a career in
teaching, will receive scholarships and additional supports designed to enrich
their STEM knowledge and skills, as well as enhance their preparation for
teaching. During their tenure as Noyce Scholars, the students will have
opportunities for early research experiences to expand their STEM knowledge and
skills. The Noyce Scholars will benefit from a modified teacher education
curriculum that supports philosophies and strategies for teaching in high-need
schools. They will apply this knowledge in their teaching experiences in
secondary STEM classrooms in a high-need school district. Finally, the Scholars
will participate in learning communities such as the Collaborative Professional
Development Circle and ongoing mentoring that supports preservice and new
teachers. The project expects to prepare the Noyce Scholars to implement
student-centered teaching and STEM habits of mind, grounded in an understanding
of the challenges of high-need school environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at Geneva College, located in Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, includes
partnerships with New Brighton School District (a high-needs school district)
and the Urban Impact Foundation. The goals of the grant are to: (1) recruit,
enroll, retain, and graduate 22 qualified biology, chemistry, mathematics, and
physics majors prepared for secondary education certification over the five-year
grant period; (2) support and prepare highly qualified STEM teachers who are
trained to work in high-need classrooms; (3) place and retain 100% of the Noyce
Scholars in teaching positions in high-need local education agencies upon
graduation; (4) evaluate the effectiveness of the Noyce Scholars in the
classroom through successful completion of state-mandated induction programs;
and (5) use the assessment and evaluation results to institutionalize and
sustain successful programmatic elements. The project seeks to generate new
knowledge through creating a survey that will allow STEM teachers in high-need
school districts to evaluate their teaching practices using effective evidence-
based research. A high-quality evaluation and assessment process led by an
independent evaluator will inform Geneva College and the larger academic and
research community about the components that are most effective in STEM teacher
recruitment, retention, and preparation. Results of the project will be widely
disseminated to the local, academic, and research community via a project
website, publications, presentations, and regional and national meetings and
conferences. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.