* 1949530
* Modeling Secondary School STEM Teacher Retention via Ecological Theories
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* John Settlage, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 799,495.00

This project aims to serve the national need to increase the persistence of
science and mathematics teachers in teaching careers, particularly in schools
designated as high need. A distinctive feature of this project is its
application of ecological theory to examine why science or math teachers in the
state of Connecticut decide to remain in or to leave their teaching position.
The project will also use innovative statistical analyses to identify factors
from the individual classroom to the entire school system that affect the
teachers’ decisions. The research will be based on data from local, state, and
federal educational agencies, together with qualitative information collected
within specific settings. This research has the potential to improve
understandings and explanations of STEM teacher retention and loss. In addition,
the statistical modeling approaches and associated analyses could be
transferable for similar investigations in other
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project at University of
Connecticut has three goals. First, the project is designed to produce
quantitative analyses that may result in an empirically informed typology of
secondary schools. This goal will result in a more nuanced mechanism for
categorizing schools than simply relying on the percentage of low-income
students to classify a school as high-need or not. Second, the project aims to
identify factors at the classroom, department, and/or school level that are
associated with science and math teacher attrition. More detailed and multi-
level explanations could enable educational leaders to make more informed
choices about strategies for retaining STEM teachers. The final research goal is
to assess whether a congruence in views about educational equity between school
administrators and STEM teachers is associated with retention and attrition. In
addition to statistical modeling and analytic processes arising from this
research, the project will communicate findings to school leaders and district
administrators to inform their efforts to enhance STEM teacher retention.
Consequently, this research project has the potential to provide recommendations
that could enhance opportunities for high-quality STEM instruction. This Track
4: Noyce Research project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.