* 1949230
* Developing and Testing Bilingual Curricula that Infuse Authentic Computer Programming Experiences into Middle School Mathematics for Latinx Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Marios Pattichis, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,499,940.00

The scientific careers of the future increasingly require advanced
understandings and applications of computer programming and mathematics. This
project is designed to broaden participation in these career pathways and
careers by iteratively developing and testing bilingual computer programming
curricula in middle school mathematics classes attended primarily by
multilingual Latinx students. Aligned with standards in computer programming and
mathematics for middle schools, these Spanish and English curricula will guide
educators and students through authentic programming tasks, such as those
practiced by programmers in Artificial Intelligence fields. With the assistance
of undergraduates who are majoring in computer science or a related field,
middle school mathematics teachers will implement and revise the proposed
curricular materials in partnership with the research team over the course of
six semesters. Five middle school students in each class will also serve as co-
facilitators of the curricula. Quantitative and qualitative research will
determine whether and how the curricula support students’ mathematics learning
and attitudes toward mathematics, as well as whether and how the youth co-
facilitators reported transformative or challenging experiences relative to
their self-concepts in mathematics. Because many students begin to opt out of
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) classes and career
pathways in middle school, this project will advance knowledge regarding
educational approaches that prepare bilingual youth for continued pursuits along
STEM career pathways. The bilingual curricula, which uses low cost and widely
accessible programming platforms, will be posted on a project website, and
empirical findings and practitioner materials will be disseminated widely. This
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the context of action research conducted with
middle school mathematics teachers, this project will iteratively develop, test,
and refine Spanish and English curricula, based in principles of
translanguaging, which infuse computer programming and mathematics. The
mathematics teachers and undergraduates with expertise in computer science will
participate in professional development in which they have opportunities to
learn, use, and revise the curricula. This project will use a mixed methods
research design to study whether and how computer programming supports the
teaching and learning of mathematical content; whether and how the use of the
bilingual curricula support teachers’ interactions with Latinx students; whether
and how the curricula support Latinx and emergent bilingual students’
mathematics learning; and whether changes occurred in middle school students’
attitudes and learning, among other outcomes. The project will employ
qualitative analyses of transcripts from interviews with middle school teachers,
undergraduate facilitators, and middle school student facilitators; teaching
documents such as lesson plans; video-recordings of classroom observations and
professional development sessions; and student work. It will also employ
quantitative analysis of pre- and post-measures of attitudes and learning in
mathematics. In addition to sharing the curricula on a public website, the
project will result in video tutorials that will support online and offline
class delivery for middle school mathematics teachers with examples of teacher-
adapted materials. Empirical research and implications for practitioners will be
disseminated widely in peer-reviewed journals and professional
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.