* 1949331
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Income, cognitive tax, and economic decision-making among the urban poor
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* John Hoddinott, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2021
* USD 24,000.00

Research indicates that financial stress faced by the poor reduces their
abilities to make informed choices (cognitive constraints). This results in
inefficient decision-making among the poor in countries around the world. For
example, the poor frequently do not take advantage of poverty-reducing programs
and services in both developing and developed countries. This study explores
whether these cognitive constraints explain inefficient economic decisions and
behaviors observed among the poor. This research project focuses on informal
workers in urban areas whose incomes fluctuate substantially in the short-term,
in ways that are both expected and unexpected. The experiment involves giving
some entrepreneurs in the informal sector (treated group) unexpected increased
income through large unexpected purchases and offer them tasks that involve
business decision making. By comparing decision-making ability of the treated
with those of not treated, the researchers will be able to draw policy
implications from the experiment. This research will indicate the potential
demand for such policy design solutions as nudging reminders, default enrolment,
and timing application of procedures to coincide with periods of higher
cognition. The results of this research will help develop policies to improve
decision making of people with cognitive constraints, hence increase the take-up
rate of poverty reducing programs among the poor. This will help establish the
US as the global leader in poverty reduction research.

To understand the relationship between income and economic decision-making, this
research project will conduct a lab-in-the-field experiment in an urban informal
markets. The experiment is designed to test the hypothesis that an increase in
income leads to improved economic decision-making. This research exploits the
timing of market days to study the effect of increases in income and send
mystery shoppers to make purchases from the traders to generate realistic, but
unexpected increases in income. Following these income shocks, the PIs then
measure economic decision-making using an incentivized, menu choice game that
assesses consistency of decision-making ability and assess real-life economic
decision-making by providing traders with information about an opportunity to
receive free mobile credit. Finally, the PIs will measure attention and working
memory to assess the cognitive mechanism. The results of this research will help
develop policies to improve decision making of people with cognitive
constraints, hence increase the take-up rate of poverty reducing programs among
the poor. This will help establish the US as the global leader in poverty
reduction research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.