* 1949990
* Preparing STEM Teachers to Serve in High-Need, Rural School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2026
* Thomas McCarthy, Utica College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 729,578.00

This project aims to address the national shortage of highly skilled STEM
educators in high-need school districts. To this end, the project seeks to grow
a sustainable pipeline of STEM teachers by recruiting, retaining, preparing,
graduating, and supporting talented undergraduate STEM majors to become
secondary school teachers. It intends to accomplish this goal by providing
twenty STEM undergraduates with scholarships and other supports as they pursue
degrees in biology, biochemistry/chemistry, mathematics, geology, and physics
and become certified to teach in New York. Following entry of the Noyce Scholars
into their teaching careers, experienced school-based educators will mentor them
to increase the Noyce Scholars' success as teachers and their retention in the
teaching profession. The project will emphasize inclusion of underrepresented,
low income, and first-generation students as Noyce Scholars. This emphasis is
expected to increase the diversity of STEM teachers in the region's high-need
school districts. Through hands-on teaching opportunities, collaborations with
faculty and peers, and a capstone research experience, it is expected that the
Noyce Scholars will develop their STEM teaching talents and skills and enter a
productive, rewarding teaching career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
Utica College includes partnerships with Mohawk Valley Community College, Little
Falls Central School District, and Poland Central School District. Project goals
include: recruiting twenty highly-qualified STEM undergraduate scholars;
retaining and graduating well-prepared Noyce Scholars who are ready to instruct
students, including those from underserved populations; placing the graduating
scholars into high-need school districts to fulfill their teaching requirement;
and advancing STEM education by developing original, student-created, inquiry-
based laboratory investigations and mathematics lessons aligned to national
learning standards. The Noyce Scholars will adapt college classroom laboratory
experiments and mathematics lessons to create new inquiry-based laboratories and
lessons that meet Common Core Mathematics and/or Next Generation Science
standards. This pedagogical model provides training for the scholars in
scientific thinking and effective communication as they create and present
original research proposals. In partnership with two rural, high-need school
districts, the Noyce Scholars will collaborate with faculty and their peers,
develop their pedagogical strengths and talents, and engage in hands-on teaching
opportunities. Studentsâ€™ original, inquiry-based STEM investigations will be
disseminated at conferences and in peer-reviewed science education journals so
that they might be adapted by secondary STEM teachers for classroom and teaching
laboratory use. The project seeks to disseminate a pedagogical model that other
teacher education programs may adopt or adapt, thereby advancing knowledge in
STEM teacher preparation. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.