* 1949831
* Multiple Field Experiences and Undergraduate Research to Prepare Highly Effective Mathematics and Science Teachers for Diverse Urban Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Nathan Frank, Augustana College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 705,933.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing highly qualified
mathematics and science teachers for work in high-needs school districts.
Specifically, the project plans to prepare undergraduate students who are
earning baccalaureate degrees in mathematics, physics, biology, or chemistry to
be successful mathematics and science teachers in high-need secondary schools.
To do so, Augustana College intends to provide sixteen students with scholarship
support as they complete their baccalaureate degree and teacher certification.
These Noyce Scholars will participate in field experiences and have access to
specific advising and mentoring during and after the Scholars’ tenures at
Augustana College. With this funding, Augustana College intends to address
teacher shortages resulting from high teacher turnover in the Quad Cities
metropolitan area in northwest Illinois. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
Augustana College includes partnerships with Black Hawk College and the
Davenport Community Schools, the Moline-Coal Valley School District, the Rock
Island-Milan School District #41, and the United Township High School District
30. It intends to produce 16 new certified mathematics and science secondary
teachers. The project’s goals are to: (1) increase enrollment of STEM students
pursuing education through internal recruitment and strong collaborative
relationships with Black Hawk College and local education agencies; (2) improve
high-quality and effective teacher preparation through increased and varied
early field experience, undergraduate research, and explicit study and
experience in diverse urban education environments; and (3) provide greater
supports to new teachers based on evidence-based teacher induction and mentoring
models. Noyce Scholars will receive both early field experiences and mentoring.
Across three school-based field experiences (sophomore year work with special
needs students, junior year work in a middle school and a high school, and
senior year student teaching), the pre-service candidates are expected to work
in three distinctive high-need settings, experiencing different student
developmental levels (middle school and high school), as well as different high-
need districts and schools. Following student teaching, the Scholars will take
an education capstone course (School and Society, which emphasizes diversity and
equity issues in high-need schools and includes an experiential component in a
high-need school. Thus, Noyce Scholars will engage in a total of four school
placements. Each Scholar will be paired with both a STEM faculty mentor and an
education faculty mentor. Noyce Scholars are expected to continue working with
this team of faculty mentors through graduation and the first two years of
teaching. All Scholars are expected to complete a senior inquiry project that
integrates rigorous science or mathematical inquiry with relevant applications
for K–12 teaching. This academic research will be guided by a researcher, use a
variety of techniques, and include research writing and submission of the work
for presentation at conferences. The project aims to investigate the extent to
which project activities influence students’ attitudes towards teaching in high-
need schools. It intends to also identify what skills/abilities candidates must
develop to be successful in such settings. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.