* 1949112
* Information Disclosure and Financial Markets: An Experimental Investigation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Douglas Davis, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 173,468.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The disclosure of information regarding the
financial condition of firms has been a centerpiece of financial market
regulation since the passage of the Securities Exchange Act in 1934.
Requirements have been refined and reinforced over time with regulations which
was intended to improve the accuracy and reliability of corporate disclosures,
and more recently mandates that banks and other financial institutions
periodically report results of stress tests that assess the institution’s
capacity to respond to highly adverse events. An important issue regards the
amount of the information collected that regulatory authorities should disclose
publicly. Although the disclosure of firm-specific information typically
improves the price efficiency of markets, there are concerns about this on
several fronts: Public disclosure may undermine risk sharing opportunities
between banks, may drive firms to invest in short term projects that yield high
immediate returns in lieu of more profitable longer term projects, and may
interfere with the capacity of markets to effectively aggregate information.
This project uses laboratory experiments to investigate the behavioral relevance
of recent theoretical models that analyze these important issues on information
disclosure in the financial markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists
of three experiments. The first experiment evaluates a model which provides a
framework for balancing the concern that excessive information disclosure of a
bank’s condition may undermine the risk-sharing opportunities that interbank
markets allow, against the general perception that disclosure improves price
efficiency. The second experiment evaluates the predictions of a model that
focuses on the issue that overly frequent disclosures may force institutions to
forego more profitable long term projects in favor of alternative projects that
yield higher short term returns. The third experiment evaluates the effects of
different kinds of public disclosure on a market’s capacity to aggregate
information. Overall, these experiments advances the body of knowledge on
information disclosure in the financial markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.