* 1949241
* Developing a culturally responsive pedagogical framework for STEM self-efficacy and career interest in the middle grades
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Ashish Amresh, COCONINO, COUNTY OF
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,991.00

The goal of this project is to promote STEM self-efficacy and career interest
among youth from the Navajo Nation through relevant and meaningful experiences
with integrated STEM during their critical academic development years in middle
school. To achieve this goal, the project partners with key stakeholder groups
to co-create of a set of guidelines for STEM education that align to the
cultural frameworks, interests, and needs of the Navajo Nation. The guidelines
are used to support the design and implementation of a teacher professional
development program and student curriculum for rural middle schools serving
students from the Navajo Nation. The working groups charged with developing the
guidelines will include representatives from the Navajo Nation, STEM
professional organizations, and Diné Education leaders. The project engages
teachers in professional development sessions in which they evaluate and discuss
ways to apply the guidelines for cultural competence in STEM education to the
middle-school context, learn how to use data-driven visualizations to support
STEM disciplinary integration, and design and implement project-based learning
units for their students that are technology rich and culturally responsive.
Participating teachers have professional development and technical assistance
support throughout the year as they implement a project-based STEM curricular
unit focused on creation of data-driven visualizations of an identified
community topic. The project activities will improve participating teachers'
competence and confidence in working with technology in their classrooms in a
way that is responsive to the cultural frameworks and perspectives of their
students and communities. Project deliverables (guidelines, professional
development model, and student STEM curriculum) will be available to education
leaders and interested practitioners to support their own transition to
culturally competent STEM. The project seeks to advance knowledge regarding
tools and strategies for transforming STEM teaching and learning experiences for
Indigenous students. Success of the project can lead to larger scale-up efforts
to transform STEM education policy and practice for schools anddistricts serving
Indigenous students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project follows a design-based
research methodology. The project research will include multiple iterative
cycles of development, implementation, analysis, and redesign with three cohorts
of two schools each (estimated total of 60 teachers and 1,500 students).
Throughout each cycle of implementation and improvement of the professional
development model, the project partners analyze and refine their research
instruments and process, with input from stakeholders. With respect to teacher
change, the project assesses teacher efficacy and perceived competence through
survey measures. Observations of the professional development, focus groups, and
analyses of the teachers’ lesson plans and units will also inform the analysis
of data from teachers. Student impacts are measured through career interest and
learning activation surveys, curriculum embedded assessments, observations of
student learning, and formative feedback. The layered focus of project research
with cultural competence and creation of data-driven visualizations will inform
the future design of teacher learning experiences that foster student interest
and efficacy in STEM through technology-rich, culturally relevant, and community
focused projects. The research findings related to the effectiveness of using
co-created guidelines for cultural competence to guide the design of teacher
professional development and student curricular units can be used to inform the
development of a set of guiding principles for STEM education serving under-
represented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.