* 1949463
* 3D Plants: Students Build Augmented and Virtual Reality Plant Models to Understand the Role of Design in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Kristine Callis-Duehl, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 386,754.00

This exploratory project will study the integration of science, design and
advanced technology in high school education through a set of innovative
learning experiences in the context of plant science using augmented and virtual
reality (AVR) technologies. Underrepresented and underserved students from both
urban and rural communities will have access to novel educational tools while
learning how to create 3D models of different parts of plants in small
collaborative teams. With the support of instructors, mentors and scientists,
students will acquire skills in the use and applicability of AVR technology, 3D
design and plant science. As part of the learning experience, students will also
be exposed to the process of plant science research. Researchers will engage
students to learn about plant science through AVR experiences to understand
everyday plants in their own lives and communities. The project will contribute
to the emerging body of knowledge on innovative technological teaching tools and
best practices. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences
for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four major
objectives of this project are to (1) integrate art and design into STEM
education, (2) apply AVR technology to advance plant science education through
the use of novel tools and methodologies, (3) inspire interest in STEM careers
among underserved and underrepresented students and provide them with skills for
a future STEM career, and (4) foster knowledge and appreciation of plant science
among high school students. Researchers will form teams of learners who are
interested in either STEM or art to work together collaboratively in integrating
design and technology within the same science project. Students’ projects are
focused not only on the final products but also on the artistic and scientific
creative process. The project team will examine whether and how this innovative
intervention inspires creative learning, develops critical thinking and problem-
solving skills, supports concepts of innovation, and allows students to connect
to real-life situations impacting STEM career paths. Students will interact with
researchers and present their own projects at a symposium that will horn
student’s professional skills at preparing presentations for the public outside
the comfort zone of their schools. They will also have the opportunity to attend
the NSTA (National Science Teachers Association) annual conference and present
posters on their experiences. These serve as opportunities to broaden students’
view of future career opportunities and to establish a network of future
mentors. Project assessment will include surveys of student attitudes towards
and interests in STEM careers before, during, and after their participation in
the project. Researchers will also test and validate a botanical content
inventory with high school students to study their plant content knowledge
gains. The AVR plant science 3D models produced by the project will be made
available for educators around the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.