* 1949629
* IIBR Informatics: Reducing the training data annotation cost for learning-based macromolecule identification in cellular electron cryo-tomography
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Min Xu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2023
* USD 427,114.00

Cells are basic structural and functional units of all known living organisms.
Understanding the structures of large individual macromolecules and their
complexes inside cells is fundamental to biological research community. However,
such structural information has been extremely difficult to obtain due to the
lack of data acquisition techniques. Recent advances in cellular electron cryo-
tomography (CECT) have enabled 3D imaging of cellular structure and organization
at sub-molecular resolution and in near-native state. CECT images contain tens
of millions of structurally highly diverse macromolecules, which introduces a
major challenge in the throughput of subsequent computational analysis. How to
efficiently and accurately process the images to identify each distinct type of
macromolecular complex has been challenging. Conventional methods that try to
align and classify each type of complex are too slow to process the large
volumes of data being acquired. This project will focus on reducing data
annotation costs using supervised deep learning, which is a major bottleneck for
macromolecule structural recognition. This project will train graduate and
undergraduate students in computational biology, bioinformatics, and bioimage
analysis, as well integrate research results into university
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop novel approaches to
significantly reduce the training data annotation cost. This will be achieved by
(1) improving the generalization ability of classification model trained by
randomizing the simulated imaging conditions; (2) enhancing training of
classification model using structural representation learned from unlabeled
subtomograms via a semi-supervised autoencoder; and (3) reducing annotation by
selecting the minimal set of most important subtomograms for improving the
classification using active learning. By integrating the three objectives into a
unified system, this project will provide users learning-based subtomogram
classification models with improved accuracy and a minimal amount of annotated
training data. The success of the project is a critical step towards fully
automating the systematic in situ macromolecule structural classification in
single cells captured by heterogeneous CECT datasets. The algorithms and
software developed in this project will have direct benefit to the structural
biology community. To facilitate broad use of the methods developed from this
project, an open-source CECT analysis software, AITom
(https://github.com/xulabs/aitom), will be developed. Results of this research
will be provided on the Xu Lab website (http://xulabs.org) and GitHub site
(https://github.com/xulabs)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.