* 1949927
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Impact of Noyce Master Teaching Fellowship Programs on Teacher Retention: The Role of Motivation, Leadership, and School-Work Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Peter Sheppard, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 55,490.00

This project aims to serve the national need to improve the retention and
persistence of STEM teachers in high-need schools across the nation. It will do
so by studying the retention and persistence of Noyce Master Teacher Fellows
compared to a control teacher population. Specifically, this Noyce Track 4
Collaborative Research project will conduct an exploratory study through a
collaboration among eight universities: Rice University (lead institution),
Middle Tennessee State University, University of Rochester, Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale, University of Arizona, University of Louisiana-
Lafayette, University of California-San Diego, and Kennesaw State University.
K-12 education in the U.S. has been suffering from teacher shortages and
attrition, particularly in mathematics and science disciplines and particularly
in high-need schools. Investigating factors related to teacher retention and
persistence is, thus, a crucial first step to increasing the positive effects of
teacher retention on K-12 education. By comparing Noyce Master Teaching Fellows
with a group of non-Noyce teachers with similar background characteristics, the
impact of the Noyce Master Teaching Fellows programs on long-term teacher
retention and persistence should become more visible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on existing research and theories related to
teacher development and retention including self-efficacy, self-determination,
and networks, the project intends to investigate the relation between key
teacher constructs and variables (e.g., motivation, leadership skills, diversity
dispositions, school-work environment, social networks, and professional
background) and teacher retention and persistence. The project aims to compare
Noyce Master Teaching Fellows with non-Noyce teachers, using both quantitative
and qualitative methods. Results of this study have the potential to inform
teacher preparation and development programs, as well as stakeholders who are
trying to solve the teacher retention and persistence problems facing the
nation, particularly in high-need schools and school districts. An external
Advisory Board of expert scholars will provide feedback throughout the
implementation of the research study. Broad dissemination of the findings is
planned through Rice’s Digital Scholarship Archive, publications in academic
journals, and presentations at professional conferences. To reach the public
audience, articles about the project will be sent to local newspapers; and the
work and its findings will be disseminated through social media outlets (e.g.,
website, FaceBook, Twitter). This Track 4: Research project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.