* 1949415
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: What's in a Name? The Effect of Changing Definitions of "Employer" on Worker Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Daniel Deibler, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 29,160.00

This doctoral dissertation research in economics (DDRIE) project will use
machine language and modern economic methods to investigate court decisions on
who is an “employee” affect worker’s labor outcomes, such as employment tenure,
wages, benefits, and unionization. There has been a large increase in
“contingent workers” – workers who are on temporary contracts, contracted out,
or are independent contractors. These workers have weaker protections in terms
of compensation tenure and collective action. In spite of these developments in
the labor market, there is relatively little research on the causes of the
increase in the proportion of temporary work or independent contracting in the
labor market. A major determinant of the increase in the growth of these
“contingent workers” is the legal definition of employee as defined in court
rulings. This study will use machine learning and random assignment of judges to
specific cases to determine whether changing the legal definition of employee
affect the growth of the size of “contingent workers” and how this impacts
workers’ wages, tenure loss, unionization rates, and inequality. The results of
this DDRIE project will shed light on how economist can combine machine learning
tools and economic theory to investigate important labor market and other social
issues. The results of the research project will also provide guidance on how to
develop policies to improve the functioning of labor markets as well as how to
increase the living standards of workers, especially those at the lower end of
the earning spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will estimate
the causal effects of changing legal definition of an employee. It will collect
data on all cases in which a court made a decision about whether workers could
be considered “contractors”, and use machine learning to analyze case text to
determine the direction of decision and the set of affected workers. It exploits
the random assignment of judges to specific cases to obtain exogenous variation
for identification. Judges vary systematically in their decisions on employment
definitions, and that variation can be predicted by judge characteristic, such
as age, race, political preferences, and education. Building on work using
machine learning and variable selection, we train a regularized regression model
to predict case decision from characteristics of judges assigned to a case. The
cross-validated model produces an exogenous instrument for use in a two-stage
least squares regression. This approach is leveraged to analyze the causal
effects of changing definitions of employee on worker outcomes. The project then
investigates whether a legal opinion that workers can be considered contractors
affects unionization rates, remuneration, and inequality. This project directly
examines the impact of legal precedent on worker outcomes and contracting rates,
as well as the role of legal institutions in determining contracting outcomes,
and its effect on employment and wages. The results of the research project will
provide guidance on policies to improve the functioning of the labor market as
well as how to increase the living standards of workers at the lower end of the
earning spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.