* 1949710
* Learning-Based Fault-Tolerant Traffic Management Algorithms for Intelligent Transportation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Li Jin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,931.00

This grant will support research on fault-tolerant intelligent transportation
systems. Intelligent transportation systems have a strong potential for
congestion mitigation and energy savings. However, such systems rely on a large
number of sensors and communications devices deployed in complex environments.
Therefore, these systems are prone to sensing faults (misreported, corrupted, or
missing measurements), which can significantly compromise system efficiency. To
address this challenge, this project will develop traffic management algorithms
that detect and resolve sensing faults. Based on these algorithms, a paradigm of
real-time, online fault-tolerant traffic management will be studied. This
project will advance the knowledge about resiliency of intelligent
transportation systems and provide ready-to-implement solutions. The solutions
have the potential for mitigating the economic and environmental losses caused
by sensing faults and improving cyber resilience of the traffic system. The
expected results will provide hints on fault-tolerant design of other civil
infrastructure systems as well. Graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups will lead the research activities. Transportation
agencies will be involved in discussion on concerns for actual
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities jointly consider fault
detection and resilient control for intelligent transportation systems. The
modeling will synthesize physical law-based and learning-based approaches.
Consequently, the models can integrate real-time information and adjust
themselves to non-stationary environments with minimal human intervention. The
objective will be approached via two research and one validation tasks. First,
online fault detection and correction algorithms will be developed. These
algorithms check consistency between observations from correlated sensors and
between the observed data and physical law-based models, which contain prior
empirical knowledge of the spatio-temporal correlation of sensor observations.
Second, learning-based approaches will be incorporated into classical traffic
control methods to design adaptive traffic management algorithms. The approach
will provide guaranteed resiliency against sensing faults. Finally, the
algorithms will be validated in a realistic micro-simulation testbed of a road
network in New York City under a variety of sensing fault
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.