* 1949845
* Computer-intensive Inference with Applications to Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Joseph Romano, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2023
* USD 290,000.00

This research project will develop new statistical computer-intensive procedures
that address current problems in the social sciences. Two different research
questions that are related by common principles and methodologies will be
addressed by this research. First, the project will develop new methods for
generating inferences from ranked data that do not rely on strong model
assumptions. It is common for data available from different populations (such as
countries, schools, or hospitals) to be ordered by some performance measure, say
from best to worst in the form of ranks. Improved methods for ranked data will
have many applications in the social sciences, including the analysis of
countries ranked in reading, math, and science or the ranking of neighborhoods
by intergenerational income mobility. Second, the project will address the 'hot
hand fallacy' and the human misperception of randomness. The common
understanding of streaks in small samples has been challenged recently, and this
research will provide solid statistical tools to address this controversy. In
addition, graduate students will participate in the research process, and the
project will develop free and easily accessible
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems to be addressed in this project are
related by common inferential methodologies that will provide sound principles
to areas in need of formal statistical analysis. So that inferential procedures
will not rely on unverifiable model-based assumptions, computer-intensive
methods of statistical inference will be used, such as resampling, bootstrap,
and randomization methods. Although machine calculations will be developed, they
will be accompanied by mathematical or theoretical results that justify their
use. The problems to be addressed will require novel insights in order to
develop rigorous statistical properties so that the methods may be applied
safely in practice. In addition, the project will draw heavily on the literature
in multiple testing and simultaneous inference. For example, inference for ranks
will result in the construction of simultaneous confidence regions for ranks
with guaranteed error control. This will allow researchers to know whether
empirical rankings represent real differences between populations or whether
they are just artifacts of the data. While the problems to be addressed stem
from specific applied questions, they will require solutions that are of
fundamental importance in statistics. These open problems are exciting and
challenging not only from the point of view of mathematical statistics, but also
because burgeoning applications demand new statistical
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.