* 1949107
* The New Normal: Macroeconomic Stabilization Policy Post-Great Recession
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Eric Sims, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 297,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest rates have declined through time such
that the lower bound on policy rates is likely to bind more frequently in the
future. Unconventional monetary policy tools such as forward guidance and
quantitative easing, which were those deployed in the wake of the Great
Recession, will become more common policy tools in future recessions. This
project will address research questions on monetary policy in the low interest
rate environment currently affecting the US and other developed economies. The
research will focus on the notion that the adjustment of short-term policy rates
is insufficient as the only monetary policy instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first project incorporates constrained financial intermediaries into a standard
macroeconomic framework to systematically study different unconventional policy
tools such as quantitative easing (QE), forward guidance, and negative interest
rate policy. By exploring the substitutability of unconventional policies such
as QE with conventional interest rate policy, the project explores overall cost
of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. The second project looks at
the implications of constrained financial intermediaries on fiscal policy by
specifically focusing on the magnitude of the government spending multiplier and
its dependence on the zero lower bound. The third project incorporates a
realistic model of the term structure of interest rates so as to study certain
monetary policy tools such as the maturity extension program. The final project
considers household heterogeneity and incomplete markets within the framework
developed in the first project. This project studies the distributional
implications of unconventional monetary policies such as
QE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.