* 1949648
* I-Corps:  Photocatalytic Water Purification Technology for the Removal of Pollutants that  are Commonly Problematic for Water Treatment Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Jun Jiao, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is an
improvement in the current state-of-the-art water purification capability. The
technology expands the range of water purification effectiveness and provides a
means of preventing anthropogenic wastes from entering the environment through
photocatalytic degradation. The removal of organic material from the water
system has an ever-increasing role in the subject of human health. The degree to
which anthropogenic water waste affects human health is ultimately tied to the
ability to remove these wastes from our water supply. Unlike filtration methods,
photocatalytic oxidation has the ability to destroy these contaminants without
the need for chemical additives. Successful commercialization of this technology
protects health by improving the capability for organic waste remediation. There
also are many industrial applications requiring organic pollutant removal where
this technology can have impact. The proposed system is capable of oxidizing
water contaminants and can destroy contaminants that are commonly problematic
for water treatment systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on fundamental research showing improved efficiency and scalability of
photocatalytic water purification systems by optimizing the 3D geometry of the
catalyst material in conjunction with the geometry of the illumination system.
The result was a significant reduction in energy loss, as well as an overall
improved usability and scalability of the system. The photocatalyst material
itself also has been modified in order to optimize the electrical and chemical
properties of the catalyst surface. Implantation of TiO2 and SiO2 nanoparticles
resulted in increased degradation performance by more than 500%. The overall
efficiency of the photocatalytic reactor also was considered with respect to
energy usage as defined by the Electrical Energy per Order (EEO)
characterization model. The lowest EEO achieved in this system was 54 kWh per
cubic meter of water for each order of magnitude reduction in pollutant
concentration - an improvement in EEO over previously reported thin-film based
photoreactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.