* 1949749
* RUI-ARTS. Deciphering the Hidden Diversity of the Neotropical frog genus Elachistocleis (Anura, Microhylidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Rafael de Sá, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 05/31/2024
* USD 405,136.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award focuses on assessing the species diversity of a
group of small and mostly subterranean South American frogs known as “oval-
frogs”. The group consists of only 18 known species; however, preliminary
studies suggest that there may be at least 30 additional species that have not
yet been identified as separate species. Understanding the total diversity of
the group is critical to developing rigorous scientific understanding of current
unprecedented rates of amphibian declines, which can inform conservation
priorities. The project combines research and education both at national and
international levels. Other broader impacts include the training of graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as professional development of an early-career
researcher (post-doctoral scholar). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elachistocleis
constitutes an excellent model to address fundamental questions related to
species diversity, cryptic speciation, and phylogeny. The genus occurs in a
variety of climatic and ecological regions across South America and represents
the second largest genus of Neotropical microhylids after the genus
Chiasmocleis. Preliminary data suggest that species diversity is highly
underestimated, and that current taxonomy based on morphology alone does not
reflect the phylogenetic history of the clade. All currently described species
will be sampled, with emphasis on populations previously assigned to “E. ovalis”
which are currently without name. Many populations are likely representing new
species. Species description and phylogeny reconstruction will use a combination
of molecular markers and morphological data. Building on these goals, this
project aims to understand the patterns of biogeography of this fossorial group
of frogs. Furthermore, this project will compare and contrast the historical
biogeography of Elachistocleis with a recently published biogeographic
hypothesis for Chiasmocleis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.