* 1949348
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Merger Analysis of Multisided Platforms: An Application to the Used Heavy Duty Truck Auction Market
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Andrew Sweeting, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 10,043.00

This project is designed to test economic theories about the effects of market
competition on firms providing multisided platforms. A multisided platform
facilitates interactions between two or more groups of participants. For
example, a firm that sells auction services is connecting sellers with buyers.
This project will develop new economic theory and will test the theory using
data from auction sales of used heavy-duty trucks in the United States. The data
analysis will examine the effects of a specific previous merger in this industry
to see if and how the merger reduced competition. The methods developed in this
project can also be used to examine other markets with competition between
between multisided platform firms. Policymakers in the US are asked to evaluate
proposed mergers to determine whether the merger might reduce competition. This
is a difficult task for these types of merger, since the evaluation has to take
into account both how the platforms interact and how the merger might change
interactions. This project will develop and demonstrate one way to evaluate
these factors. Preserving and strengthening competition strengthens the U.S.
economy as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will extend the existing
theoretical models of multisided platforms by including both horizontal
differentiation between platforms and vertical differentiation among goods.
According to the model constructed in the project, the higher fees charged by
the platforms along with the merger have a heterogeneous impact on sellers with
goods at different quality levels. When there are different indirect network
effects among the groups on these platforms, it can trigger a change of quality
structure across platforms. This structural change is more significant if there
is less horizontal differentiation between platforms, which can make the number
of participants more elastic to the fees and the indirect network effect. These
findings are consistent with transaction data collected from the U.S. used
heavy-duty truck auction market. According to the data, the high-quality trucks
sold on the offline platform are valued more than the ones sold on the online
platform. After the merger of the leading offline and online auction platforms,
the offline platform charges a higher fee and uses a cross-platform information
policy to reduce the search friction across the two platforms. These policy
changes affect the decisions of buyers and sellers, resulting in a quality
structure change on these two platforms: low-quality trucks are more likely to
be transacted on the online platform, and high-quality trucks tend to be
transacted on the offline platform. The difference in transaction prices on
these platforms becomes more significant than before. The project will focus on
this possible market evolution caused by the merger. After performing a
structural estimation based on the model, the project will investigate the
welfare implication of the merger on different groups and show several ways to
improve the platform's revenue or social welfare. The method and results used in
this project are especially useful when the markets have vertically
differentiated goods, such as the health insurance market and the peer-to-peer
lending market. The project can help us to understand the potential
heterogeneous impact of mergers on different groups in those
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.