* 1949972
* REU Site: Scientific computing for structure in big or complex datasets
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Burton Rosenberg, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/29/2024
* USD 399,999.00

Science contributes to the national welfare to solving current problems,
advancing towards a more prosperous and peaceful world, and enriching each
citizen’s understanding of the world. The career path towards a scientist is
difficult and often exclusive, and the national welfare is served by attracting,
encouraging, and mentoring those undergraduates who are considering a scientific
career. The project mission is to do this, and to anticipate the changing nature
of science by training young scientists in the theoretical and practical use of
computation to find, understand, and exploit structure in large or complex data
sets. The project also broadens participation in scientific research by locating
and encouraging talented students at institutions with fewer research offerings
than the REU site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A portfolio of mentored projects is
offered. Projects feature computation, either for the exploration or
manipulation of data, such as for visualization or high performance GPU
computation, or for the theoretical framework of computation, such as for
understanding brain processes, deep learning, and neural nets. Because of the
cross-cutting nature of computational science, the projects come from diverse
fields with mentors from diverse departments, including Computer Science,
Chemistry, Psychology, the Center for Computational Sciences, and the medical
school. Each student pairs with a mentor on a project of mutual interest, and
during the ten week summer experience, is involved in authentic research, often
interacting with graduate students. The experience concludes with a poster
session to present the outcomes. The participants are encouraged to, and the
project will fund, travel to present posters at national science
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.