* 1949471
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: To Join or Not to Join: Coalition Formation in a Public Goods Game
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Sheryl Ball, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 9,597.00

This research project will use economic theory and laboratory experiments to
study how coalitions form to provide public goods efficiently. Public goods are
goods or services that can be simultaneously consumed by several people and
there is no mechanism to exclude anyone from consuming it once it is provided.
Because of these characteristics, there is strong incentives to “free
ride”---enjoy the public good without paying for it provision. This usually
results in inadequate supply of the public good. A possible solution of the free
rider problem is the formation of coalitions to collectively provide public
goods. While coalitions may form to produce public goods, economists do not
understand the conditions under which these coalitions are likely to form and
how these conditions affect the efficiency with which such coalitions provide
public goods. This project will combine insights from behavioral economics and
laboratory experiments to study coalition formation for the provision of public
goods. The research design will allow the researchers to investigate several
aspects of coalition formation in public goods provision. The findings of this
research could have implications for many problems that society and businesses
face today such as sustainable development and provision of public services like
health care and public infrastructure. The results of this research will lead to
improved provision of public goods, such as infrastructure, hence increase
economic growth and improve living standards in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses theoretical and experimental methods to
explore behavioral economics based explanations for the formation of coalitions
and their role in the provision of public goods. While existing public goods
theory predicts free riding and inefficient outcomes, experimental results
suggest cooperation exists with contribution rates at 40-60 percent of the
efficient level, suggesting that theoretical approaches miss something
important. This research takes a novel approach to the public goods game,
allowing for heterogeneity in privately known social preferences between members
of society as well as variation in individual returns from the public good. A
two stage mechanism allows individuals to choose whether or not to join the
coalition in the first stage. Once individuals learn the size of the coalition,
they then determine the desirability of contributing to the public good
provision in the second stage. As a result, although individual social
preferences are private information, the mechanism increases the size of the
public good and thus outcome efficiency. The research tests the theoretical
predictions of this model using incentivized laboratory experiments which will
provide evidence on whether decision makers in a simple environment can achieve
predicted outcomes. The results of this study will further facilitate a better
understanding of the importance of coalitions in provisioning of public goods.
The results of this research will lead to improve provision of public goods,
such as infrastructure, hence increase economic growth and improved living
standards in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.