* 1949586
* Youth Engaged in STEM and Service: Locally- and Globally-Relevant Solar Technology Summer Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Joanna Totino, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,471,693.00

The Youth Engaged in STEM and Service: Locally- and Globally-Relevant Solar
Technology Summer Experiences project responds to the pressing need for systems
of formal and informal STEM education to support Black, brown, and female-
identifying youth with opportunities for youth to build and sustain their
interests in STEM beyond required coursework. This project will leverage
community-based partnerships to broaden the participation of youth from female-
identifying and Black and brown communities through engaging, hands-on solar
technology summer camps. The investigators will co-design and implement two
summer camp models that engage youth in project-based learning experiences
through the lens of either (1) local relevance or (2) global service learning.
These camps will operate under the premise that drawing connections to youths’
lived experiences, interests, and globally relevant issues empowers youth to see
themselves as someone who can do and be a scientist and engineer. In each of
these camp models, youth will learn about electricity, energy, engineering, and
solar technology; engage in science and engineering practices; and gain a
greater awareness of STEM career pathways. The camps will draw connections to
either local issues that directly impact youth’s lived experiences and
communities (local relevance), or global social issues with an opportunity to
use what they learn to enact social change (global service learning). The Youth
Engaged in STEM and Service project aims to contribute to the field’s
understanding of the strengths and challenges of two approaches to culturally
relevant program design, with important implications for STEM programmatic
decision-making. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will include a three-part
study to examine the design and development, implementation, and learner
outcomes of this project. The project will build on the field’s understanding of
the key programmatic characteristics and necessary conditions that can support
culturally relevant STEM programming for Black and brown and female-identifying
youth. Utilizing design-based research, the project will engage in an iterative
design process with community-based partners to develop program models for two
solar power summer camps, using two approaches to culturally relevant
programming: one focused on global service learning and one on local relevance.
An implementation study will deepen our understanding of how the features of the
two experiences support implementation and youth engagement. Finally, the
learner outcomes study will use a quasi-experimental mixed methods approach to
examine the impact of camp experiences on youth’s cognitive and social-emotional
outcomes. Cognitive outcomes include students’ understanding of STEM content and
awareness of STEM career pathways. Social-emotional outcomes include
dispositions, interest and identity associated with science. In addition, the
study will investigate differential outcomes by gender identity and seek to
understand the conditions that attribute to these differences. The study will
rely on quantitative and qualitative data including content assessments;
observations; interviews; and youth surveys that measure STEM fascination,
values, competency beliefs, engagement, and science identity. Outcomes of the
project include the research findings as well as curricular resources for hands-
on, culturally-relevant summer camps centered around solar
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.