* 1949458
* Career Exploration Lab: 3D Printing and STEM Engagement for High School Students with Visual Impairments and their Educators
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Carol Christian, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,499,733.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). For these students with
visual impairments (VI), the possibility of a future in astronomy, or any
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) field, seems daunting.
To help address this, the project will develop and research STEM Career
Exploration Labs (CELs) for high school students with VI, using astronomy and 3D
printing to bolster their interests in and knowledge of STEM and STEM careers,
as well as their STEM skills. Educator Partner Institutes will build teacher
expertise in facilitating student learning that will use a mix of 3D printing
technologies and tactile- and sound-based astronomy instruction. Well-developed
spatial thinking is necessary for understanding numerous astronomical topics,
such as celestial motion and lunar phases. Spatial thinking is particularly
important for students with VI, who touch their surroundings and/or gather
information via sound to form mental images and make sense of the world.
Students with VI use auditory and haptic perception with spatial thinking. The
project will use hands-on activities including student involvement in assembling
and using desktop 3D printers and the use of 3D printed models and sound to
teach astronomy. The program will also include interactions with STEM
professionals with VI and field trips to local STEM businesses that offer
insights into possible STEM careers. The project will serve high school students
(ages 14 - 20) with VI, their sighted peers, STEM high school teachers, and
teachers of the visually impaired (TVIs). The project, building on pilot work
that has already pilot-tested each component, will expand to more geographical
regions (12 states total) and include STEM educators, TVIs, and sighted
students. 3D models and activities developed by the project will be made freely
available via online repositories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
research the effects participation in CEL workshop has on high school students
with VI. There is little research on how students with VI learn science, and
even fewer studies on the impact of technological tools designed for students
with VI. The project will investigate: (1) the effect of the project on VI
student understanding of scientific concepts and the self-efficacy; (2) how the
students participate in the project's inquiry-based STEM work; (3) how the
project affects student attitudes towards STEM, STEM careers, and astronomy;(4)
assess understanding of spatial thinking skills and astronomy concepts; and (5)
identify STEM high school teachersâ€™ attitudes towards students with disabilities
in STEM classes. The project will use a mixed-methods approach and a pre-test -
intervention-post-test design employing qualitative and quantitative measures to
determine the effects of the CELs model. Project research will contribute to the
empirical research in the field of students with VI and addresses the research
to practice gap by focusing on the use of 3D printers and 3D printed models as
STEM instructional tools for students with VI. Moreover, there is a need for
research on the efficacy of 3D printing as an instructional tool for access to
visual content for students with VI, as 3D models have been suggested as
superior to tactile graphics. Project methods, 3D models, activities, and
research results will be disseminated via a wide variety of means, including
peer-reviewed research journals practitioner publications in education (STEM,
general, and special); presentations and workshops at various STEM, astronomy,
VI, education, 3D printing, persons with disabilities, and related domestic and
international conferences; and teacher professional development
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.