* 1949855
* CSHL Drosophila Neurobiology: Genes, Circuits &amp; Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2024
* USD 412,711.00

The "Neurobiology of Drosophila: Genes, Circuits and Behavior" course
(2020-2023) is an intensive advanced three week summer course taught by leading
neuroscientists with extensive and complementary research experience studying
brain function in this important model organism. The course is taught by lead
instructors who remain at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL) throughout the
duration of the course together with teaching assistants from their
laboratories. Twelve students will be selected from a pool of applicants largely
on the basis of scientific merit. Course trainees include advanced graduate
students (typically 70%), postdoctoral trainees (typically 25%) and junior
faculty (5%) who are entering into neurobiological research using the fly model.
Women and underrepresented minorities will be actively recruited. The course has
a broad impact on the field in that students are chosen based in part on their
potential for disseminating the acquired skills and knowledge at their home
institutions. The course also provides instructors, assistants and guest
lecturers with opportunities to explore new approaches and material for teaching
neuroscience with Drosophila at their universities. Protocols developed in the
course will reach an audience beyond the classroom through publication of
laboratory manuals (Drosophila Neurobiology: A Laboratory Manual) and technique
videos that will be made available on CSHL's E-Technical web
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The course consists of laboratory sessions led by
3 course directors and daily lectures presented by up to 20 leading experts in
the field. The hands-on portion of the course is centered on inquiry-based
projects, utilizing different morphological and physiological measurements and
behavioral paradigms learned in the course. Specific techniques include
molecular genetic analyses, quantitative neuroanatomy, computational modeling,
recording of neural activity using electrophysiology and genetically encoded
calcium indicators, optogenetic and thermogenetic control of neural activity, as
well as numerous quantitative behavioral measures. Guest lecturers will divide
their presentations into two parts. The first part will address the core
neurobiological concepts and techniques they use in their own research, and the
second part will focus on how their specific research fits into the field as a
whole. Collectively, the course will provide a comprehensive and practical
introduction to modern experimental methods for studying the neural basis of
behavior in Drosophila. Long-term impact analysis demonstrates that this course
enhances research productivity, builds collaborations, and reaches a broader
audience through dissemination of protocols and
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.