* 1949544
* REU Site: Engaging Student Teachers in STEM Education Research
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Jennifer Wilhelm, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2023
* USD 378,159.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Kentucky will provide an academic year undergraduate research experience for
preservice STEM teachers. It will host three cohorts of eight students, engaging
a total of 24 students over the three-year award period. The long-term goal of
the project is to improve K-12 students’ STEM knowledge, understanding, and
skills. The project’s core strategy to achieve that goal is to develop a larger
and better-prepared K-12 STEM teacher population. Site activities will use
evidence-based educational practices and focus on developing higher order
thinking skills and deep conceptual STEM understanding. The project will engage
pre-service teachers as undergraduate research fellows, who will pursue STEM
education research focused on local educational issues with national and
international implications. In this work, the fellows will be mentored by eight
experienced faculty in the University of Kentucky's STEM Education Department.
This REU site intends to increase the fellows’ knowledge of the interplay
between society, education, and research, especially the multiple transformative
ways that STEM literacy can be attained across diverse learner populations.
Another intended outcome is increased interest of students from diverse
populations in STEM education research. Towards this end, the REU will recruit
students from Bluegrass Community and Technical College and from specialized
programs for specific student populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year
project will immerse eight undergraduate research fellows each year in the
design, execution, analysis, and communication of authentic STEM education
research. The fellows will contribute new knowledge to the collective
understanding of pedagogical practices and consequences influencing urban,
rural, and suburban K-12 STEM education. Thus, this project will offer fellows
an opportunity to do research most pertinent to modern K-12 STEM educator
practice. Through these activities, undergraduates will learn how to consult the
research literature for relevant background theory and methods pertaining to
STEM education problems, cultivate technical expertise and meticulous habits of
data collection and record-keeping, develop proficiency with both qualitative
and quantitative data analysis, improve writing and presentation skills, and
earn valuable experience working with an active and successful team of educator-
researchers. This REU stands out due to its academic-year (August through May)
implementation period. The fellows’ experience will culminate with a
presentation at the National Conference of Undergraduate Research. It is
expected that this work will be developed into a journal article by the research
team and submitted for publication. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program
is cofunding this project in recognition of its alignment with the broader
teacher preparation goals of the Noyce effort. The Advanced Technological
Education program is cofunding this project in recognition of its alignment with
the broader goals of providing research experiences to community college STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.