* 1949173
* Collaborative Research: Synthesizing arc-scale geochemical, petrologic, and geophysical datasets to investigate causes of volcanic diversity in the Cascade Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Christy Till, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 262,679.00

Subduction zones – locations where one of the Earth’s tectonic plates are pushed
beneath another – are one of the most volcanically active environments on the
planet. Decades of study on subduction zones have provided insight into the
overarching processes that produce the magmas erupted, how the erupted magmas
are produced at individual volcanoes, and a number of related questions. Despite
this progress, a complex and largely unsolved problem is the cause of ubiquitous
and dramatic variations in the amount and composition of magmas that erupt at
volcanoes within the same subduction zone. Do these reflect processes acting
deep within the Earth’s mantle, or in the overlying crust? Addressing this
problem has important implications for understanding magma production and
volcanic hazards, as worldwide almost a billion people live at risk from
volcanoes. There is also a potential for scientific breakthrough by utilizing
the existing large data sets acquired from recent NSF investments such as the
MARGINS, GeoPRISMS, and EarthScope programs. However, addressing the question
has proven challenging to date in part because of a lack of critical data for
some locations, but largely because of the lack of suitable tools and approaches
that allow us to quantitatively synthesize and compare the existing large data
sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, this is a multidisciplinary study to conduct a
quantitative comparison of existing large geophysical and compositional datasets
at the spatial scales of the entire Cascades subduction zone, linked through
sets of common intensive variables such as heat and density, to determine the
primary drivers of intra-arc magmatic diversity. Building on a successful Proof
of Concept project that demonstrates the promise of the approach (Till et al.,
2019), the project will test hypotheses about the relative roles of mantle
magmatic flux vs. crustal characteristics and crustal magma storage depths in
producing variations in erupted compositions and fluxes, and in controlling the
geophysical state of the crust along strike in the Quaternary Cascades arc. The
project has the potential to transform our understanding of these important
regions and will produce a number of important broader impacts including,
catalyzing interdisciplinary collaborations between three PI’s at three
institutions, producing expert datasets widely and easily available to the Earth
Science community, supporting undergraduate experiential learning activities.
Specifically, it will implement a new multi-year undergraduate research program
CONVEcT program (Central Oregon Network for Volcano Education and Training) with
research cohorts from Arizona State, Oregon State and Cornell
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.