* 1949531
* A Labor Markets Research Agenda through a Job Search Platform
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Syed Uzair Junaid, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2023
* USD 407,178.00

This research will use modern economic theory and experimental methods to study
how information flows affect the functioning of labor markets, especially in low
income communities. Specifically, this research study whether providing accurate
labor market information to both employers and job seekers leads employers to
make better employment decisions and therefore increase hiring and whether the
accurate information encourages workers to be truthful about their
qualifications when applying for jobs as well as encourage them to invest in
improving their skills. Research on the effects of information flows on labor
markets have either focused on the demand side (employers) alone or on the
supply side (the workers). This innovative research project looks at how
information flows affect both the employer (demand) and the supplier (job
seeker) in the labor market. It thus provides a more complete view of how
information flows affect the functioning of labor markets. In addition to its
contribution to the economics literature and education, the results of this
research project will guide policies to improve the functioning of labor
markets, increase employment, human capital formation, economic growth, and
ultimately reduce poverty. This research project will also help establish the US
as the global leader in efficient labor
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information frictions in labor markets can lead
firms and workers to make suboptimal matching decisions, lower employment,
output, and wages while increasing costly turnover. Information frictions can
also lead workers to make suboptimal human capital investments. This research
will use a series of RCTs to test if alleviating information frictions can
change job search and hiring behavior, improve firm-worker matching, and
increase human capital investment. The project will build on a labor market
search and hiring platform that was developed using prior NSF support that
generates rich, high-frequency data on labor supply and demand. This project
will use the platform to study the effects of actual and threatened audits of
applicants’ work experience on applicants’ reporting of past work experience,
job search, and investment in human capital, firms' hiring decisions; and firm-
applicant match quality. The use of audits to capture both supply and demand
side responses to labor market information frictions as well as the effects of
these frictions on human capital formation is an innovation in the study of
labor markets. The results of this research will significantly contribute to the
economics literature on understanding the role of information flows in efficient
functioning of labor markets as well as provide inputs into policies to improve
the functioning of labor markets. The results of this research could increase
investment in human capital, improve matching in labor market, hence employment,
wages, incomes, and economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.