* 1949881
* AON Collaborative Research: Continuation of long-term Beaufort Gyre observations in 2020-2024 to enhance understanding of the Arctic's role in climate variability
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2026
* Andrey Proshutinsky, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 05/31/2026
* USD 4,500,872.00

The Arctic is undergoing rapid climate change, with atmospheric temperatures
warming at a rate greater than twice the global average, a precipitous decline
in Arctic sea ice, and sustained accumulation of heat and freshwater in the
ocean. These changes have extensive consequences for global climate, marine
ecosystems and geopolitics. The Beaufort Gyre is one of the Arctic Ocean’s main
sea-ice and ocean circulation systems and a centerpiece for Arctic and global
change. The most pronounced sea-ice losses and ocean changes are observed in
this region. Conspicuous examples are the substantial increases in
concentrations of relatively fresh water in the ocean, and in the amount of heat
contained in the ocean. Other prominent changes in the Beaufort Gyre include
ocean acidification and transformations in the marine ecosystem. This project is
an extensive observing program to document and analyze the Beaufort Gyre’s
evolving sea ice and ocean properties. In-depth analyses of the data provide
understanding of the Beaufort Gyre’s role in the Arctic and global climate
system, which is essential to develop the most viable future climate
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon the discoveries of
the 2003-2020 Beaufort Gyre Observing System (BGOS) project to sample and
analyze the Beaufort Gyre. BGOS operations are continued in 2020-2024 including
an extensive analysis and interpretation of the data. Ocean moorings sample
seawater properties and sea-ice to resolve sub-daily to interannual variability.
Annual ship-based ocean sampling, in collaboration with Canadian scientists,
augments the year-round mooring measurements. The data comprise measurements of
heat, freshwater, currents, bottom pressure, biogeochemical properties, and sea
ice. These observations are analyzed and interpreted in context with the
existing long-term measurements to test key hypotheses related to the evolving
freshwater, energetics of the ice-ocean system, the accumulation of ocean heat,
and biogeochemistry. The BGOS program coordinates with and accommodates other
national and international projects to enhance effectiveness and
interconnections of observing activities. The project includes training of
students, providing them with the opportunity to participate in BGOS expeditions
and advising them in BGOS data analysis. This encompasses an educational
exchange between Yale and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution involving
graduate students and summer undergraduate students, and tiered mentoring. Other
broader impacts include ship-board scientific presentations, tutorials, and
dispatches, participation in the NSF PolarTREC program, and engagement of Arctic
communities in Canada and Alaska. The long-term Beaufort Gyre system perspective
and knowledge gained from the data and analysis are vital to a wide variety of
Arctic processes and, ultimately, our understanding of the climate
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.