* 1949121
* I-Corps: Ultra-clear, transparent aerogel material developed to enable the next generation of energy efficient windows
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable the
next generation of cost-effective, energy efficient windows. The lack of
affordable, energy efficient windows results in thermal discomfort and Americans
wasting over $32 billion each winter in direct energy losses. The proposed
super-insulating nanoporous glass can enable windows to be 50% more insulating
than 80% of currently installed products, with payback periods 5 times faster
than similar performance solutions. Based on silica aerogel technology, the
approach of using a solid material as a transparent insulating layer also
increases window lifetime and reduction in total materials needed, leading to a
more sustainable product line. Commercialization of this material and its super-
insulating properties also has potential energy savings and sustainability
improvements to other industries as well, such as transportation and renewable
energy generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on years
of fundamental development of ultra-clear, insulating aerogel. The proposed
aerogel material is a nanoporous glass made up of 95% air trapped inside
features so small they are invisible. However, these "invisible" nanopores allow
the material to be a fraction of the weight of glass and twice as insulating as
air. Even a thin layer (only a few millimeters thick) reduces heat losses by up
to 50%, and, also provides a more stable, insulating support layer for exotic
gasses and reduced pressures. Unlike commercially available silica aerogels,
this ultra-clear material was developed to be extremely transparent
(transparency higher than even glass). This was achieved by carefully studying
and tailoring the nanostructure of the silica aerogel to reach visual clarity
and transmittance higher than 98%. Modeled performance supported by material
characterization indicate our aerogel can achieve a U-factor of 0.20 BTU/h/ft2/F
while still being sufficiently clear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.