* 1949400
* Collaborative Research: Expanding Socio-Environmental Science Investigations with Geospatial Technologies in High Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Thomas Hammond, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,667,845.00

This project aims to develop high school students' and teachers' understandings
of and skills in geospatial technologies in order to improve STEM literacy and
access to the STEM workforce. Researchers collaborate with teachers in six
different high schools to develop new teaching materials that use geospatial
technologies such as geographic information systems (GIS) and GPS-enabled iPads
or other mobile devices. Students use these tools to investigate local social
and/or environmental topics, such as the urban heat island effect, civic impacts
of urban trees, or carbon costs of different transportation systems. Each
investigation involves student data collection, data visualization, and
analysis, combining both students' own data and data from other sources--such as
local governments, federal agencies, or researchers. The investigation concludes
with students proposing a change in their communities, such as adding or re-
allocating urban greenspace or expanding bike trails or pedestrian access to
bridges. Each investigation is aligned to local curriculum and standards. As
students complete these investigations, they (a) learn about geospatial tools
and careers, (b) develop spatial thinking and reasoning skills, and (c) become
motivated to pursue STEM-related college and career paths. The teachers also
enhance their skills, particularly their understanding and use of geospatial
tools and data sets. This project increases the reach and the diversity of the
STEM pipeline in geospatial fields directly--by working with approximately 1500
students across the 6 high schools--and indirectly--through the teacher training
and professional development, continuing to impact students beyond the lifespan
of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends the work of a previous
ITEST award that established a model for the co-design, development, and
implementation of local socio-environmental science investigations (SESI) using
a geospatial curriculum. The learning activities provided opportunities for
students to collaborate, seek evidence, problem-solve, master technology,
develop geospatial thinking and reasoning (GTR) skills, and practice
communication skills, all of which are essential for the STEM workforce. This
project uses an adapted form of the original SESI model to work with a larger
and more varied group of high school students across three different regions:
urban areas in Delaware and Pennsylvania (Lehigh University), rural Washington
state (Washington State University Tri-Cities), and urban Texas (Texas Christian
University). At each of these sites, university faculty collaborate with two
high schools to form a Research-Practice Partnership (RPP) to co-design,
develop, and implement SESI activities embedded within the school’s regular
curriculum. Student outcomes consist of geospatial thinking and reasoning skills
(assessed via a performance task), STEM college and career interest (adapted
career inventory), and spatial learning attitudes (adapted learning preferences
questionnaire). Subgroups for analysis include engaged versus unengaged learners
--that is, those who complete all required assignments and projects versus those
who do not. Student outcomes on college and career interest and spatial learning
attitudes are compared to those of a control group, drawn from a similar
population (same school or same district). Teacher outcomes include their
geospatial technology use and knowledge, measured by the Geospatial Science
Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge questionnaire. The research also
examines impacts within each school and each RPP. The project contributes to the
knowledge base on geospatial curriculum design and development in a variety of
settings (urban, suburban, rural), student outcomes from curriculum-aligned
geospatial tools use, teacher professional development on geospatial technology
integration, integration of geospatial tool usage across different units of high
schools (different academic departments, different support services such as ESL
and special education), and the formation and function of RPPs centered on
curriculum-aligned geospatial education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.