* 1949556
* Exploring Partnerships to Build Trajectories into STEM Teaching Professions
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Marcia Millet, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2023
* USD 74,938.00

This project aims to contribute to the national need for highly effective
mathematics and science teachers. Toward this goal, it will engage in a one-year
planning/capacity building process to build the foundation for a teacher
education program. Secondary schools, particularly those in high-priority
districts, struggle to fill math and science vacancies every year. This project
will examine the perceptions of undergraduate STEM students at Fisk University
about teaching as a viable career option. It will also explore potential
experiences that could support student recruitment and success as teachers and
develop a trajectory into the teaching profession. In seeking to expand the
number of STEM teachers, the project intends to build bridges between Fisk
University students, experiences in Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools, and
the secondary education program at Vanderbilt
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Fisk University, a Historically
Black College and University, aims to strengthen existing partnerships with math
and science teachers in Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools (a high-need
school district), with Nashville State Community College, and with an existing
Noyce Graduate Teaching Fellows program at Vanderbilt University. The overall
project goal is to build the knowledge, community, and partnerships needed to
increase the number of students recruited into STEM teaching at Fisk University.
The proposal aims to develop an experiential curriculum and mentoring that will
support recruitment and successful preparation of STEM majors to become licensed
in secondary STEM teaching. Fisk Universityâ€™s leadership in this work will help
broaden participation in STEM teaching. This project intends to develop a model
for teacher preparation that combines STEM mastery with teaching excellence,
including preparation for using pedagogies infused with social justice.
Formative evaluation will provide data to ground decision making and to improve
development of the program. The summative evaluation will examine the degree to
which project goals are achieved, including development of a STEM secondary
teacher program at Fisk University. This Capacity Building project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.