* 1949398
* I-Corps: Self-sustainable Water Leak Detection System for Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Thad Starner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves
developing printable sensors and computational materials to create
infrastructure-scale sensing surfaces. It moves sensing and computation from
discrete chips and individual devices to large-scale materials that can sense,
communicate, and compute with no batteries or external power. This approach
solves a key challenge in modern Internet-of-Things devices, making it easier to
monitor the health of physical and energy infrastructure. For example, building
wraps that sense problems like leaks or mold can speed and lessen the costs of
diagnosing and repairing structural or aesthetic issues. Such materials would
sense and report the condition of a physical structure, proactively alert
residents if some area requires maintenance, and immediately notify the owners
of structural damage. This improved feedback loop would reduce the burden of
maintaining $4.5 trillion worth of physical infrastructure in the United States
alone by proactively directing engineers and technicians to the most vulnerable
parts of a structure. Similarly, being able to ambiently sense the presence of
various substances like water, oil, or carbon monoxide can have significant
safety, economic, health, and environmental benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project proposes sensors that are printable, inexpensive to manufacture
and purchase, and self-sustainable in terms of energy and durability. Two of our
technical approaches are active, producing enough energy in the presence of
various substances like water to be able to communicate the event of a leak
wirelessly to a remote receiver. Another approach is passive, requiring a scan
to determine a change in antenna properties to determine the presence of water.
All three techniques use non-toxic materials and are inexpensive: $1.50/sq foot
and lower for the sensing and power generation material, and $0.01/transmitter
(passive) to $5/transmitter (active, which can be connected to multiple
sensors). The goal is to design a process that can be used with standard
commercial printing techniques to produce large sheets of plastic or paper (such
as with building wrap) at meters per second. The resulting material is thin and
flexible and easily deployed. The sensing material should last for decades
allowing it to be deployed in hard-to-access locations. Prototypes and proof-of-
concept devices have been shown in the lab for each
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.