* 1949989
* Characterizing the role of TRPM4 in taste transduction
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Kathryn Medler, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 02/29/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Chemical sensory systems, which are comprised of olfaction and taste in
vertebrates and many invertebrates, play important roles in feeding and social
interactions. The sense of taste is used to determine whether potential food
items will be ingested or rejected and is critical for an organism’s survival.
Because the chemicals that activate the taste system have variable structures,
there are multiple taste cell types that use different signaling pathways to
detect these stimuli. Some taste chemicals activate receptors that initiate
second messenger cascades, while others interact directly with ion channels to
cause a cellular response. The PI’s laboratory has recently reported that the
monovalent selective TRP channel, TRPM4, has a critical role in taste
transduction but how it functions in taste cells is poorly understood. The goal
of this application is to characterize how TRPM4 contributes to taste
transduction in the different signaling pathways. Overall, the current
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms that translate taste stimuli into a
signal that is sent to the brain for processing is still quite limited.
Therefore, a better characterization of these signaling pathways will provide an
enhanced understanding of how taste information is sent to the brain and more
generally, provide new insights into how the brain gathers information about its
surroundings. The project will also support the PI's efforts to increase the
number of underrepresented groups to pursue careers in STEM through the
University at Buffalo’s Collegiate Science and Technology Entry Program
(CSTEP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taste stimuli activate multiple signaling
mechanisms in distinct taste cells populations within the oral cavity. One cell
population communicates via conventional synapses and expresses voltage-gated
calcium channels (VGCCs). A different cell population lacks chemical synapses
and relies on the phospholipase-C-dependent signaling pathway to activate a
Calhm1/3 channel complex to release neurotransmitter. Taste cells that express
this pathway (called Type II cells) contribute to the detection of bitter, sweet
and umami taste stimuli. Taste cells with conventional synapses (Type III cells)
detect sour and salty stimuli. Recently, it is becoming clear that the signaling
pathways in these different cell types are more complex than previously
appreciated. The PI’s laboratory identified a critical role for the transient
receptor potential melastatin 4 channel (TRPM4) in the Type II signaling
pathways and reported that TRPM4 is also expressed in Type III cells. Initial
data has found that the role of TRPM4 varies within the different signaling
pathways and is differentially used to affect the output response. How this
happens and the modulators regulating TRPM4 activity in these different cell
populations is unknown. The proposal’s focus is to define the function of TRPM4
in different taste signaling pathways and to identify how it is regulated in
each. The specific aims are: (1) How is TRPM4 regulated in the GPCR signaling
pathway in Type II cells? and (2) What is the role of TRPM4 in ionotropic
signaling in Type III cells? These aims will be accomplished using mouse
transgenics, live cell imaging and pharmacological
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.