* 1949418
* Imprecise Inference from Sequentially Presented Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Michael Woodford, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 01/31/2024
* USD 449,999.00

Understanding how people make decisions is crucial to advancing our
understanding of economic mechanisms. Rational-choice theory, despite successes
in accounting for some aspects of human decision making under uncertainty, fails
to capture certain recurrent patterns observed in behavior, such as biases and
apparent randomness in choices. Some of these deviations from optimal behavior
suggest that information is processed in the brain in a way that introduces
imprecision, similar to the imprecision in sensory perception. A growing
literature on perceptual judgments argues that in sensory contexts, these
imprecisions often actually represent efficient adaptations, given constraints
on the available cognitive resources. This raises a question as to whether
patterns of imprecision in the case of higher-level cognitive processing
(comparisons of numerical magnitudes, estimates of the average values of
fluctuating series, and inference about unknown variables) cannot be understood
in a similar way. We investigate this hypothesis through an array of experiments
in which human subjects are asked to make decisions on the basis of multiple
pieces of information, presented sequentially. Decisions made on the basis of
sequential evidence are not only important in actual economic life, but also
have the advantage as an object of study that they allow us to investigate how
each piece of information is separately taken into account in the decision. This
reveals the relative allocation of cognitive resources to the processing of each
piece of evidence, which in turn sheds light on the underlying constraints faced
by the brain. Overall, the main goal of our research is to provide an account of
human judgments and economic decisions that is founded on normative principles,
and that can be generalized to many problems of human decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, we investigate, in the
context of economic decisions, the neurocognitive hypothesis that the brain
faces a problem of constrained optimization: that of allocating its limited
information-processing resources to achieve the best possible decisions. From
this general principle, we derive testable quantitative models of cognitive
processing and decision making that make specific predictions regarding the bias
and randomness in human choices. In particular, these suboptimal patterns are
predicted to depend on prior beliefs about the probability distribution from
which the presented evidence is drawn, and on the rewards associated with
different responses in a given context. To test this hypothesis, we design six
experiments, in which we manipulate both the prior and the reward structure, and
we examine the degree to which our proposed models of constrained information
processing capture the behavioral patterns found in experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.