* 1949802
* AGS-PRF: The Effects of Nonlinearities on the Onset and Evolution of Microinstabilities in Solar Plasma
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Emily Lichko, Lichko, Emily R
* Fellowship Award
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 227,916.00

The postdoctoral study in geospace science is a combination of analytical,
computational, and observational work to be conducted under the supervision of
Prof. Kristopher Klein at the University of Arizona. The project addresses open
questions in solar physics about how the solar wind is energized, and in
general, about how astrophysical plasmas are heated due to particle interactions
with magnetic fields. This work is important as the vast majority of visible
mass in the universe is expected to be in the plasma state, in which atoms are
broken up into electrons and ions that are strongly influenced by magnetic and
electric fields. The study is particularly timely to interpret forthcoming
observations from the Parker Solar Probe. In addition to doing cutting-edge
research, the principal investigator (PI) will also mentor a summer student’s
research project and develop an undergraduate educational module on space
physics, which will contribute toward her professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microinstabilities are known to play a large
role in the energy transfer and evolution of astrophysical plasmas including the
solar wind. Most descriptions of the evolution and onset of microinstabilities
only include linear terms, ignoring nonlinear effects. However, the onset and
evolution of many of these instabilities is highly dependent on non-thermal
features of the particle velocity distribution function, in particular, regions
of trapped particles in finite amplitude magnetic fields. The primary questions
to be investigated in this postdoctoral study are (i) the extent to which
nonlinear effects, such as trapped and passing particles, affect the onset and
evolution of microinstabilities in the solar plasma, and (ii) the parameter
regimes where the nonlinearities need to be taken into account. The project will
develop an analytical model for the evolution and onset of the instabilities,
drawing on quasilinear theory and the PI’s thesis work on trapped and passing
particles. The analytical model will be validated using kinetic simulations in
conjunction with a statistical analysis of fluctuations observed in the solar
wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will mentor an REU
student’s research project at the University of Arizona and develop an
educational module to introduce undergraduates to current research questions in
space science and plasma physics. This module will be made available to the
scientific as well as education community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.