* 1949346
* NRI: FND: COLLAB: An Open-Source Robotic Leg Platform that Lowers the Barrier for Advanced Prosthetics Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/25/2019,09/30/2022
* Robert Gregg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2022
* USD 146,172.00

The objective of this project is to provide researchers with access to a fully
capable and standardized open-source robotic leg research platform, without the
immense burden of developing each component from scratch. The outcome will be a
robust and inexpensive test bed that can be easily manufactured, assembled, and
controlled. One of the greatest challenges to the design and commercialization
of robotic prosthetic legs is the control strategy -- that is, the computerized
instruction set that specifies the effort level and timing for each component of
the mechanism. Challenges in developing control strategies stem from the many
different functions that an active robotic limb must accomplish. One important
function is to detect the amputee's intention to perform different mobility
activities, such as walking on a level surface versus ascending or descending
stairs. Another important function is to coordinate the pattern of effort and
movement of the prosthetic limb in order to emulate the healthy human body.
There are many researchers working independently on better control algorithms to
address challenges such as these. To be of value, these algorithms must be
tested and validated experimentally. Research groups around the world have
created a variety of specialized robotic leg designs for this purpose,
representing a significant investment of time and effort. The resources required
to obtain a suitable research platform represent a substantial obstacle for new
researchers to overcome. Furthermore, the vast difference in designs used by
established researchers hinders the comparison of new control strategies across
research groups. The accessible, standardized leg platform resulting from this
project will lower barriers to entry, allowing new researchers to study the
control of robotic legs, to unambiguously compare different control approaches,
and to generally advance the field. Finally, the improved prosthetic leg designs
arising in the long term from this project will benefit the lives of
amputees.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall research goals of this project are
1) to identify an electromechanical design for a low cost, high performance,
open-source robotic knee and ankle system; 2) to understand how separate
prosthesis control strategies can be combined to benefit amputee gait, and 3) to
evaluate and compare resulting controllers in amputee experiments. The approach
utilizes a novel design methodology employing selectable series elasticity and
high-torque motor technology to achieve high performance at low cost.
Interchangeable control modules in the open-source architecture allow
researchers to investigate new control methods at low, mid, and high levels of
the system, that is, motor drive, joint control, and human intent recognition,
respectively. In particular, a reflex-based approach and a phase-based approach
will be implemented as mid-level control modules and a high-level intent
recognition module will enable the robotic leg to automatically switch between
different user activities. In all cases, having the new robot leg available
together with these algorithms will enable testing in real-world scenarios,
rather than being confined to the laboratory. The results of this project will
lower the barrier for conducting research and enable fair comparison across
different control approaches with standardized leg hardware. Finally, the
proposed work will impact students and the community through training, outreach,
and dissemination.