* 1949437
* Synthesis: Impact of integrating innovative technologies in STEM classrooms on K-12 students' STEM career outcomes
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Maressa Dixon, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 11/30/2023
* USD 299,999.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences. The NSF ITEST program supports research on the design,
development, implementation, and selective spread of innovative strategies for
engaging students in technology-rich experiences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Miami
University project will synthesize research conducted from 2000 to the present
regarding the effects of innovative technology-based educational interventions
on PreK-12 students' STEM career outcomes. This mixed-method study will include
two concurrent, interrelated componentsâ€”a quantitative meta-analysis and a
qualitative synthesis. The goal of the project is to provide a more complete
understanding of rigorous intervention research regarding the effects on
students' STEM career outcomes. The research team will analyze variations in
effect sizes among intervention characteristics, learning contexts, student
demographics, and study designs. This study will provide insights regarding what
types of interventions work best for which student populations, in what
educational settings, and within what community
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantitative meta-analysis component of this
project will provide a comprehensive picture of the ways interventions using
innovative technologies and technology-based learning experiences influence
PreK-12 students' STEM career outcomes, directly or indirectly, to identify
intervention characteristics that offer the most evidence of effectiveness for
impacting STEM career development overall, and specifically, for students
traditionally underserved in STEM education and underrepresented in STEM
careers. Qualitative synthesis will supplement findings about magnitudes and
variations of effects with findings that 1) help explain how and why
intervention characteristics influence career outcomes for different types of
students and 2) further develop theoretical constructs that reflect
underrepresented groups' STEM career development trajectories in culturally
appropriate ways. Methodologic features of this proposed study will include: (a)
comprehensive review of quantitative and qualitative, peer-reviewed and gray
literature, 2000 to present; (b) use of a broad definition of "career-related
outcomes" to theoretically link effects, variables, and moderators to more
proximal, measurable career outcomes; (c) study of a broad range of innovative
technology interventions; (d) searching, screening, coding, analyzing, and
synthesizing processes following rigorous, systematic review guidelines; (e)
consideration of relevant moderator variables and interactions among variables
to identify critical intervention features and settings associated with positive
outcomes; and (f) control of study rigor and publication biases. By synthesizing
quantitative and qualitative components at a meta-level, this study will provide
a model of scholarly review that is replicable across fields for other studies
of program-level impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.