* 1949413
* Collaborative Research: Artificial intelligence and deep learning solution methods for dynamic economic models
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Lilia Maliar, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 10/31/2023
* USD 307,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial intelligence (AI) has many impressive
applications, including self-driving cars, computer vision, and speech
recognition. This project demonstrates that many challenging economic models and
applications can be successfully analyzed by using the same break-ground AI
technologies and the same state-of-the-art combinations of software and hardware
as those used by data scientists for dealing with their impressive applications.
This project develops open-source AI software that makes it possible to examine
complex economic models that were intractable under the earlier solution
methods. Applications of this AI framework include central-banking models of
monetary policy, growth models of wealth inequality, and models of social
security and population aging. The developed AI tools will be disseminated in
the profession by providing carefully documented replicated materials, examples
and tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of several components.
First, the project shows how to convert three fundamental objects of economic
dynamics -- lifetime reward, Bellman equation and Euler equation -- into
objective functions suitable for deep learning. Second, the project adapts the
stochastic gradient descent method to maximizing the objective on few randomly
drawn grid points instead of a large fixed grid used by conventional solution
methods. Third, the project shows how to construct the expectation operators for
dynamic economic models by combining multiple expectation operators into a
single unbiased expectation operator. Fourth, the project automates the AI
solution framework to make it ubiquitous and portable to other applications.
Fifth, the project solves a collection of empirically relevant applications that
represent challenges to the existing solution methods in
economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.