* 1949665
* Collaborative Research: Tracking Novel Metal Isotope Signatures during Subduction Metamorphism
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Richard Gaschnig, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2023
* USD 222,600.00

Subduction is a key geologic process governing the Earth’s chemical evolution.
Through this process, sediments bearing the chemical signatures of low-
temperature interaction with the hydrosphere and atmosphere are delivered, along
with ocean crust altered by interaction with seawater, to the Earth’s deep
interior. With increasing depth and pressure, metamorphic changes to the
subducting slab’s mineralogy lead to the release of fluids and, in some cases,
melts, enriched in some elements over others. These materials may return to the
Earth’s surface via the route of arc volcanism, leaving behind a chemically
altered slab that continues to sink deeper into the mantle. The research broadly
aims to better understand the chemical exchange that occurs between the slab and
overlying mantle during subduction metamorphism using the molybdenum (Mo) and
thallium (Tl) isotope tracer systems. Isotopes of Mo and Tl experience strong
fractionation in the oceans, leading to distinct isotope signatures in sediments
and altered ocean crust that are ultimately transferred to subduction zones.
While recent research on the Mo and Tl isotope systems in volcanic arc rocks
indicate that Tl isotopes match subduction zone inputs well, there is a large
mismatch between the Mo isotope composition of most arcs and subduction zone
inputs. The work will focus on the origins of the divergent behaviors of the Mo
and Tl isotope systems and provide new understanding of the deep Earth cycling
of these elements. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work uses two well-characterized
suites of high pressure-low temperature (HPLT) metamorphic rocks as analogs for
the chemical processes and mineralogical changes that occur in sedimentary rocks
during subduction. The Schistes Lustres and related rocks from the western Alps
exhibit a metamorphic gradient that ultimately reaches pressures approaching 3
GPa, but prior work has shown only limited mobile-element loss. The Catalina
Schist from California represents warmer subduction metamorphic conditions and
shows considerable mobile element loss. The bulk-rock Mo and Tl isotope
compositions of the two sample suites will be determined in order to ascertain
whether these isotope systems experience fractionation during HPLT metamorphism.
In situ analysis via LA-ICP-MS will determine which minerals host these elements
and how they are redistributed during progressive metamorphism. Isotope analysis
of purified mineral splits will determine whether isotopic fractionation occurs
between mineral phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.