* 1949914
* Awarding Career Educators in STEM: Leveraging Simulation Technology, Institutional Mission, and Field Experiences to Address Critical Teacher Shortages
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2026
* Cheryl Berry, Saint Leo University, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 659,653.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality STEM
teachers. The specific goal of this project is to attract undergraduate students
majoring in biology and mathematics into STEM teaching careers. It will award
these promising future teachers with scholarships and educate them to become
highly competent teachers. Connections between the University, future teachers,
and local schools will be strengthened via outreach and service projects.
Innovative use of digital technology will allow students to practice their
classroom teaching skills in a virtual classroom. Mentoring by faculty and
alumni will provide the future teachers with support before and after they start
their teaching careers. Thus, the project will help to address shortages of
general sciences and mathematics teachers in high-need school districts in
central Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Saint Leo University
includes partnerships with Hernando County Schools and Pasco County Schools,
both of which are high need school districts. The project seeks to prepare and
support 18 undergraduates majoring in biology or mathematics to also complete a
minor in education and achieve secondary teacher certification to become highly
qualified STEM teachers. The project's recruiting efforts feature service in
local schools. To deepen interest and foster skill development, students who are
selected for scholarships will engage in multiple supervised outreach and
teaching opportunities. Microteaching experiences enhanced by a mixed-reality
classroom simulator will provide a laboratory for students to hone their
classroom skills. Upon graduation, students will be mentored as they apply for
funds to obtain classroom supplies for their new STEM teaching position. The
project also aims to generate knowledge regarding the development of teacher
self-efficacy and the relationship between self-efficacy and persistence. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.