* 1949110
* Narrative Modeling with StoryQ: Integrating Mathematics, Language Arts, and Computing to Create Pathways to Artificial Intelligence Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* William Finzer, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,596,760.00

The future workforce is being drastically reshaped by artificial intelligence
(AI) technologies. The advancement in AI theories, algorithms and practices has
not only created great demands for AI scientists, engineers, technicians and
entrepreneurs, but also reformulated the nature of work in almost all
industries. Importantly today's students must gain a fundamental understanding
of AI in order to be prepared to enter the workforce of the future. This project
will design a 12-lesson high school curriculum called StoryQ and associated
teaching guides that will provide students with firsthand experience on how
narrative modeling, one of the oldest fields in artificial intelligence, can be
developed while working on their language arts writing projects. By integrating
age-appropriate mathematics, language arts, and computing concepts, researchers
will leverage advanced data exploration and text mining technologies, and employ
research-based pedagogical approaches to help high school students learn basic
concepts in machine learning and artificial intelligence. This project is funded
by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST)
program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by a multidisciplinary team of learning technology and
data experts, machine learning researchers, and experts in the integration of
narrative modeling and mathematics learning, the project will focus on helping
students envision their future careers as powered by artificial intelligence.
The researchers will create and test StoryQ, a web-based text mining and
narrative modeling platform, and develop, implement, and test narrative modeling
with StoryQ curriculum. Students will learn to design, build, test, and
iteratively improve machine learning models of narratives sourced both from
student and teacher selected literature and from students’ own writings.
Beginning with core narrative concepts, students will engage in development
cycles that lead them to explore their own writing, annotate models by hand,
observe a trained text mining model at work, become familiar with error
analysis, and ultimately build their own AI model and evaluation process. The
project broadens participation among youth from underrepresented and underserved
populations by recruiting participants from two Massachusetts school districts
with ethnically and economically diverse populations. To create broadly
inclusive learning experiences, students from diverse backgrounds will write
narratives to express their cultures and personalities as part of the learning
activities. Research questions include (1) How can learning environments be
designed to help students understand core AI concepts including the structures
in unstructured data and the roles of human insight in the development of AI
technologies? and (2) How can learning environments be designed to help students
develop awareness and interest in careers that are centered on text mining
practices or broadly powered by AI technologies? The project will use a design-
based research design. The research team will carry out class observations and
in-depth analysis of observational data, and draw design principles for building
learning environments that cultivate future STEM and ICT workforce. The
project’s success will be evaluated by a group of external evaluators who are
experts in diversity and inclusion in AI, computing education, mathematics
education, and language arts and literacy education. The outcomes of the project
include the resulting web-delivered classroom-ready AI curriculum modules, a
teaching guide and teacher resources for high schools, which will be
disseminated to teachers and professional development groups. The StoryQ
technology will be freely distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.