* 1949973
* Developing Elementary and Secondary Master Teachers in Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2026
* Kathryn Theiss, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,908,441.00

This project aims to serve the national need for exceptional mathematics and
science master teachers in high-need schools, particularly teachers with similar
demographics as the communities they serve. Master teachers fill a crucial need
in low-performing, hard-to-staff schools that enroll high percentages of low-
income students who are historically underrepresented in mathematics and science
careers. This project will recruit 30 in-service teachers with strong leadership
potential. These teachers will receive financial and other supports as they
complete a rigorous five-year program to achieve master teacher competencies.
The project will support one cohort of secondary mathematics and science
teachers and one cohort of elementary teachers. The project will test the
effectiveness of a research-based training model for master STEM teachers that
encourages interdisciplinary, standards- and project-based approaches. These
master teachers will be prepared to collectively improve STEM teaching and
achievement in 23 schools in South Los Angeles that enroll more than 18,200
students, of which 85% are low-income, 74% are Latinx, and 10% are African
American.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at California State University,
Dominguez Hills includes partnerships with the Los Angeles Unified School
District and the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County. Over a six-year
period, the project will recruit, support, and prepare 30 master teachers,
including 15 secondary biology, chemistry, and mathematics teachers in cohort
one and 15 elementary teachers in cohort two. Innovative aspects of the project
include: (i) micro-credentials in project-based learning, fabrication lab
technology, Next Generation Science Standards, and Common Core mathematics
standards; (ii) summer internships in the universityâ€™s Fabrication Lab; (iii)
three-year action research projects; and (iv) the choice to pursue a pathway in
research, National Board certification, or computer science authorization. The
project will disseminate results regionally and nationally via presentations at
professional conferences and publications. Project evaluation aims to increase
understanding of the approaches that are effective in developing exceptional
master teachers who can enhance STEM education in high-need schools, develop the
skills of preservice and in-service teachers, and help shape future strategies
for teacher leadership development. This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.