* 1949522
* A Tough Call: Understanding the Gendered Impact of Mobile Technology in Low Income Communities
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Rohini Pande, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

The increasingly powerful and decreasing cost of smartphones throughout the
world is making it possible for low income communities to access the internet
and social other media. How does this increased access to the internet and other
forms of social media affect women’s participation in business and politics in
these communities? This research will use experimental methods and modern
economic theory to investigate the effects of internet access through
smartphones on women’s business success and political participation in low
income communities. In addition, the research will investigate whether there are
gender differences in adoption of this mobile technology, whether there are
gender gaps in the effects of mobile technology on business development and
political participation, especially whether access to the internet encourages
women to run for political office. Finally, the research will also study whether
access to the internet changes gender norms in low income communities. The
results of this research will provide a better understanding of how technical
innovation affect low income communities and whether these effects differ by
gender. It also provides inputs into designing policies to reduce poverty in low
income communities. This research establishes the US as the global leader in the
study of the effects digital technological innovation on low income
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project encompasses two separate studies
focusing on the effects of internet access through mobile phones on low income
communities and their distributional consequences. Both parts leverage a sudden
and large-scale availability of low cost smartphones to low income rural
households. The PIs will use a regression discontinuity design to study how
smart phone access impact electoral outcomes, political conflict, and women’s
political engagement. The PIs will construct outcome variables from community-
level data on electoral outcomes, including voter turnout by gender, performance
of female candidates, and performance of candidates with criminal records. The
project will also use newspaper reports to construct a geographically-explicit
database of women’s political mobilization. In the second study, the project
will employ a randomized controlled trial strategy that introduces a new value-
added service for recently acquired mobile phones by women: the service delivers
weekly information on health and government services, while contacting women on
a monthly basis to solicit their feedback on service provision. The study will
vary financial incentives to use the service as well as the share of women in
the community invited to participate in the service. This design will allow the
PIs to assess whether providing women with a norms-compatible “use case” for
phones can spur deeper adoption, while quantifying how peer effects inform the
adoption decision, and how adoption impacts social norms and women’s networks.
The results of this research will provide a better understanding of how
technical innovation affect low income communities and whether these effects
differ by gender. This research establishes the US as the global leader in the
study of the effects digital technological innovation on low income
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.