* 1949283
* Collaborative Research: Horses and Human Societies in the American West
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Sarah Trabert, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2023
* USD 35,730.00

Researchers seeking to understand the complex interactions between present-day
environmental and cultural change increasingly turn to historical datasets,
which enable examination of such interactions over the long term. This project
uses historical and archaeological data to model human responses to one of the
most important socio-environmental changes in human history: the dispersal of
the domestic horse into the Americas in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
The project promotes collaborative research with and public outreach to
indigenous groups, supports an early-career researcher and the development of
scientific facilities and public education at the University of Colorado, and
funds the education of students at three western universities (including a
Hispanic-serving institution). Results of the project are to be disseminated
through both the scientific literature, popular media, and a museum exhibit, as
well as a series of seminars bringing together scholars and indigenous leaders.
In doing so, this project establishes an analytical framework for understanding
the complex interaction between species dispersals, environmental changes,
ecological factors, and cultural transformations that built our modern
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After their introduction to the Americas domestic
horses revolutionized life across the plains and deserts of North America,
giving rise to the great horse cultures of the plains and deserts and forming
the backbone of economically and militarily dominant Native empires during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Despite the obvious importance of horses
in later history, however, gaps in the historic record mean that little is known
about when, why, or how the first horses were first integrated into Native
societies across most of the American West. Applying techniques including
radiocarbon dating, ancient DNA sequencing, zooarchaeology, and stable isotopes
analysis to ancient horse remains, this project produces a scientific model for
when and how domestic horses dispersed into the continent, and in so doing
explains the ways horses impacted life in early historic
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.