* 1949073
* Contrasting active magma- and fault-dominated segments of the East African Rift through the synthesis of InSAR and GPS time series: Implications for rifting dynamics and hazards
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Bridget Smith-Konter, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2023
* USD 390,663.00

The East Africa Rift System (EARS) produces large damaging earthquakes,
landslides, and volcanic hazards that threaten large developing populations that
tend to be relatively less well-prepared with resilient infrastructure.
Measuring how the surface of the Earth deforms in response to these natural
processes allows scientists to better understand them and the associated
hazards. The Global Positioning System (GPS) network in Africa is sparse, and
network expansion has both political and financial challenges. Interferometric
Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) greatly complements GPS measurements with high
spatial and temporal resolution imagery of ground deformation over the entire
EARS, while avoiding the complications and costs associated with installing and
maintaining instrumentation. Beyond volcano and tectonic applications, combining
GPS and InSAR measurements of ground deformation also allows scientists to
monitor anthropogenic activities such as groundwater extraction. Understanding
both natural and anthropogenic-related deformation is important for local
communities for better water management, improved planning and development of
infrastructure, and protection of natural environments.

The objective of this project is to produce precise maps of temporally and
spatially dense crustal deformation time series across the central EARS
documenting tectonic, volcanic, and anthropogenic related deformation signals.
This will involve synthesizing and integrating GPS data collected by previously
funded GeoPRISMS projects with InSAR displacement time series across the central
section of the EARS. These data will allow for improved characterization and
comparisons of distributions of strain between the likely plume-controlled
eastern segment and the likely fault-controlled western segment that branches
around the Tanzania Craton, placing these observations in the context of the
geologic history and pre-existing structures. Results from this work will
provide reliable measurements of crustal deformation to support a diverse range
of research questions related to rift dynamics. Additionally, it will provide
critical constraints for modeling rift initiation and evolution on the central,
eastern, and western segments of the EARS, with extended applications to
anthropogenic deformation

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.