* 1949915
* Growing Highly Qualified Mathematics Teachers for a High-Need Rural Area
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Todd Frauenholtz, Bemidji State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,129,401.00

This project addresses the national shortage of mathematics teachers who are
well prepared to serve high-need students in rural areas. The project will
recruit undergraduate STEM students to complete double majors in mathematics and
mathematics education, and to become certified middle/high school mathematics
teachers. These students, called “Noyce Scholars,” will receive financial
support for the full cost of college attendance for the two years of the double
major program, and for the required teacher licensure exams. The Noyce Scholars
will participate in a professional learning community and workshops that explore
topics such as social-emotional learning, resilience, and adverse childhood
experiences. Training in effective strategies for working with youth who have
experienced trauma is an innovative feature of the project. Upon graduation,
Noyce Scholars will be employed in high-need schools. During the first two years
of their teaching careers, they will receive mentoring and additional training.
This support is designed to help them continue to develop as effective teachers
who are culturally responsive, resilient, and skilled at teaching in high-need
schools that include Native American and rural populations. Noyce Scholars will
be expected to teach in high-need schools for at least four
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Bemidji State University includes
partnerships with Peacemaker Resources, Normandale and Mesabi Range Community
Colleges, Northwest Service Cooperative, Sourcewell, Cass Lake – Bena School
District, Laporte School District, Red Lake School District, Schoolcraft
Learning Community, and St. Mary’s Mission School. Project goals include: (i)
recruiting and educating 16 undergraduate highly capable undergraduates who are
double majoring in mathematics and mathematics education; (ii) identifying
significant factors in preparing pre-service teachers to work with high-need
students; and (iii) increasing the available pool of licensed secondary
mathematics teachers in a high-need area. The project integrates research on
Adverse Childhood Experiences, which documents the health and mental challenges
faced by people who have a history of such experiences. This knowledge will be
integrated as part of the learning community designed to support the Noyce
Scholars through a rigorous STEM double major. Project evaluation will include
exploration of the impact of educating Noyce Scholars about social and emotional
aspects of learning Scholars on their teaching effectiveness in rural schools.
This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.