* 1949432
* Influence of Peers on Beliefs About Vaccination and GM Food: Mechanisms and Interventions
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Henrik Olsson, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 343,713.00

Beliefs that are not aligned with the current scientific evidence can have
important consequences for national health, prosperity, and welfare. For
example, insufficient rates of vaccination could place U.S. children at greater
risk of vaccine-preventable diseases and preventing the adoption of genetically
modified (GM) crops can hurt local economies and farmers. Why are people
sometimes reluctant to adopt beliefs that are in line with scientific consensus?
We investigate the social influence of peers, a factor that is known to be
important for belief formation but is still insufficiently understood: For
example, parents who are reluctant to vaccinate their healthy children are often
clustered in the same neighborhoods, and information from social environments
and cultural differences have a strong influence on the acceptance of GM food.
In a longitudinal experimental study of parents and their peers, we investigate
the mechanisms underlying peers’ social influence: informational cues one
receives from peers, and social network cues that reinforce the need to be in
sync with peers' views. For example, disagreeing with a well-connected peer can
lead to disapproval by others in one's social network and loss of valuable
connections; whereas disagreeing with a less prominent member might not matter
as much. This project will inform the design of public education interventions
that leverage the theoretical knowledge about how social networks influence
people’s beliefs about science, while providing transparent information about
scientific consensus and promoting people’s own agency when forming their
beliefs. These interventions can be applied to a broad range of science topics
of national interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate the
mechanisms underlying belief change, or lack of it, after exposure to others
with different beliefs. We focus on beliefs about scientific issues that affect
day to day family-level decisions: childhood vaccination and GM food. We will
develop a conceptual framework and use a longitudinal experimental study to
investigate two questions: First, how important are different informational and
social network cues for social dissonance? Integrating literatures on social
dissonance and social networks, we propose that the extent of social dissonance
individuals feel when encountering a peer with a different belief depends on
perceived informational and social network cues. Second, what is the relative
importance of social learning and belief protection strategies in reducing
social dissonance, and how does the choice of strategy depend on social network
cues? Building on the literatures on social learning and motivated cognition, we
propose that individuals can resolve their social dissonance by either changing
their beliefs in line with their peers’ beliefs (social learning) or by
protecting their existing beliefs (belief protection). Using a web-based
platform SciFriends (NSF-MMS #1560592), we investigate experimentally whether
this framework can explain when and why people become more or less influenced by
the beliefs of their peers, and of scientists. The project will serve the
national interest by supporting a healthy and prosperous public and provide new
insights on how social networks influence belief
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.