* 1949760
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Behavioral Sciences of Transportation Issues
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jing Chen, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2024
* USD 374,840.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. The REU program has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. The goal of this
REU Site on transportation in the behavioral sciences is to provide a diverse
group of undergraduate researchers with training on research skills in various
subfields of Psychology and Engineering that contribute to interdisciplinary
transportation science. Students will be exposed to the interdisciplinary nature
of transportation science and conduct research that has both theoretical and
applied impact in various transportation areas. Students will learn a variety of
behavioral science and engineering methods within human-in-the-loop simulation
experiments, questionnaire-based behavioral research, and direct observation.
Students will work closely with their faculty mentors on active research topics,
such as automated driving systems, driver workload, distracted driving,
pedestrian crossing behaviors and driver yielding responses, and pilot
performance and trust in aircrafts. This project will help prepare students for
higher education and careers in various transportation areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary transportation field enjoys
theoretical developments in human perception and cognition, behavioral,
engineering, public health and methodological areas to name a few, and is
critical for reducing injuries and deaths resulting from motor vehicle crashes.
This program will engage REU students in hands-on research activities in
interdisciplinary transportation science in a 10-week summer program that will
include research seminars, workshops, mentored research activities, and
University sponsored poster session that are expected to shape the work into
professional conference presentations and/or peer-reviewed publications. The
program will offer training on research skills using driving and flight
simulation, human performance modeling, eye tracking and field methods, among
others. The REU program will also offer instructions in graduate school
application and career development in transportation fields. The program will
contribute to the development of researchers who advance transportation science
with interdisciplinary, theory-driven, perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.