* 1949003
* Kin Networks, Neighborhood Disadvantage, and Health and Well-Being across the Life Course
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Elizabeth Ackert, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2024
* USD 488,271.00

Living in a disadvantaged neighborhood is associated with worse health than
living in a more advantaged context. However, the mechanisms by which
neighborhoods influence health and the factors that exacerbate or ameliorate
neighborhood influences on health remain understudied. This project investigates
the premise that kin dynamics–the size, structure, location, and operation of
family networks—play an important role in explaining neighborhood effects on
health. By considering kin-related factors, this project lends scientific
insight into how neighborhoods affect individual health and health disparities
and which individuals are more or less affected. Findings from this project will
inform policies and programs aimed at ameliorating health inequalities as part
of broader efforts to advance national health, prosperity, and well-being. This
project will enhance infrastructure within the research community by documenting
the construction of an analytical database for scholars seeking to replicate
project methods. The project will also broaden participation of under-
represented groups in scientific research by providing research and training
opportunities to graduate students across three diverse public universities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the direct and indirect
ways though which neighborhoods may influence health via kin-related dynamics.
The project will investigate kin network structure, resources, and function as
confounding, suppressing, or moderating factors for neighborhood effects on
health. In addition, the project will identify points in the life course at
which neighborhood influences on health and well-being may be more or less
sensitive to kin network inputs. The project will combine longitudinal data on
individual respondents and uniquely rich kinship data from the 1980 to 2017
waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) with information on
residential census tracts from the U.S. Census. The sample size is approximately
700,000 person-years corresponding to over 70,000 unique respondents. Health
outcomes will be classified into three domains: health status, psychological
well-being, and health behaviors. Data will be analyzed with point-in-time
descriptive analyses and a series of multilevel regression analyses with
individuals clustered within their broader kin networks. The project will rely
on specialized approaches including the mediational g-formula approach and
structural nested mean models to address the complex issues of selection,
reverse causality, and mediation within the longitudinal setting. In doing so,
this project will deepen our understanding of the multiple and complex ways in
which kin networks may operate in relation to neighborhoods and health. Findings
from the project will contribute to sociological theories involving
neighborhoods and kin networks as drivers of health
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.