* 1949276
* I-Corps:  Low-cost and high-durability fuel cells
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Chuan-Jian Zhong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
commercialization feasibility of a fuel cell technology to help fuel cell
manufacturers solve the problem of high loading of platinum group metal
catalysts. Fuel cells address the increasing societal interest and market needs
in sustainable and clean energy sources as substitutes for fossil fuels, and the
reduction of on-road and off-road transportation emissions. The technology will
benefit the fuel cell stack or parts manufacturers who currently suffers from
high manufacturing costs associated with high-cost of catalyst materials and
short lifetime of fuel cell operation. The technology also will have the
potential to benefit the agriculture drone manufacturers seeking alternative
lightweight, highly-efficient energy package that provides long flight duration
and low/zero pollution. The global fuel cell market will grow at an CAGR of
about 21% to hit about 12 billion US dollars by 2026. Fuel cell-based hybrid
systems are forecast to reach 46 billion US dollars. The customer discovery will
identify the market needs, explore technology licensing opportunities, and
develop commercialization plans. The project also will train students and
researchers to better prepare to pursue entrepreneurship in technology
commercialization.

This I-Corps project will focus on customer discovery to identify the market
opportunity, explore entrepreneurship, and develop the business model centering
on the new fuel cell technology. The fuel cell technology has the potential to
address some of the challenges in the existing market in terms of customer needs
arising from specific requirement to provide alternative energy storage and
conversion modules that effectively manage the energy consumption, clean
environment and zero pollution as well as high energy efficiency for residential
use. The high cost associated with catalyst materials in the total manufacturing
cost and the poor durability of existing catalysts constitute the major barrier
to the mass production and application. The fuel cell technology in this project
will overcome these barriers by using ultralow loading of platinum group metal
catalysts and effective membrane electrode assembly to provide a low cost and
high durability conversion system for fuel cell manufacturers and energy storage
and conversion facilities. A minimum viable prototype demonstration of fuel cell
modules also will be part of the technology development roadmap.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.