* 1949880
* Collaborative Research: Research in Improving Computational Thinking in the Formation of Engineers, a Multi-Institutional Initiative.
* ENG,EEC
* 07/12/2019,08/31/2024
* Noemi Mendoza-Diaz, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 387,899.00

Title:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the Role of Computational Thinking in Engineering
Education&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The need for undergraduate engineering
students to learn computing has dramatically increased as computing has become
more important in engineering practice. Many engineering colleges have responded
to this change by requiring their engineering students to take computing
classes. Some of these classes are now central to the first year of college
engineering education. Computing classes are considered to be extremely
difficult by many students, especially those who have not been exposed to
computing in high school. Inequities in the K-12 education system mean that some
students often have less opportunity to be exposed to computing before college
than others. As a result, integrating computing into engineering education may
exacerbate existing inequities in engineering education and reduce diversity and
inclusion in engineering. This research examines the integration of computing in
engineering at three institutions that incorporate computing into engineering
education in different ways. A computational thinking diagnostic, which measures
the degree to which students are learning critical computing concepts in
engineering classes, will be used to determine how much computing the
engineering students are learning. A survey will examine how students with
different backgrounds are responding to the challenges of doing computing in
their engineering education program. Students will also be surveyed as the term
progresses to identify students who are feeling increasing, steady or decreasing
stress as the complexity of the material increases. Students will be interviewed
about how computing is affecting their desire to become an engineer and their
confidence in their ability to excel in engineering. Taken together this
information will provide new knowledge of how the integration of computing in
beginning engineering classes is changing engineering education and impacting
who becomes an engineer.&lt;br/&gt;Previous research has demonstrated that while
engineering and computational skills have substantial overlap, many engineering
students have little or no prior experience with computational thinking. The
goal of this project is to improve the way that computational thinking is taught
in colleges of engineering by understanding multiple factors that affect
computational thinking development. A mixed-methods research design involving a
computational thinking diagnostic paired with qualitative analysis of interviews
will explore answers to three research questions: (1) How does the integration
of computing into the foundational engineering courses affect the formation of
engineers? (2) In what ways do social identities (e.g. gender, ethnicity, first-
generation college attending), choices (e.g. major, transfer status), and other
factors impact the engineering student experience with computational thinking?
(3) In what ways do computational thinking skills develop over time in
engineering students? The PI team has direct access to the target population at
three institutions (a large, public, land grant institution (Texas A&amp;M), a
medium sized, public, state flagship institution (University of Oklahoma), and a
small, private, undergraduate university focused on engineering degrees
(Milwaukee School of Engineering). Each institution has unique ways of
integrating computational thinking into engineering programs. Having these three
institutions collaborate provides varied curricular models for integrating
computation into engineering, making comparative analysis powerful. The novelty
and creativity of this project lies in the capacity of the research team to
answer critical questions about why students succeed or fail to become engineers
based on unique computational thinking opportunities that three diverse
institutions and environments provide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.