* 1949395
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Belief Formation and Choice in Games: An Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Mark Dean, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2023
* USD 28,026.00

Much of economic analysis is based on the idea that economic agents respond to
incentives and that they will increase their effort to understand the
consequences of their actions in order to make the right decisions. This
research project will use laboratory experiments to test whether increasing the
size of reward or punishment (stakes henceforth) while considering how others
will react affect the effort one puts into studying the environment before s/he
makes the decision. The research will answer the following questions: (i) does
the size of stakes affect people’s choices and beliefs? (ii) does higher stakes
lead to better responses? (iii) do beliefs become more accurate as stakes
increase?, and (iv) do these effects depend on how complex the problem is? In
spite of the importance of these questions to economic science, economists have
not been able to test them because there is a feedback effect among stakes,
beliefs, and actions---changing stakes for one person will change their beliefs
and actions, accordingly, thus making it impossible to determine how the size of
reward or punishment affects effort. The laboratory experiments, which allows
the researcher to get around these problems, are designed to allow the
researcher to change the size of the reward while allowing people to play the
role of decision maker as well as observers. This allows the researcher to study
how people form beliefs about others as well as react to changes in stakes at
the same time. The results of this research will help improve decision making,
especially when interacting with other people, and in the process, increase
productivity and economic growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An individual facing a
decision takes into account possible courses of action as well as what is at
stake. In addition, if the outcome of such a decision depends on what others do,
a decision maker may spend some time to understand how her own action and those
of others interact. This research analyzes the following questions: Do stakes
affect choices and belief formation? Do higher stakes lead to higher best-
response rates? Do beliefs become more accurate as stakes increase? Do these
effects depend on how complex the game is? Current literature does not provide
answers to these questions and this research aims to fill this gap. This project
test how changing the stakes in a strategic environment affect both the choices
of the individual and the beliefs formed on others’ likely strategy. A
fundamental challenge of testing these hypotheses is that there exists
interaction effects among incentives, beliefs, and actions: changing the
incentives of one subject will not only affect that particular individual but
also on others who will change their behavior. The research project overcomes
this issue through an experimental design where subjects act as both players and
observers. In the latter, their own payoff changes but they make choices in an
environment where choices have already been made by other actors with different
incentives. The research design is able to isolate the effect of scaling up the
stakes on choices and beliefs from equilibrium. Furthermore, the design will
allow the researchers to provide new insights on cross-game comparisons. It also
presents a new class of games spanning those requiring multiple steps of
iterative deletion of dominated strategies to those without pure-strategy
equilibria. This class of games has various desirable properties in terms of
their connection to level-k and random utility models. The results of this
research will help improve decision making, especially when interacting with
other people and in the process increase productivity and economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.