* 1949582
* The Impact of Securities Regulation on Financial Development and Entrepreneurship
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Michael Ewens, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 189,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An economy's growth and innovative output depends
on the size and breadth of its entrepreneurial activity. Unlike its large firm
peers, the small entrepreneurial firm faces unique impediments to its growth and
survival. One such impediment is limited access to capital. This research
project will study the impact of state laws regulating capital raising on local
financial development, economic growth and entrepreneurial activity. The
overarching goal is to understand how regulations that govern raising of capital
by small firms affects those firms' outcomes. The project will produce a
database describing and quantifying the levels of regulation for equity capital
raising by U.S. businesses. Empirical analysis of the data will guide policies
that seek to support entrepreneurial activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared to
large, established firms, entrepreneurial firms face more costly external
finance because of the informational imperfections inherent in their innovative,
high-growth objectives such as incentive issues or adverse selection.
Traditional bank or credit financing is therefore often unavailable, and these
firms instead must raise equity or non-traditional financing that provide
incentive and monitoring solutions. Thus, equity market regulations and
securities laws will impact the entrepreneurial firm financing constraints. From
the early 20th century to the mid-1990s, individual U.S. states were the main
regulators of these markets. Their laws exhibited significant variation in
complexity both across and within states for much of that time. This project
aims to document and categorize these laws, study their origination and finally,
investigate their consequences for the capital markets and economic outcomes by
examining the effects on entrepreneurial firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.