* 1949047
* Collaborative Research: Transparency and Misspecification in Structural Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jesse Shapiro, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Much economic research seeks to combine economic theory and statistical modeling
to derive policy-relevant conclusions from data. The transparency of this
process—whether the intended audience can understand the evidence behind the
conclusions as well as the conclusions&lt;br/&gt;themselves—is crucial to the
success of policy relevant research. This project will develop a framework for
understanding the process through which the results were achieved, as well as
the communication of scientific findings to a diverse audience, apply the
framework to important problems in applied economics, and study how economists
can reach more stable policy-relevant conclusions from data that does not change
with minor changes in data or methodology. The research has three projects: a
study of scientific communication, a definition and measurement of transparency,
and a project that focuses on how to achieve transparency in economics research.
The results of this research will lead to more efficient and reliable policy
relevant economics research. It also will result in more trust in economic
policy research as well as the development better
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study transparency in
scientific research. The research consists of three projects: The first project
will use economic theory and statistical decision theory to propose and develop
a model of scientific communication and contrast its implications with those of
a classical model of statistics. The second project---Transparency in Structural
Estimation---provides a working definition of transparency for structural
estimation and discusses approaches to achieving it. The third project titled
“Instrument Selection and Sensitivity to Misspecification in Structural Models”
will develop and illustrate the importance of instrument choice in determining
the sensitivity of estimates of structural models to misspecification. The
results of this research project does not only contribute to econometric theory
and practice but also to improvement of policy and program evaluation. This
research improves economic and policy decision making, hence strengthens the US
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.