* 1949735
* REU Site:  Summer Research Experiences in Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Juan Bruses, Mercy College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 416,382.00

This REU Site award to Mercy College, located in Dobbs Ferry, NY, is a joint
effort between Mercy College Department of Natural Sciences and the Department
of Neuroscience at Albert Einstein College of Medicine. The REU site supports
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. The
research, housing and program-related activities are conducted at the Department
of Neuroscience at Albert Einstein, New York, NY. Applicants must be US citizens
or permanent residents attending an undergraduate program. Students from
minority serving institutions and community colleges are encouraged to apply. A
goal of the program is to provide training in scientific research in a state-of-
the-art research center to students underrepresented in STEM to promote
diversity in academia and other institutions of higher education. Assessment of
the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool used to assess
Biology REU programs. Students will be tracked after the program to determine
their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus and theme of the
REU Site is neuroscience, focusing on the understanding of the biological
mechanisms underlying brain development and function at the molecular, cellular
and systems level. Accepted students will select a laboratory of their interest
within the Department of Neuroscience and will conduct an intensive hands-on
research at this state-of-the-art research center. The laboratories focus on a
wide range of research areas and experimental approaches, including cellular and
molecular biology, biochemistry, genetics, neurophysiology, bioinformatics,
neural development and plasticity, and neuroimaging. Students will work with a
scientific mentor at Albert Einstein to carry out their research and with a
mentor from Mercy College, who will coordinate extracurricular activities
including seminars, mentoring on graduate education in academia and careers in
industry, and responsible and ethical scientific research conduct. Albert
Einstein will provide housing to the students. In addition, students will also
be provided with stipends and meals. More information about the program is
available by visiting http://REU.mercy.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Juan
Bruses at jbruses@mercy.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Jose Pena
jose.pena@einstein.yu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.