* 1949119
* Collaborative Research: Refining the use of scleractinian cold-water coral skeleton-bound d15N as a proxy for marine N cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Julie Granger, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 02/29/2024
* USD 145,187.00

Refining the use of scleractinian cold-water coral skeleton-bound d15N as a
proxy for marine N cycling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies show that cold-
water corals and their skeletons provide valuable information about the marine
nitrogen (N) cycle. This information can shed light on the processes that both
drive and respond to changes in Earth’s climate. Cold-water corals are found
across the global ocean and can be dated with decadal precision, offering
spatial and temporal records of the N cycle in the past. In addition, a single
skeleton can be used to reconstruct both surface and deep ocean composition.
Despite the promise of cold-water corals, we don’t fully understand how they
record changes in the marine N cycle. We must strengthen this understanding
before we use cold-water corals to produce reliable records of marine N cycling
across space and time, across different coral species, and under different
lifestyle and feeding patterns. This project examines how the isotopic
composition of organic N trapped in coral skeletons is linked to marine N cycle
properties. The study includes a series of lab experiments, measurements of live
corals sampled from the natural environment, and measurements of coral skeletal
material from different ocean regions and depth horizons archived in museums.
The project involves undergraduates at St. Olaf College, Pomona College and Mt.
San Antonio College, one of the largest community colleges in Southern
California. These students will conduct the research with scientists and peers
in collaborating labs. Participation in the project will build student research
skills and scientific knowledge for advanced study and prepare students for the
scientific workforce. The project will also develop educational materials,
including YouTube videos, to promote interest in marine science and awareness of
how climate change influences global oceans. These educational materials will be
created in collaboration with high school students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main tool used to investigate marine N cycle history
is the isotope composition of particulate organic nitrogen (δ15N-PON) exported
from the euphotic zone, which can be accessed using sedimentary archives such as
foraminiferal tests, anoxic sediments and soft corals. Recently, the δ15N of
organic N trapped within asymbiotic scleractinian cold-water coral (CWC)
skeletons has been shown to record the δ15N-PON exported from the surface ocean
(Wang et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2017). In order to reliably apply CWC δ15N as a
proxy, however, we must explain a ~8.5‰ offset between the δ15N of organic
nitrogen within the CWC skeleton and the exported δ15N-PON in regions of coral
growth (Wang et al. 2014). The nature of the δ15N offset must be accounted for
to be confident that CWC records marine N cycle history consistently across
space and time, across different coral species, and for corals with different
lifestyle conditions. Through coral culture experiments, measurements of live
corals samples from the natural environment, and archives of corals skeletal
material from different ocean regions and depth horizons, this research will
test whether the offset arises from: (1) a biosynthetic isotope offset between
CWC tissue and skeleton, (2) an unusual trophic transfer between CWC tissue and
diet, and/or (3) coral feeding on material with elevated δ15N relative to
exported δ15N-PON. This work will also provide estimates of N turnover time in
CWC, which are scant, and will inform trophic ecology of
CWC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.