* 1949151
* Closing a Gap in Macroevolutionary Studies: Integrating Fossils and Phenotypes to Illuminate Morphological Evolution in Monocot Flowering Plants
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,09/30/2024
* Selena Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 549,403.00

This project will study monocot flowering plants, a highly diverse group of
plants that are economically and ecologically important, including many staple
foods (grains, plantains, oil palms), horticulturally valuable plants (lilies,
orchids, irises), and the main components of ecosystems such as grasslands and
wetlands. The leaves and fruits/seeds from both living and fossil monocots will
be studied to understand how morphology has changed over the evolutionary
history of this important group. Broadening our understanding of evolutionary
patterns and processes across all life is relevant to addressing present-day
challenges such as how species and Earth systems will adapt to current and
future environmental change. The project will provide training for high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, including those who are from groups that
are currently underrepresented in STEM fields. In addition, a new website to
increase recognition of Earth &amp; environmental scientists who are from a
diversity of backgrounds and experiences will be created and a public display at
the University of Michigan Natural History Museum will help communicate findings
from this research to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A subset of monocot
flowering plants will be used as a model system for understanding
macroevolutionary processes relating to phenotypic diversity. Morphological data
on leaf and fruit/seed traits from four orders-Alismatales (water-plantains and
seagrasses), Pandanales (screw-pines), Arecales (palms) and Zingiberales
(bananas &amp; gingers)-will be collected to build a novel phenotypic framework
facilitating the interpretation and phylogenetic placement of fossil taxa. A new
time-calibrated phylogenetic tree will be produced using a revised fossil
record. Properties of plant traits, including correlations among traits and
differences between vegetative (leaf) and reproductive (fruit/seed) traits on
phylogenetic inference will be characterized. Finally, the phenotypic data will
be analyzed to infer temporal shifts in morphospace, quantify disparity, and
determine rates and modes of morphological evolution in these four clades of
monocots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded with the Systematics and
Biodiversity Sciences program (Division of Environmental
Biology).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.