* 1949949
* REU Site: Computational Biology Research - Gateway to STEM
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Jannette Carey, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 152,049.00

This REU Site award to Princeton University in Princeton, NJ, will support the
training of six formerly incarcerated students for nine weeks during summers of
2021 and 2022. The Site offers intensive exposure to scientific thinking for
non-STEM majors with excellent grades in mathematics coursework. Students will
learn how research is conducted, its ethics, its roles in society, and how to
present their results orally and in writing. Assessment of the program will use
the online SALG URSSA tool. Trainees will be tracked after the program to
determine their career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational research
approaches are rooted in mathematics; and biology, being all around us, is a
natural subject of human intellectual curiosity. Projects will span many
departments and faculty mentors. Exposure to the rewards and benefits of STEM
education and careers, and to the connections among science, biology, and the
lives of their communities, may lead some trainees to consider a STEM major.
STEM education offers high-level workforce readiness for formerly incarcerated
students, enabling them to be valued employees who contribute to American
economic success and become respected members of society, and opening paths to
more rewarding futures for their families. STEM education of formerly
incarcerated students has the potential to diversify the STEM workforce; bring
new insights that may enrich employment practice; and bring to the workplace
perspectives that may spread to the society at large. All participants will
become more informed citizens with enhanced ability to identify and interpret
facts and communicate across disciplinary and experiential boundaries. The Site
leverages and extends a long-standing volunteer effort at Princeton University
that includes teaching of community college-accredited STEM courses to
incarcerated students and cooperating with reentry professionals to advance the
education of formerly incarcerated students in New Jersey. In year one of this
pilot, the Site will accept students from local reentry partners while
establishing new partnerships nationwide. The demographics of incarceration mean
that most trainees will be from under-represented groups and have no prior
research experience. More information, research descriptions, and applications
are available at https://vonholdt.princeton.edu/REU.html or from the PI (Dr.
Bridgett vonHoldt, vonholdt@Princeton.EDU) or co-PI (Dr. Jannette Carey,
jcarey@princeton.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.