* 1949489
* SBE-UKRI: Business Cycles, Uncertain Growth and the Distribution of Production
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Julia Thomas, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The decade since the Great Recession has seen a
lack of new business creation and slow economic growth. This project explores
the interplay between these two phenomena using a model economy with rich
differences across businesses. The model economy reproduces the long-run size
and age distribution of firms in the U.S. economy and thus gives rise to a firm
life cycle. New businesses are typically small and grow over time, so startups
become more important in the economy as they mature. As a result, the effect on
the overall economy from a decrease in the number of startups grows with time.
The initial loss of production and employment is small, but the absence of new
firms implies a long-term cost that is far larger than the initial loss. The
project explores forces that may explain a persistent lack of startups. The
results of the project will help researchers and policymakers better understand
both the causes underlying the past decade of slow growth and how long-term
reductions in the number of firms contribute to the slow recovery.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the slow GDP and investment growth over the
past decade, relative to trend, alongside the persistent reduction in firm
entry. The research explores possible forces driving large, long-lived changes
in new business formation using a quantitative model with endogenous entry and
exit. The model economy includes a distribution of firms that differ along
several dimensions including their age, productivity, capital and debt. Changes
in this distribution propagate exogenous shocks. Moreover, the model allows for
countercyclical risk premia and thus large changes in firm value. As a result,
it has the potential to reproduce persistent reductions in entry similar to
those in the data. In this setting, the project explores the effect of
persistent shocks to total factor productivity growth, increases in the
uncertainty of future growth and shocks to firmsâ€™ cost of borrowing. The model
economy serves as a laboratory to evaluate the sources of the slow economic
recovery through the lens of firm entry, and is used to study the effect of such
shocks both on the aggregate economy and on the distribution of production
across firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.