* 1949637
* DDRIG: Knowledge Production and Arctic Environmental Futures
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2020,08/31/2022
* David Nugent, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2022
* USD 12,434.00

This ethnographic research seeks to understand differences in how scientists
collect, analyze and interpret data on environmental change. Using Greenland as
a case study, the PI will observe and record how scientists collaborate and
communicate with one another and how they interact with the general public.
Better understanding of how scientists study environmental change and implement
collaborations will contribute to improved strategies for navigating cultural
difference and fostering relationships among researchers and Arctic
stakeholders. This project will further NSF’s goal of understanding the complex
socio-environmental connections linking science to Arctic communities, their
southern neighbors, and the environment. Additionally, this project fosters
collaborations between American and Greenlandic scientists and between
scientists and Arctic communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This project employs
standard ethnographic methods: participant observation and semi-structured
interviews with scientists and non-scientists in the U.S., Kangerlussuaq, and
Nuuk, Greenland. Participant observation provides insight into the activities,
events, and modes of communication scientists use to collect, analyze, and
interpret data. The themes that emerge during observation will guide follow-up
interviews, which allow for in-depth analysis of perspectives scientists hold
regarding their own research. Interview transcripts will then be analyzed for
differences in discourse and attitudes related to environmental change, future
research, and professional collaboration. Interviews with non-scientists
contextualize the role of scientific research in the cultural and political
landscape of contemporary Greenland. This project complements existing data on
remote communities by collecting data on U.S. and Greenlandic scientists and
inhabitants of more densely populated areas of the country. This research will
contribute to better understanding the context of scientific research within
Greenland, providing insights with relevance to the Arctic more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.