* 1949439
* Collaborative Research: Preparing Students for the New Manufacturing Economy: An Integrative Learning Approach
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Rodney Boehm, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,190,040.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The project is designed
to prepare students for the future world of work that will require them to
develop and integrate multiple areas of skill and knowledge that can be flexibly
deployed across widely varying and ever-changing work requirements. The current
education system emphasizes the development of skills and knowledge within
specific disciplines, which does not reflect the multidisciplinary nature of
future work. The project investigates a 2-year Career and Technical Education
(CTE) learning experience that integrates knowledge and skills across multiple
technology areas with authentic tasks. This model of learning dovetails with a
vision of future work that favors individuals who are flexible and innovative
with a holistic understanding of a range of technologies. The CTE learning
experience will enhance students' technology literacy, career preparedness,
growth mindset, and sense of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) identity. In the first semester of their Junior year, students will
focus on learning three basic technologies (3D design and fabrication,
microcontroller-based electronics and computer programming). Students will then
apply these technologies in project-based learning cycles where they will
prepare educational science kits and deploy them in local elementary school
classes. As high school Seniors, students will move on to innovation and
entrepreneurship through a series of graduated design and innovation challenges.
Local business and manufacturing representatives will provide talks, site visits
and challenge problems to add authenticity and provide roles models to the
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to the
understanding of how an integrated learning model supports student development
of holistic technology understanding and STEM identities. In CTE, the project
will advance knowledge regarding how curricula may be designed to effectively
prepare high school students for future careers in engineering innovation and
design. The project will also contribute to the understanding of how identities
are formed in STEM, especially for students from underrepresented populations.
Rubrics, theoretically grounded questionnaires, video analysis, and interviews
will be used to assess both learning and identity formation. Students who do not
take part in the CTE course will serve as the comparison group. The project will
have a number of broader impacts. The project will directly serve students in an
economically disadvantaged school district with predominantly Latinx and African
American students and prepare them for the future world of work. The CTE
curricula developed by the project will be disseminated through a web resource
that will enable other schools and researchers to implement similar programs.
Undergraduate and graduate students from different disciplines (e.g., computer
science, industrial engineering, psychology, and education) will mentor and gain
practical experiences by working in high school CTE classrooms that serve
predominantly underrepresented communities. Project research will be published
in journals and conferences reaching both researchers and practitioners of the
various fields represented&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.