* 1949030
* WORM: The Water-Organic-Rock-Microbe Reaction Modeling Ecosystem
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Grayson Boyer, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 04/30/2023
* USD 498,034.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Geoinformatics Program award supports a two-year
project to develop a free, open-source toolset for learning and running computer
models of natural systems in which water reacts with rocks, organic matter, and
microbes. These natural processes impact water quality and can be used to
predict the effects of resource exploration on water quality and guide
remediation efforts. The project has two primary goals: 1) making it easier for
beginners to conduct geochemical computer models by providing fully adaptable
examples online at no cost, and 2) making it easier for more experienced
researchers to delve into the details of the models, expand the range of
problems they can work on, and make rapid improvements over current
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Water-Organic-Rock-Microbe (WORM)
Reaction Modeling Ecosystem will serve the needs of advanced researchers while
also enabling new users to develop the skills to achieve research success in
performing aqueous geochemical thermodynamic calculations for applications to
the Earth Sciences. Computational tools will be accessible through a public
online JupyterLab environment, featuring interactive notebooks crafted to
introduce students and newcomers to topics in aqueous geochemistry and
geobiochemistry. The software will be tailored to model mineral and organic
solubilities in user-specified fluids, metal-ligand speciation in those fluids,
consequences of water-organic-rock-microbe reactions, quantitative assessments
of metabolic energy supplies in diverse environments, and stabilities of
biomolecules in geological habitats. Advanced users will have access to the full
range of tools and codes to process experimental thermodynamic data and expand
data through estimation algorithms to address their research needs. The WORM
geoinformatics platform will support geochemical modeling and prediction of:
changes in water quality; weathering reactions that drive soil development;
alteration of rocks throughout hydrothermal and metamorphic conditions;
elemental transport in subduction zone fluids; evolution of ocean
biogeochemistry; bioavailability of nutrients and toxins; energy supplies for
microbial metabolism; and transformations of organic molecules in sedimentary
basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.