* 1949083
* Improving Officer Safety and Decision-making by Understanding and Harnessing Within-Officer States and Between-Officer Traits
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* John Hollenbeck, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 499,884.00

To understand why people make “good” versus “bad” decisions, much research has
focused on identifying stable factors that differentiate one individual
decision-maker from another. These factors include characteristics of the person
(e.g., personality, attitudes) and characteristics of the situation (e.g., type
of task, nature of the environment). Although these factors have helped to
differentiate “good” decision-makers from “bad” decision-makers, they cannot
explain why a given decision-maker makes good decisions at sometimes and bad
decisions at other times. To do so, it is necessary to compare not just one
person to another person, but also how and why one person differs from himself
or herself from one point in time to the next. In other words, research needs to
identify momentary factors (e.g., emotions) that explain why any one person is
an effective decision-maker in one context but not in another context. This
research aims to improve our ability to explain differences in decision-making
effectiveness by examining the combination of momentary and stable factors
within a nationally important context: policing. Momentary, or “within-person”
factors include emotions, physiological arousal, and sleep quality, and stable,
or “between-person” factors include personality traits and perceptions of the
environment. Gaining a better understanding of when and why a given police
officer makes good versus bad decisions not only promotes the progress of
science, but it also advances the health, prosperity, and welfare of citizens,
ultimately benefitting society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take a
multilevel approach and examine police officer decision-making in the field at
the episodic level. By viewing officer decision-making as a multilevel
phenomenon, shaped by within- and between-person factors, our goal is to explain
more variance in key decisions. The hypothesis is that between-person
differences a) influence within-person states, which in turn affect decision-
making processes and outcomes, and b) moderate the relationship between within-
person states and decision-making processes and outcomes. To test this, we will
utilize experience-sampling methodology with a sample of police officers in the
field, surveying them twice daily for two-weeks, at two points in time, spaced
nine months apart. We will assess police officers’ emotions felt during positive
and negative interactions with civilians and decisions made during those
interactions. During the experience-sampling phase, we also will capture
momentary assessments of physiological arousal and sleep quality via wearable
sensors. In addition, we will measure stable factors by surveying officers about
their personality traits (e.g., conscientiousness, self-monitoring) attitudes
(e.g., trust in the public), and perceptions of their agency (e.g., fair
culture). The identification of both within- and between-person factors should
enhance police officer decision-making and lead to more consistent decisions by
identifying event-level, momentary triggers that cause officers to stray from
high levels of performance. Findings from this study will help agencies identify
the types of encounters that increase officer anxiety or stress and leverage the
advantages and disadvantages associated with emotions and, in so doing, may
optimally position them to: (a) pinpoint ways to improve de-escalation
strategies, (b) increase the self-awareness of officers when it comes to their
emotional states, (c) reduce stress and promote officer well-being, and (d)
develop training programs that might improve citizen and officer
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.