* 1949747
* Efficient Global Dynamic Optimization using Dynamic Cut Generation and Domain Reduction Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Joseph Scott, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 290,476.00

Dynamic optimization is a computational approach used to optimally control
dynamic processes. Effective dynamic optimization codes have become a key
enabling technology in many industries, leading to substantial gains in
profitability, efficiency, and safety. However, dynamic optimization problems
commonly exhibit multiple sub-optimal local solutions. Use of these sub-optimal
solutions instead of the desired globally optimal solution can lead to
significant economic loss and performance degradation in many applications; this
can even produce expensive or dangerous unreliable conclusions. This project
aims to develop more efficient global optimization algorithms for types of
problems that arise in a broad spectrum of applications in the chemical,
pharmaceutical and aerospace industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to increase the efficiency of global dynamic optimization (GDO) codes by
developing cut generation and domain reduction techniques in the branch and
bound (B&amp;B) algorithm for solving nonconvex algebraic optimization problems.
Cut generation refers broadly to methods that strengthen the convex relaxation
of a nonconvex problem by imposing constraints that are redundant in the
original model, but not in the relaxation. In contrast, domain reduction refers
to methods that tighten the bounds on the decision variables in a B&amp;B node
using the problem constraints or a known feasible objective value. Research into
such techniques for GDO is very well motivated by analogy to standard nonlinear
programs (NLPs). Prior work on GDO has focused on relaxation methods that can be
considered dynamic extensions of the most basic methods used for NLPs
(specifically those based on factorable decomposition, such as McCormick
relaxations). However, B&amp;B codes based solely on these techniques are
extremely inefficient in most cases. In contrast, modern B&amp;B codes, which
routinely solve problems with hundreds of decisions, utilize a rich toolbox of
cut generation and domain reduction techniques. This strongly suggests that
analogous techniques for dynamic problems will profoundly impact the efficiency
of GDO algorithms. In addition to training graduate students, the proposed
research will involve training of undergraduate researchers through Clemson's
Creative Inquiry Program and rising high school seniors through Clemson's six-
week Summer Program for Research Interns. The project also includes the
development of a half-day long hands-on research activity for educating women
and minorities about career opportunities in STEM fields, hosted by Clemson's
Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) Program and the Programs for Educational
Enrichment and Retention (PEER).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.