* 1949962
* Collaborative Research: Chemically Modified, Plasma-Nanoengineered Graphene Nanopetals for Spontaneous, Self-Powered and Efficient Oil Contamination Remediation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Petros Voulgaris, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 220,000.00

Spills and leakage of oil during offshore oil production or marine
transportation cause both long-term damage to water ecosystems and loss of
valuable resources. Thus, efficient strategies for capturing and treating such
releases are urgently required. Gravity-driven siphons allow the transport of
liquids between phases. Siphons have been utilized for various applications and
hold promise for oil recovery. However, siphon devices generally suffer from
significant issues such as low oil removal flow rate, poor stability, and
inability to self-restart after disruption of the siphon. The goal of this
project is to develop a novel oil skimming technology based on a new chemically
modified graphene material. The hydrophobic nature of graphene is expected to
result in high remediation efficiency. Experiments guided by computational
molecular simulations will provide fundamental understanding of the interaction
of oil with graphene nanochannels. Successful completion of this research will
help guide the design of spontaneous, self-powered, and continuous oil
remediation systems with significantly enhanced efficiency. Such systems would
have broad-reaching impact on society by alleviating environmental and human
health impacts of spilled oil. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
research project is to understand the nature of interaction between oil and
graphene nanochannels. This will be achieved through experiments designed to
elucidate the mechanisms governing the synergistic effects of the nanochannel
geometry and surface functionalization of plasma-nanoengineered, vertically
standing graphene petal (GP) oil skimmers. Guided by molecular simulation
results, researchers will design and demonstrate an oil skimmer system based on
chemically modified GPs with controlled morphologies for spontaneous, self-
powered, and highly efficient oil spill remediation. The knowledge learned from
this research will offer insights into developing unique graphene materials to
address pressing oil pollution issues. The design principles will also
accelerate broader applications of graphene materials to other environmental
applications such as seawater desalination, wastewater treatment, and soil and
air pollution prevention and remediation. The project will also include
significant educational activities, including research programs for local K-12
students, teachers, and undergraduates. Society will benefit from students
acquiring relevant knowledge and skills to diversify and train the STEM
workforce of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.