* 1949013
* Cracking the chemical code: a data-science approach to deciphering the chemical information stored in environmental samples
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Rebecca Hutchinson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 329,002.00

Numerous natural and anthropogenic processes release organic chemicals into the
environment. The underlying hypothesis of this project is that these processes
have distinct chemical markers that can be used to uniquely identify each
source. Over time, chemicals are transported through the environment and are
often captured in lakes, rivers, and the ocean. These water bodies thus contain
a chemical record of all processes occurring upstream. This project will develop
tools to test water bodies for these chemical markers, using artificial
intelligence (AI) tools to screen for all processes that occur in a watershed.
This approach holds great promise to efficiently collect more data than existing
methods. Successful development of this AI approach will have wide-ranging
applications to detect and identify sources of pollution from local to global
scales. Broader impacts to society will result from the training of
underrepresented communities and development of STEM curricula for high school
students. These will lead to diversifying the STEM workforce and increasing
scientific literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lakes and other bodies of water can
be considered as systems that store chemical information recorded in the form of
tens of thousands of molecules in the water and sediment. The goal of this
research project is to use artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms to translate
the chemical data stored in environmental samples into knowledge about ecosystem
processes. This goal will be achieved through specific objectives to: 1) develop
diagnostic chemical fingerprints associated with multiple anthropogenic
pollution sources, 2) quantify environmental processes the affect the chemical
composition in receiving water bodies, and 3) identify pollution sources through
source identification in various water bodies including lakes and groundwater.
Although current application of chemical forensics is focused on pollution
source tracking, the goal of this research is substantially broader. Hundreds to
thousands of ecosystem processes occur across the landscape, and successful
completion of the research holds promise to track environmental processes
through fingerprint identification within a single water
sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.