* 1949182
* REU Site: Observing our world with light and sound
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Kevin Repasky, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 11/30/2023
* USD 378,171.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program, hosted by the
Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) Department at Montana State University
(MSU) and focusing on a central theme of "Observing Our World with Light and
Sound", offers state-of-the-art, interdisciplinary research experiences spanning
the applications of this theme, as well as the development of enabling
technologies, to diverse and talented cohorts of undergraduates from
institutions with limited or no research opportunities. The ECE Department's
diverse activities provide research opportunities catering to a wide spectrum of
backgrounds and interests. Moreover, the research experience will open students'
eyes to the nature of research, its role in understanding our world, and
engineering solutions to the problems that we face. The interdisciplinary nature
of the research efforts will also help the students to see how various academic
disciplines come together to solve important problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objectives of this REU site program are to provide each undergraduate
participant with a ten-week intensive and immersive, research experience within
a highly collegial environment of collaboration with faculty mentors and other
students. The program focuses on the development of the technical skills and
critical-thinking abilities of the participants and on their exposure to
substantive, representative research activities aimed at developing and
utilizing electromagnetic (including light) and sound-based observational tools
and techniques for a diverse range of applications. In addition, research will
include a number of supporting technologies which enable the development of
novel sensors such as micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), lasers and
photonics, nanotechnology, advanced image and signal processing, and machine
learning. It will also emphasize development of the participants' technical
communication abilities through several professional-development seminars and
workshops and enhance their understanding of the ethical and societal context
within which engineering research is performed. Industrial partners will be
highlighted by including industrial researchers in the seminar series and
including visits to local companies. The discoveries made during these
collaborations will be communicated to the broader scientific community via
publications and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.