* 1949870
* Collaborative Research: A New Rational Design of Functionally Graded Materials for Durable Lithium-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Zhenxing Feng, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2024
* USD 305,168.00

There is an increasing demand for high-performance and reliable energy storage
technologies, especially lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), for many cutting-edge
applications such as long-range electric vehicles and large-scale smart grids.
Reliability and cyclability are among the most critical bottlenecks in the
current LIBs technologies for these markets. In general, the compositional and
structural instabilities of electrode materials are the most encountered
problems responsible for the reliability issues. The state-of-the-art approach
to improve the electrode stability is to protect the electrode surfaces using
inhomogeneous coating layers. However, the internal resistance generated at the
electrode/coating-layer interface has negative effects on performance. This
project will investigate the controllable synthesis and electrochemical
stability of FGM in LIBs for next-generation energy storage technologies. The
project also includes related course development, undergraduate research
experience and outreach plans to local high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to understand the interfacial stabilization mechanism of lithium
battery (LIB) electrodes through a controllable surface reconstruction and to
establish experimental approaches for constructing functional graded materials
(FGM) for durable LIBs. The project will use in-situ synchrotron X-ray
characterization techniques to identify battery chemistry, coordination
geometry, and phase transition behaviors in FGM coated electrodes. The project
will comprehensively access the processing-structure-property relationship of
FGM for LIBs by integrating advanced characterizations with electrochemical
analyses. The research goals will be accomplished through the following
objectives: (1) understanding the formation mechanism of structure/composition
gradients in FGM by combining multiple in-situ and ex-situ electrochemical and
spectroscopic characterization tools; (2) studying the roles of
structure/composition gradient of FGM in improving the LIBs durability,
understanding the effects of structure/composition gradients on the electrical
and electrochemical properties of electrode materials; and (3) understanding the
electrode protection mechanism of FGM, establishing approaches to probe the
structural and compositional reconstruction of FGM for durable
LIBs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.