* 1949866
* Building Capacity in Support of the Development of Computer Science Master Teachers for Rural South Georgia
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Thomas Koballa, Mercer University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 124,829.00

This project aims to build the capacity for increasing the number of computer
science master teachers in rural Georgia. The shortage of computer science
instruction in rural schools is a serious gap in the STEM education pipeline. To
help fill this gap, this project seeks to define the skills and knowledge that
teachers need so they can provide students with effective computer science
learning experiences. It will also identify local resources that can help
achieve this goal. In addition, it will collect data about challenges that must
be overcome to increase the number and diversity of middle- and high-school
computer science teachers. The leadership potential of rural, high-need school
systems will also be assessed. The project intends to use the results of this
capacity building project to design a computer science master teacher
endorsement track within an existing Master of Education degree program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Mercer University includes partnerships
with Wiregrass Georgia Technical College and these rural county school
districts: Ben Hill, Bleckley, Evans, Jeff Davis, Tattnall, Treutlen, and
Wheeler. Additional partners are Rural Education Service Agencies (RESA):
Coastal Plains RESA, Heart of Georgia RESA, and Okefenokee RESA. Project goals
include the following: 1. Conduct a needs assessment to determine the
infrastructure needed to support computer science instruction in rural school
systems. The needs assessment will also collect data about the interest among
exemplary and certified grades 6-12 STEM teachers to pursue computer science
teaching and leadership opportunities. 2. Investigate recruitment, preparation,
and support processes pertinent to computer science teaching and leadership. 3.
Design a computer science master teacher endorsement track within an existing
Master of Education degree program. This endorsement track will be based on
understandings developed through activities aligned with the project’s first two
project goals. Data will be collected via interviews and publicly available
documents. The data will be analyzed using grounded theory to identify the
infrastructure needed to support computer science teacher and leader
development. The data analysis also aims to determine teacher interest and
recruitment capacity for a computer science teacher leader endorsement program,
computer science teacher leader preparation, and ongoing support. The
intellectual merit of the project resides in the process of evidence-based
decision making that will be used to design a model computer science teacher
endorsement track. The project’s broader impacts include its potential to
increase computer science learning opportunities for students in South Georgia
rural, high-need school systems. Dissemination of project findings will occur
via: paper presentations at state and national conferences; reports to the state
RESA directors and school superintendents; a written summary sent to state
legislators, the State Superintendent of Education, and the Offices of the
Governor and Lieutenant Governor; and manuscripts submitted to journals for
publication. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.