* 1949732
* A Workshop for Studying the Knowledge Creation Process with the ASA/Mason Digital Archive of Manuscripts and Reviews; Fairfax, VA - March 2020
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2020,03/31/2022
* James Witte, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 49,702.00

Much of science is found in peer-reviewed journals. However, researchers in the
history or sociology of science cannot study what is accepted and what is
rejected in these journals because until recently they did not have access to a
body of data that included accepted and rejected manuscripts, the topics
covered, the characteristics of those who submitted manuscripts, and the
comments of the reviewers. Moreover, they did not have such data over time, so
that they might see changes within a discipline in terms of topics and
submitters. The American Sociological Association (ASA) has electronic copies of
all the manuscripts and all the reviews for ASA journals for a twenty-year
period between 1991 and 2010. Based on a prior three-year, NSF-funded project,
the Center for Social Science Research (CSSR) at the George Mason University has
created a Digital Archive that contains this information for the American
Sociological Review, the ASA’s top journal. Given the complexities of the
Archive data file, in June 2019 CSSR held a two-day workshop so that interested
scholars could be trained to use it to answer critical questions about the
history and development of sociology in a time-period of pronounced changes in
the discipline. Demand for the first Workshop was high and its documented
success have prompted the need for a second workshop. Faculty trained in the use
of the archive will pass on this knowledge to their colleagues in sociology and
other disciplines to further the study of the peer-review system for a flagship
journal. This project is beneficial because it allows for scrutiny of the
scientific process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a two-day
workshop to be held in April 2020 to train a new group of faculty and graduate
students in the use of the ASA/Mason American Sociological Review (ASR) Digital
Archive. The Center for Social Science Research (CSSR) at the George Mason
University has created a Digital Archive of more than 8,000 manuscripts and
26,000 reviews. The Archive includes demographic and institutional information
of authors and reviews over a 20-year time-span. The Archive was created by
examining all submitted manuscripts, matching them with reviewers, and using the
internet to secure other information about authors and reviewers. This
information was merged into four types of files—author, reviewer, person, and
manuscript files. Workshop participants will become familiar with the files and
learn how to link them and/or how to use each separately, depending on the
research question to be answered. Examining these files allows researchers to
determine whether the peer networks of reviews are intellectually distant from
those of authors, or whether both the author and the reviewer are in the same
networks, thus suggesting the potential for reviewer
bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.