* 1949100
* Market-level effects of competition: prices, quality, and mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jeremy Foltz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2024
* USD 479,343.00

This research project uses experimental methods to test a fundamental economic
theory---the effects of market competition on prices, product quality, exit
decisions of existing firms, consumer welfare as well as how these changes
affect consumer perception of quality, buying habits, and behavior. The
experiments are applied to agricultural input markets. This research project
will take advantage of the entry of a large quality conscious agro-input store
chain into the agro-input market of a country to examine whether entry by this
quality-conscious chain can improve outcomes in this market, especially price,
quality, and usage of fertilizer. The researchers will also study how farmers
change their views on quality and buying habits as they learn about the
differential quality and prices of the new market entrant as well as the
reaction of existing forms to these market changes. The results of this research
project will not only offer an empirical test of the effects of competitive
pressures on product quality, price, and consumer welfare, it also shows one
mechanisms through which agricultural productivity can be increased, especially
in low income countries. This will increase the productivity and incomes of
farmers, thus decreasing poverty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will use lab-in-the field experiments to measure the broader impacts of entry on
the market with particular refence on quality, price and changes in preferences.
The PIs hypothesize that the effects will take place through the new firms
increasing competitive pressures on existing retailers and/or by shifting
consumer beliefs. Modern seeds and fertilizers have the potential to boost
agricultural yields, but there is a high prevalence of low-quality inputs on the
market in low income communities. This can reduce farmersâ€™ propensity to use
modern inputs which in turn lowers agricultural productivity and economic
growth. This research project proposes a two-pronged research design to study
the effects of new market entrant. First, the new entrant is willing to
randomize where the new stores will open across a set of pre-identified
locations. This will allow the PIs to measure how competition affects prices,
quality, and firm entry/exit. Second, experiments with farmers who live near
study markets will measure their willingness to pay for inputs of differing
provenance and quality levels. These experiments will shed light on the
mechanisms behind market-level effects. By studying whether market forces can
increase the product quality available to consumers, the findings could have
large implications for economic growth in the region and for the welfare of
millions of farmers. The results of this research will inform policies to
increase the adoption of modern agricultural inputs, hence improve productivity
and incomes, leading to poverty reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.