* 1949892
* Growing Future STEM Teachers in Maine
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Emily Lesher, Saint Joseph's College
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,181,403.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality STEM
teachers. To help meet the STEM teacher shortage in Maine, the project will
recruit undergraduate STEM majors into STEM teaching careers in biology,
mathematics, and physical sciences. It will support these students through
scholarships, mentoring, coursework, and seminars so they can become highly
skilled teachers in their local communities. Key project activities include
teaching career workshops to recruit community college students into teaching,
as well as supervised teaching experiences in high-need schools. In addition,
the project will include a field experience in a school that serves Native
American students. Through in-person mentoring, electronic resources, and
opportunities for alumni to interact with current students, the project intends
to develop a community of STEM teachers in Maine. The project activities are
designed to recruit talented undergraduate students into STEM teaching and help
them develop the skills to be successful teachers who have long-term teaching
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at St. Joseph's College in Maine
includes partnerships with Southern Maine Community College, Bonny Eagle School
District, Westbrook Public Schools, and teachers at Deering High School, Old
Town High School, and Lake Region Middle School. The project seeks to prepare
and support 18 undergraduates minoring in secondary education and majoring in
biology, mathematics, or physical sciences, to achieve certification and become
highly qualified STEM teachers. The long-term goal is to meet the needs of rural
and urban Maine schools by recruiting future STEM teachers from the local
community. Research activities will explore undergraduate student perceptions of
teaching as a career. Project evaluation focuses on recruitment, quality and
persistence, dissemination, and the degree to which Scholar employment trends
indicate that Scholars are employed in their home communities. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.