* 1949029
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: OIL AND GAS SITING, HOUSING CHOICES, AND STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* John Adgate, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2024
* USD 562,285.00

All people deserve equal protection from environmental risks and equal
opportunities to participate in decision making processes that affect local
environmental and health outcomes. This project assesses the extent to which
these principles are being met in the context of oil and gas development in
Colorado. The boom in unconventional oil and gas (O&amp;G) development in
Colorado, and many other states, has yielded both benefits and risks for
communities. Horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing (aka “fracking” or
“fracing”) have changed the geography of US energy production by increasing the
intensity of extractive activities and infrastructure and bringing them closer
to more people than ever before. This project assesses whether or not the
distribution of risks and benefits from O&amp;G development has been equitable,
and why (or why not). In April 2019, public concern over these issues led to
policy changes in Colorado that increased local involvement with O&amp;G
decisions. This research project examines the implications of this policy
innovation and draws lessons for other states considering similar legislation.
As the U.S. energy landscape changes and debates on this issue continue across
the country, protecting the nation’s health requires understanding how
communities are affected and who gets to take part in the decisions surrounding
O&amp;G development. Our team is committed to maximizing the broader academic
and policy impacts of our research through collaborative relationships with
other researchers, local and state-level decision makers, and members of the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes conceptual, methodological, and
empirical contributions to the study of environmental patterns and processes in
the context of O&amp;G development. The conceptual framework demonstrates how
patterns of proximity to O&amp;G development result from decision and policy
processes involving many actors at varying scales. The research team uses this
framework to address the following questions: 1) Are socially disadvantaged
groups more likely to be closer to O&amp;G development? 2) Are there disparities
in information about O&amp;G risks and benefits between socially advantaged and
disadvantaged groups that could affect choices about housing and policy
participation? 3) Does increased local involvement in energy development lead to
improved processes and policy outcomes? To answer the first question, the team
analyzes large geospatial data sets to assess the distribution of O&amp;G
impacts, triangulating between multiple data sets and analyses at different
levels of spatial aggregation to assess how these methodological choices affect
results. The second question is addressed using a household survey in
purposefully selected Colorado case study sites. The project investigates the
third question with a mixed-methods analysis of local decision maker surveys,
policy documents, and interviews, focusing specifically on policy and rule-
making changes following the April 2019 passage of SB-181, which increased local
involvement in O&amp;G activities. This policy shift creates a natural
experiment to examine effects on stakeholder engagement and
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.