* 1949472
* Collaborative Research: Beyond CS Principles: Engaging Female High School Students in New Frontiers of Computing
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Akos Ledeczi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 04/30/2024
* USD 595,380.00

Building on the foundations set by the AP Computer Science (CS) Principles
course, this project seeks to dramatically expand access, especially for high
school girls, to the most exciting and emerging frontiers of computing, such as
distributed computation, the internet of things (IoT), cybersecurity, and
machine learning, as well as other 21st century skills required to productively
leverage computational methods and tools in virtually every profession. Creating
pathways that stimulate high school learners' interest in advanced topics with
the goal of building a diverse, gender-balanced, future-ready workforce is a
crucial and impactful imperative addressed in this work. An experienced multi-
disciplinary team of researchers, high school teachers, and industry partners
will be involved in the design of a new, modular, open-access curriculum called
Computer Science Frontiers (CSF) that provides an engaging introduction to these
advanced topics in high school (that are currently accessible only to CS majors
in college). To address the dire gender disparity in computing, the project will
design and research the curriculum to engage female students. Through studying
the impact of innovative computing tools and curricular units on learning,
attitudes, interests, and collaboration of students (and especially young
women), the project will advance discovery and understanding to aid the cause of
broadening participation in technology-related careers as well as the future of
work at the human-technology frontier. The open access modular design of the
curricular materials and the dissemination activities will ensure wide adoption
of the products of this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leverages
NetsBlox, a powerful yet easy-to-use visual programming environment that has
been shown to increase engagement and interest in computing. Additionally,
NetsBlox supports effective collaboration while facilitating learning of
distributed computing, networking, and cybersecurity in informal settings. Early
phases of the project will involve design and refinement of curricular modules
through co-design workshops with seven participating teachers, summer camps with
students, and pilot implementations in Tennessee and North Carolina, leading to
full classroom implementations in Year 3 by the high school teachers. Data
collected through surveys, student portfolios, teacher interviews, and digital
logs from NetsBlox will be analyzed. Research findings will help in
understanding if and how advanced computing methods alongside key competencies
can be introduced in high school; how pedagogies involving project-based
activities around real-world, multidisciplinary problems work to increase female
students' interests in computing; and which advanced topics work better than
others in terms of difficulty level and engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.