* 1949484
* Collaborative Research: Network Science for All: Positioning Underserved Youth for Success in Pursuing STEM Pathways
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Alexandra Oliver-Davila, SOCIEDAD LATINA INC
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 02/29/2024
* USD 439,521.00

Boston University, in partnership with Sociedad Latina, will investigate the
role that a middle school network science curriculum plays as both an input and
outcome of science learning. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers. The project team will focus on
development of skills to investigate real-world problems that have meaningful
consequences for humankind across social, technical, and scientific domains.
This project will make use of publicly available data to allow students to be
involved in project-based activities in and out of their classrooms that can
have societal impact. The project team will leverage previously developed data-
driven curriculum in the context of a network science lens, synthesize highly
promising technical and STEM resources as well as in-school and out-of-school
programs, and embed new education research advances on effective career
development to evolve a construct that will best position underserved youth for
future learning of science. The curriculum and career development resources will
directly reach 600 principally Latinx students, 12 teachers, parents, and other
key stakeholders. Project activities will be implemented in a range of in-school
and after-school programs in Boston. Through a collective impact approach, the
project will be replicable, scale to more schools throughout Massachusetts,
inform related projects, and evolve to regional and national impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create novel learning opportunities for
middle school students to explore real-world project-based problems addressed
through data analysis, data visualization and network modeling. This study will
advance the field of interdisciplinary teaching and learning as well as
strategies for supporting students and teachers through three interdependent
strands: (1) Network Science for All workforce readiness curriculum modules, (2)
applied evaluation metrics based on comparing students to peer groups through
statewide data, and (3) sustainability and scalability embedded in the structure
of the program. The project will be informed by several advisory boards aimed at
leveraging the program in order to sustain and scale the effort. At Boston
University, an internal advisory board will embed the project into the broad
ecosystem of the university as part of a collective impact culture. A STEM
advisory board will inform the science program. A formal independent external
advisory board will guide the projectâ€™s efforts. Research will be conducted in
two phases. In Phase 1, design-based research will be used to iteratively refine
curriculum and programmatic interventions. In Phase 2, the research will examine
the degree to which the program positions youth for success by examining the (1)
varied acquisition of next generation STEM competencies for future workforce
needs, (2) motivation and engagement of students and their support systems, and
(3) impact on shifting STEM-related career goals and pathways to achieving these
goals. All materials will be available in electronic forms on a Boston
University project website, will be licensed under open-source code and open
content licenses, and will be freely distributed to teachers, curriculum
developers, and researchers. Research findings will be widely disseminated
through publications and conference proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.