* 1949434
* Emerging Roles for the Nucleolus - American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Symposium
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Francesca Duncan, American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 09/30/2020
* USD 18,000.00

The overarching objective of the project is to facilitate the attendance,
education, participation, and integration of the next generation of researchers
into nucleolar biology. The conference is organized by the American Society of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB). It was held for the first time in
2017 and will be held for the second time in 2019. This conference series fills
a gap in biology meetings because it is the only conference devoted to nucleolar
biology in the last 10 years. The conference will introduce early career
scientists to an array of leaders and perspectives and will allow early career
scientists to share their perspectives, helping them to become the leaders of
the future. The meeting size and setting fosters scientific discussion and
collegiality, with collaborations emerging as one outcome. The nucleolus is a
nuclear organelle of interest to a wide array of scientists who do not normally
convene, from those studying the biophysical properties to those trying to
understand basic functions in model organisms, to those targeting its activity
in cancer and rare developmental syndromes. All of these individuals are united
under one roof at this meeting to foster communication. For any field to
flourish, it is imperative to support diverse perspectives and build the next
generation of leaders, which is the main objective of this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary conference will focus on a
range of topics related to nucleolar biology. These include the stability and
diversity of ribosomal DNA sequences, the biophysical properties of the
nucleolus, new advances in imaging methods, and the function of the nucleolus in
health, stress and disease. The program is designed to facilitate interactions
and discussions, with a poster session and shared meals, including a "meet the
experts" lunch in which senior leaders are seated with a group of early career
scientists for informal conversation about science and career related topics. In
addition to ten invited speakers, twenty-four abstracts were chosen for platform
presentations of which fourteen are from early career scientists, primarily
postdocs, and graduate students. Significant efforts have been made by the
organizers for inclusion and diversity. The meeting's organizational framework
includes a team of both a senior and early career scientist as co-organizers and
session chairs. The conference has a roughly equal split between male and female
speakers, and all requests for a platform presentation were accommodated.
Promoting international discussions, the program includes speakers from nine
countries. Speakers will have the option to write a review article for
publication in Biochemical Society Transactions. To promote scientific awareness
with the public, the 2019 meeting boasts a STEAM initiative, in which artistic
images of nucleoli will be assembled into an art page and made into a
banner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.