* 1949790
* I-Corps:  Smartphone-based peanut maturity grading and analytic system
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Tsz Ho Tse, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
improvement of crop yield and quality by providing accurate and consistent
color-based peanut classification. Many crops are based on color classification
to determine the harvest day and quality. Also, optimizing harvest dates is a
key to maximizing peanut quality and production. A loss of the total yield can
be caused by underestimating or overestimating the harvest dates. In addition,
overestimation can cause a low selling price and suboptimal peanut quality due
to immaturity, while underestimation may cause over-mature crops to be left in
the soil due to the weak stems. Currently, the color classification procedures
in peanuts are human-vision based. Comparing to them, this technology will
provide a standardized, accurate and consistent peanut grading results. Also,
the accumulated data will provide updated insights to financial institutes, food
industries, growers on peanut pricing, yield and quality. This I-Corps program
will provide opportunities for the team to explore commercialization of the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is the first peanut
maturity prediction and analytic system designed to streamline and simplify the
current procedure. Existing method for maturity prediction is based on human
vision, which can lead to variability in results due to the subjective nature of
the test, and 30+ minutes to finish one set of 200+ peanut samples. In this
proposal, a standardized peanut maturity prediction and analytic system based on
color classification has been developed. The system includes a light-controlled
photo booth, a peanut sorting board and a smartphone to grade and analyze up to
400 peanuts each time. Automation will allow the grading process to be completed
in under 3 minutes and generate a report for the user. This will help save
500-800 hours of labor cost per peanut grader in each peanut season.
Furthermore, a peanut information system will be developed to collect peanut
information through the grading procedure. This information can be used for
providing pricing and growth prediction information in the peanut market.
Several prototypes have been developed to prove the concept. Tests have been
performed with peanut samples to prove the concept of the proposed
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.