* 1949808
* Collaborative Research: Evidentiary Dilemmas and Emergent Publics: How Contestations over New Geospatial Technologies are Shaping International Justice
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Jennifer Burrell, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 44,540.00

The use of new geospatial technologies, such as geo-satellite imaging, drones,
and ground technology systems, in judicial investigations and proceedings has
proliferated in recent years, not only among governmental and law enforcement
bodies, but also by nongovernmental organizations, advocates, and ordinary
citizens. Understanding how diverse communities are using and interpreting these
new technologies is critical to our ability to grasp and forecast what justice
looks like in the twenty-first century at the local, national, and international
levels. Much of the project's data will be made publicly available in order to
inform legal and public policies regarding the use of geospatial technologies in
judicial proceedings. Data dissemination will enhance the public's understanding
of science and the scientific method through the construction of a public
archive that documents the role of technology in investigations and justice
proceedings. The project also provides training for graduate and undergraduate
students in methods of rigorous, scientific data collection and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-sited ethnographic research project is
among the first empirical studies to examine how geospatial technologies are
used by civil society stakeholders and legal experts in criminal and human
rights investigations. In particular, research will focus on the new
collaborations and contestations forming among litigants, civil society
stakeholders, and technical and legal experts. Research will illuminate how
geospatial technologies are being deployed by technical experts and laypersons
alike in an effort to uncover forensic and other evidence for legal cases. The
project will also explore whether and how these new forms of evidence are
permitted within legal institutions, as well as the related tensions surrounding
how different subject groups, including scientists and prosecutors, interpret
the information generated by these technologies. The research project will use
several qualitative methods to generate a rich data-set, including coding from
120 interviews with representatives of multiple population groups, participant
observation of technology trainings and court proceedings, archival analysis of
public media, and visual analysis of satellite imagery. Results from this
research will contribute to legal anthropology and sociolegal studies by
exploring how new technologies are influencing evidentiary procedure and the
ways within which different stakeholders participate in the judicial
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.