* 1949077
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Collaborative: Advances in Socio-Algorithmic Information Diversity
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Brendan Nyhan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 11/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Social media now play an important role in exposing people to information about
a wide range of topics ranging from entertainment to hard news and political
debate. What can be seen on these platforms is heavily influenced by algorithms
that are designed to select the most engaging and relevant content for each
user. By seeking to maximize engagement, these algorithms may inadvertently
amplify factually dubious or poor quality information that reinforces users'
existing beliefs. In doing so, these algorithms could reduce the diversity of
information to which users are exposed. This project will develop new content
recommendation algorithms that reduce this risk and improve the quality and
diversity of information circulating on social media.

This research will develop an understanding of how coupled cyber-human systems
process information in the context of news consumption on social media. This
context creates important information-processing vulnerabilities at the social,
behavioral, cognitive, and algorithmic levels. Using data from a nationally
representative sample of the U.S. population, investigators will measure the
association between political attitudes, readership, engagement, and information
quality. They will also test the effect of behavioral nudges designed to promote
the consumption of diverse information in a browser extension/smartphone app.
Finally, the researchers will develop a generic modeling framework to evaluate
the effect of these recommendations on audience-slant diversification and to
test their robustness against fraudulent (shilling) attacks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.