* 1949672
* Collaborative Research: A High Resolution Multi-Tracer Biogeochemical Study of the Pacific Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Dean Stockwell, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 03/31/2024
* USD 375,841.00

Surface warming is occurring in the Arctic at a pace that is roughly double that
of the global average, leading to reductions in extent and thickness of sea ice
and prolonged seasonal periods of open water throughout much of the Arctic
Ocean. Direct observations in the Pacific Arctic region, including the northern
Bering and Chukchi seas, are needed to understand how this ecosystem is shifting
in a time of rapid change. To that end, the investigators will participate in a
research expedition scheduled for summer 2020 and will make simultaneous
oceanographic measurements of dissolved oxygen, dissolved carbon dioxide,
dissolved nutrients, particulate organic matter distribution and composition,
and plankton productivity. In addition to providing new information about
biological and physical processes in the region, these observations will
complement and extend a companion project conducted by collaborators from the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution about the distribution and activity of
harmful algal bloom species in the region, which are an emergent concern for
Alaskan communities. This study will support graduate and undergraduate
students, providing them research and experiential educational opportunities.
The investigators will attend regional meetings and seminars in Alaska to
communicate their findings to broader audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test
hypotheses related to the controls and spatial-temporal patterns in elemental
cycling and productivity of the Pacific Arctic, the investigators will measure a
novel suite of ecosystem-relevant tracers, sampled at high frequency from the US
Coast Guard Cutter Healy's underway system and from CTD surveys. They will make
simultaneous, high resolution measurements of dissolved nitrate and phosphorous
to evaluate nutrient dynamics, oxygen-argon ratios and partial pressure of
carbon dioxide to determine net community production and biologically-mediated
air-sea carbon dioxide exchange, and particulate organic matter concentrations
and particle-optical properties (particle size, beam attenuation and chlorophyll
fluorescence) to quantify trends in phytoplankton biomass and size structure. In
addition, the investigators will use the triple oxygen isotope technique and
carbon-13/nitrogen-15 uptake incubations to determine rates of primary
productivity, as well as Fast Repetition Rate Fluorometry to evaluate
phytoplankton nutritional status under variable environmental conditions. This
multi-tracer approach will discriminate different processes (e.g., advection,
upwelling and mixing) and their biogeochemical/ecological response (e.g.,
productivity, respiration, export, and shifts in community composition) at fine
temporal and spatial scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.