* 1949939
* OPUS: CRS: Non-Adaptive and Anti-Adaptive Forces in Evolution, A Synthesis
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Dan Graur, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/28/2023
* USD 232,849.00

There exist two approaches to the functional description of the genetic makeup
that endows each living organism with its unique heritable characters. The first
approach, which ascribes particular biochemical activities to particular parts
of the genome, is descriptive and mechanistic; it does not answer questions of
causality and functionality. The second approach is evolutionary; it looks at
particular segments within the genome and asks why these segments exist and how
are they maintained during evolutionary times. By using the second approach,
this study will attempt to identify the driving forces that lead to
functionality and lack of functionality, thereby enabling researchers to
identify and focus on (1) the functional parts of the genome, and (2) on the
nonfunctional parts that are usually inert and innocuous in terms of their
effects on the organism, but which under certain circumstances may adversely
affect fitness. During this study, the PI will directly engage undergraduate and
graduate students at University of Houston as well as other institutions in the
Houston area in writing-intense activities related to evolutionary biology
through WikiEdu and other Wikimedia outlets. WikiEdu aims to connect higher
education to Wikipedia, ensuring that Wikipedia, the world’s most read
information source, is representative, accurate, and complete. The PI is also an
associate editor of WikiJournal of Science, which publishes review articles. It
achieves public engagement and outreach, and impacts public understanding of
science by a dual process of publication: a standard academic paper and a
modifiable version in Wikipedia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite huge advances in
our understanding of the molecular and stochastic foundations of the
evolutionary process, there is a need to systematically enumerate and discuss
the many non-adaptive and anti-adaptive evolutionary processes and mechanisms
affecting the genome and to logically present the reasons why “perfection”
cannot be the expected outcome of any natural process. A synthesis of these
evolutionary non-adaptive and anti-adaptive forces, each presented as a testable
hypothesis and accompanied by theoretical, experimental, and observational
evidence would be a welcome antidote to adaptive “just-so stories.” This
synthesis has an additional aim, i.e., to illustrate the advantages of
“hypothesis-driven science” over all other methods of inquiry, such as “data-
driven science,” that dispose with the need for a hypothesis as the central
conceptualization of scientific research. This research will deal with the many
reasons why evolution by its nature and the mechanisms it employs is incapable
of producing anything approaching perfection in terms of performance (i.e., the
attained output), efficiency (i.e., the manner with which the output is
attained), or fitness. The conceptual framework derived from this synthesis will
be used to analyze and interpret evolutionary patterns and characteristics at
the genome level. The synthesis will encompass theoretical as well as empirical
results. A number of evolutionary factors leading to evolutionary
“imperfections” will be considered, for example, (1) the lack of feedback
mechanisms; (2) the limitations imposed by the effective population size; (3)
the indifference of mutations, (4) historical contingency; (5) the genetic load
imposed by deleterious mutations, (6) random occurrences of extinction; and (7)
genomic sexual conflicts, whereby the two sexes share essentially the same
genomes yet are subject to divergent selection
pressures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.