* 1949491
* I-Corps:  An Augmented Reality Board Game for Mathematics
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Andre Denham, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is threefold: 1)
As an augmented reality math board game, our product can further contribute to
the design, research, and implementation of mixed reality learning products into
K-12 education while facilitating a more constructive, student-centered, and
adaptive learning approach in the modern school system. 2) As digital game-based
learning becomes more popular among educators in the recent decade, our product
has a growing customer base (parents, teachers, and school principals) seeking
evidence-based educational game products to better engage students and improve
their mathematics proficiency. 3) Proficiency in mathematics is essential to for
those wanting to pursue a career in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics fields (STEM). As a mathematics learning game that tackles the
challenging conceptual transition between basic number sense and higher-level
math skills, our product can help students improve student's confidence in
mathematics and help them further their career goals in STEM-related fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is an augmented reality (AR)
mathematics board game. The game requires students to apply their knowledge of
arithmetic, pre-algebra, and geometric concepts in order to be successful. It
combines the benefits of digital and tabletop games, making the play/learning
experience entertaining, engaging, embodied, immersive, and social at the same
time. The product was designed based on three learning theories - embodied
learning, cognitive load, and sociocultural theory. The game is rooted in the
physical world - players need to interact with the game board, pieces, and cards
to solve problems and must collaborate; in the process, their collaborative
skills, communication skills, and critical thinking skills will be utilized and
strengthened. The AR features allow students to offload the procedural
information onto the digital space, providing them with more ease and comfort to
concentrate on mathematical problem-solving and game strategies. AR also allows
scaffolding to be incorporated into the game mechanic in order to assist
students with mathematics problem-solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.