* 1949895
* Lawsonite: an exceptional geochemical archive in HP/LT rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Donna Whitney, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2024
* USD 358,113.00

Water and other chemical substances that are essential for life circulate from
the Earth’s surface to the deep interior of the planet and back again in a cycle
over many millions of years. Water is carried to great depths within mineral
crystals in tectonic plates that dive (subduct) into the subsurface. One of the
most important minerals in this cycle is lawsonite, which forms only under the
characteristic high-pressure and relatively low-temperature conditions in the
upper layer of subducting plates. Lawsonite is important because it contains a
substantial amount of water and also contains trace amounts of other elements,
such as uranium, lead, and rare earth elements. Although common in subducting
plates, lawsonite rarely survives to be preserved in the rock record,
particularly in the highest-pressure rocks of ancient subduction zones. This
project uses the composition of rare, fresh lawsonite from a global suite of
twelve subduction complexes as an archive of element-cycling processes in
subduction zones.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Lawsonite composition and zoning are
exceptional recorders of fluid-rock interaction in subduction zones.
Compositional and textural data illuminate the role of lawsonite and associated
minerals in volatile and element cycling at the interface of the subducted
oceanic crust and overlying mantle before major devolatilization at subarc
depths. This research involves the first determination of oxygen isotope values
in lawsonite and comprehensive characterization of the trace-element
composition, zoning, and microstructures of lawsonite and associated minerals.
Preliminary data indicate that oxygen isotope abundance in lawsonite is a
sensitive indicator of the source(s) of fluids in subducted slabs, such as
serpentinites (lower d18O) or oceanic sediments (higher d18O), and show that
fluid sources in mélange vs. more structurally-coherent subduction complexes may
be distinct. The sample suite consists of lawsonite eclogites and blueschists as
well as lawsonite-bearing metasedimentary (carbonate, quartzite) and metasomatic
rocks and veins, and includes prograde, peak, and retrograde generations of
lawsonite. Owing to its high modal abundance and composition (12 wt% H2O, 1-2
wt% Fe2O3), lawsonite may be a significant factor in mantle redox conditions and
H2O content since at least the Neoproterozoic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.