* 1949145
* Molecular drivers of the physiological interaction between the mosquito immune and circulatory systems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Julian Hillyer, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 876,200.00

When a microbe invades of a mosquito, it is propelled throughout the body by the
flow of the insectâ€™s blood, called hemolymph. As this happens, the flow of
hemolymph also disseminates immune cells, called hemocytes, that continually
survey the body for infecting microbes. However, not all hemocytes circulate.
Instead, some hemocytes attach to tissues, and they preferentially attach to the
regions surrounding the valves of the heart. Within seconds of infection, these
heart-associated hemocytes, called periostial hemocytes, begin to efficiently
destroy the microbes that invade the body. This immune response lowers the heart
rate and recruits additional hemocytes to the heart, which amplifies the
strength of the immune response. The goals of this project are to discover the
genes and proteins that drive the immune responses that occur on the mosquito
heart, and to determine the role that hemocytes play in regulating heart
rhythmicity. Completion of this project will greatly expand our knowledge of how
insects fight infection. This important information will allow us to manipulate
the immune system to protect beneficial insects (pollinators), and control
detrimental insects (agricultural pests and disease transmitters). This project
supports training of undergraduate and graduate students, and of primary and
secondary school students from Metro Nashville Public Schools, thus training the
next generation of STEM leaders. Trainees participating in this project will
also educate a global audience by editing and improving entries in publicly
accessible digital encyclopedias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immune and
circulatory systems of mosquitoes are functionally integrated, whereby an
infection induces intense immune processes that occur on the surface of the
heart. These heart-associated immune responses are advantageous because they
occur in regions of the body that experience the most hemolymph flow and are
driven by specific cells called periostial hemocytes. Although the structural
mechanics of this functional integration have been uncovered, the molecular
basis of hemocyte migration to the heart and its impact on heart rhythmicity
remains unknown. Gene expression data raise the possibility that the IMD/JNK
pathway drives hemocyte migration to the heart and that the cardiac
extracellular matrix guides hemocytes to their final location. Therefore, using
the societally important mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, as the study system, this
project will (i) define the specific roles that the IMD/JNK pathway and other
immune genes play in driving periostial hemocyte aggregation, and whether
disrupting this pathway or genes modulates circulatory physiology; (ii) uncover
whether disrupting the extracellular matrix and other target genes impairs
hemocyte migration to the heart and circulatory physiology; and (iii)
distinguish the relative contribution of periostial hemocytes and pericardial
cells in heart-associated immune responses, while unveiling the role that
hemocytes play in modulating circulatory physiology. Because periostial immune
responses occur in diverse insect taxa, this research will enhance our
understanding of how insects survive in their environments and will inform on
potential ways to protect beneficial insects while targeting detrimental
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.