* 1949848
* Building Capacity to Produce STEM Teachers at a Hispanic Serving Institution in Illinois
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Chetna Patel, Aurora University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2021
* USD 74,910.00

This project aims to serve the national need to increase the number of qualified
secondary STEM teachers, including the number of Hispanic STEM teachers in high-
needs school districts. Increased participation of Hispanic students in STEM
secondary education majors will help address the national and local need for
culturally responsive, bilingual teachers. These teachers will also also serve
as role models to help all secondary students envision themselves in STEM
teaching careers. The project team will develop and implement survey instruments
for high school and college students who are majoring in STEM. Data collected
from the surveys will be used to develop effective mechanisms for increasing
awareness of STEM teaching licensure as a career path and help to identify
opportunities to help students pursuing and attaining licensure. The
implementation of professional development speakers and faculty workshops on
culturally relevant teaching will help faculty encourage underrepresented
students to pursue this pathway. These activities are expected to increase
institutional capacity for the recruitment and support of students in the
secondary STEM education program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Aurora
University includes partnerships with the East Aurora and West Aurora School
Districts and Elgin Community College. Project goals are to identify methods to
connect students to careers in STEM secondary education, establish the
foundation for a strong pipeline of STEM secondary teacher candidates from area
high schools and community colleges, and to develop the infrastructure for a
subsequent Robert Noyce Track I Scholarships and Stipends program. Replicable
survey and focus group instruments will enable other institutions to adapt and
implement these tools to better increase their own STEM education licensure
enrollment and allow high school faculty to address barriers earlier in the
education process, when many students are formulating career perceptions. An
independent evaluation of this program will include focus groups, interviews,
and document reviews combined with quantitative/direct data from program
activities to measure achieved outcomes, challenges, and impact of the project.
Results from this program will be disseminated on the project website, at campus
events and meetings, to area high schools and colleges, and will be presented at
the annual NSF Noyce Summit as well as at regional and national conferences.
This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.