* 1949188
* RUI: Examining the disconnect between prolactin and parental care in avian brood parasites
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Kathleen Lynch, Hofstra University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 04/30/2025
* USD 752,933.00

Prolactin is often referred to as the “parental hormone” because there is a
clear and well-established role for this hormone in maintaining parental
behavior in many animals. Yet, there is a seasonal prolactin peak in avian
obligate brood parasites, which are birds that leave their eggs in nests of
different species rather than build their own nest, incubate their own eggs and
feed their own newborns. Elevated prolactin in species that provide no help to
their offspring indicates that circulating prolactin levels may be insufficient
or misleading in assessing how levels of this hormone motivate parental care.
The studies will examine the disconnect between prolactin and parental care in
avian brood parasites. The aim of these studies is to identify the molecular and
neurophysiological building blocks of parental behavior and how modification in
these building blocks result in striking transformations in parental care.
Additionally, these studies investigate consequences of altering prolactin
receptor on parental behaviors using modern gene manipulation approaches that
increase prolactin receptor abundance in the brain of nest parasites and
decrease prolactin receptor abundance in non-parasitic birds. Citizen scientists
will participate in the field components of these studies, including students
from programs promoting interaction of girls with female scientists so that they
may view science careers as realistic options. Robotic birds used in the
research will also be a component of summer research camps that will introduce
high school students to biological experiments using robotics. Cutting-edge gene
manipulation approaches will provide hands-on experience for undergraduate
students in lab courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parental care is critical for
survival of offspring in many species. Yet, there are profound differences in
parental care across species, sexes and individuals. These comparative studies
take advantage of natural variation in parental care to identify the
neurobiological- and molecular-basis of brood parasitic behavior in birds. Avian
obligate brood parasites evade providing parental care to offspring by laying
eggs in nests of other species, which releases the parasite from parental tasks
but ensures that parasitic offspring receive necessary provisioning until they
are independent. Some brood parasitic species, however, display seasonal surges
in prolactin, a hormone well-established as the “parental hormone”. These
studies include a blend of field and laboratory studies aimed at understanding
the disconnect between prolactin and parental care in brood parasitic species.
These aims track prolactin-dependent physiology and behavior across development
in two closely related species with stark differences in parental care and
identify whether prolactin physiology exhibits convergent features across
phylogenetically distantly related brood parasitic species. The prolactin-
related physiology to be investigated includes circulating prolactin, prolactin
receptor isoforms and prolactin-regulated intracellular messenger systems,
specifically the janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription
(i.e. JAK/STAT pathway). Prolactin-dependent behavioral responses to robotic
nestlings will be investigated across development and breeding status as well as
in transgenic parasitic and non-parasitic birds with altered prolactin receptors
using adeno-associated virus and RNAi approaches. These studies will provide a
long overdue mechanistic perspective to understanding the evolution of brood
parasitism and provide insight into possible neurobiological mechanisms
associated with novel behavioral phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.