* 1949919
* Preparing Undergraduate Science Majors to Teach in High-Need Rural and Urban Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Paul Bischoff, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,004,886.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality science
and mathematics teachers for high-need school districts. Improving the science
achievement of students at high-need rural and urban schools requires teachers
who can design daily instruction that aligns with student interests, while
creating supportive and challenging learning environments. To become such highly
skilled teachers, undergraduates must learn and practice these skills with
guidance from talented mentor teachers. To this end, this project aims to
prepare certified middle and high school STEM teachers via multiple academic and
practical experiences, including teaching experiences in both urban and rural
schools. At least one teaching experience will be in a New York City public
school. Teaching experiences in school settings will be supplemented by related
hands-on experiences, including participation in Science Saturday programs and
rural summer science camps. The project will also pair supported preprofessional
teachers with mentor teachers during the new teachers' first years in
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at The State University of New York,
College at Oneonta includes partnerships with the Oneonta City School District,
Charlotte Valley Central School District, and other rural high-need schools, New
York City public schools, and the New York State Master Teacher Program. Over
the project’s five year span, it will provide twenty-four undergraduate science
majors with the pedagogical-content knowledge and skills needed to succeed as
teachers in high-need rural and urban school districts. The undergraduate
science majors will earn Bachelor of Science degrees in Chemistry, Biology,
Physics, or Earth Science. Project activities will include internships in the
SUNY Oneonta Science Discovery Center complemented by extra-curricular workshops
focused on pedagogical knowledge and skills requisite to succeed as a science
teacher in a high-need school district. Additionally, New York State Master
Teachers and in-service Noyce Scholar teachers will serve as clinical placement
mentors. Research efforts will focus on the effectiveness of these undergraduate
experiences on Noyce Scholars’ pedagogical knowledge growth specific to teaching
in high-need school districts. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project
is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.