* 1949893
* REU Site - Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Biochemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Gary Kunkel, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 413,193.00

This REU Site award to Texas A&amp;M AgriLife Research/Texas A&amp;M University,
located in College Station, TX, will support the training of 10 students for 10
weeks during the summers of 2020-22. It is anticipated that 30 students, from
schools with limited research opportunities and/or from under-represented
groups, will be trained in this program. Recruiting efforts focus on students
who have completed their freshman, sophomore or junior years. The program
combines cutting-edge lab research and professional skill development. Students
will learn how to do research from faculty who direct nationally-funded
programs. In addition, students will attend weekly meetings to support the
development of their professional skills. Meeting topics include responsible
conduct of research, developing research questions, applying to graduate school,
and instruction in presentation skills. At the end of the program, students will
present their research accomplishments in written and oral reports. Participants
will learn how research is conducted, and many will present their results at
scientific conferences and/or in scientific publications. The program promotes
the development of research and communication skills that are critical for
success in graduate school and careers in research. Assessment of the program
will be done using the online SALG-URSSA assessment tool. Students will be
tracked after the program to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants become members of labs in the
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics. Participants study the structure and
function of macromolecules in research projects investigating energy production
by mitochondria, cell membrane components involved in signal transduction,
uptake or secretion, bacterial cell organization, metabolites that regulate
bacterial communities, proteins and RNAs that regulate chromosomes and/or gene
expression, the use of bacteriophage to treat bacterial infections, and more.
Ethics and responsible conduct in research training use case studies to promote
dialogue among students. The PI and co-PI consider academic record, reference
letters, diversity, and interest in pursuing graduate education and a career in
science when selecting participants. The web-based SALG URSSA assessment tool
will be used to determine the effectiveness of this training program. More
information about the program is available at
https://biochemistry.tamu.edu/academics/summer-undergraduate-research-in-
biochemistry/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Mary Bryk, bryk@tamu.edu) or co-PI
(Dr. Gary Kunkel, g-kunkel@tamu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.