* 1949381
* Collaborative Research: Disentangling Exploration from Exploitation
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Leeat Yariv, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 199,516.00

This group of collaborative awards funds a project in economic theory. The
project will develop a new approach to analyze how people make decisions between
trying new experiences or continuing with long standing choices. The new
approach applies to many real world situations that are not well explained with
existing models. For instance, an investor might invest in one stock while
gathering information on the returns to a different investment. A policymaker
might explore new alternatives while implementing existing policy. An employee
might search for a new job while continuing her current employment. The model
applies to these situations where an individual chooses between multiple
projects with unknown rewards and can invest in one to earn a reward while also
observing the rewards of different projects. The new model is an alternative to
a large class of models from economics and statistics that has studied a
different kind of experimentation problem, often referred to as the bandit
problem. In a bandit problem, the decision maker can only learn through
investing. She gains information only about the project that she chooses: what
she learns is linked to what she earns. The result is a well-known trade-off
between exploration and exploitation: the decision - maker may desire investment
in a low reward project because it offers valuable learning. The existing group
of bandit models have been widely applied. The new research funded by this grant
could result in deeper understanding of a similarly wide range of applications,
including applications that could enhance national security and strengthen the
US economy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will consider
three environments that offer a particularly stark contrast with the classical
experimentation framework. First, when experimentation is conducted by
individuals, the optimal alternative is always eventually discovered. This
contrasts with the classical result of incomplete learning in classical
experimentation with discounting. However, behavior is more complex than in
standard experimentation environments since a simple index (such as the Gittins
index,which characterizes solutions in the classical framework) need not exist.
Second, teams composed of similar members are no longer subject to free-rider
problems: when observation and exploitation are separated, teams achieve
efficient experimentation. The team will also analyze questions that cannot be
addressed in the standard setting. Specifically, the project explores a
delegation environment in which there are two agents: the executive (Doer), who
chooses the project to be implemented, and the intelligence agency (Observer),
who chooses what project to look at. Because the objectives of these two agents
may be misaligned, delegated choices may yield either minimal or maximal
experimentation depending on the nature of contact between the doer and the
observer. Ultimately, the project has the potential to uncover novel features of
experimentation that can be applied to various applications and tested against
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.