* 1949725
* REU Site: Research Internships in Ocean Sciences (RIOS)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Josh Kohut, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2024
* USD 565,627.00

Rutgers University in New Brunswick, NJ will manage a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site program. The program, called Research Internships in
Ocean Science (RIOS), will bring twelve undergraduates to Rutgers each summer
for three years. RIOS is run at three sites, the main campus in New Brunswick,
the Haskin Shellfish Research Lab and the Rutgers University Marine Field
Station in Tuckerton, NJ. A total of thirty-six undergraduates will have a ten-
week summer research experience that includes professional development
activities and career mentoring. The internship support provides for student
stipends, housing and travel to and from the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interns who participate in RIOS have access to
mentors drawn from an internationally recognized faculty, high caliber research
facilities and multiple coastal sites. Through independent projects and team
research experiences, students focus on process-oriented concepts and techniques
applicable in any marine ecosystem. Group activities and independent research
are embedded within ongoing programs, focused on the New Jersey continental
shelf and adjacent estuaries, polar regions, and advanced ocean observing.
Opportunities for student research include topics such as remote sensing, ocean
observatories, autonomous vehicles, numerical modeling, and molecular biology.
Students write research proposals, participate in research cruises, conduct
laboratory and field research, analyze either existing data or data they
generate, and communicate their work in various formats throughout the ten-week
program. Finally, a poster designed for display at a national scientific meeting
communicates their work with a summary of the hypotheses tested, approach taken,
and new knowledge gained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.