* 1949159
* Market Competition, Consumer Discrimination, and Public Accommodations: Evidence From Green Books
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Maggie Jones, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 433,000.00

This award funds research that will make innovative use of archival data to test
an important economic theory. The research includes creating a new data set that
will be available to an interdisciplinary group of scholars to study a wide
variety of socioeconomic issues in rural and urban areas of the United States.
The project makes use of an important historical tool used by African Americans
in navigating segregation in the Jim Crow era: The Negro Motorist Green Books.
From 1936 to 1964, these directories listed hotels, businesses, restaurants, and
other public accommodations that were friendly towards African American clients
during a time when travel could be uncomfortable, at best, and dangerous, at
worst. It will leverage a new, complete digitization and geocoding of Green Book
establishments and other new data sets to examine how changing preferences of
consumers influenced the number of non-discriminatory businesses before the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 barred racial discrimination in public accommodations.
The research team will create a unique county-level dataset and will use the
data to test theories economic theories of how market competition is affected by
discrimination and racial segregation. This project advances important societal
goals by helping us understand whether and how business competition will result
in equitable access to public accommodations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to a
relative sparsity of data, little is known about the economics and proximate
determinants of segregation of public accommodations or the propensity for
businesses to discriminate. Traditional models of taste-based discrimination
(e.g., Becker, 1971) suggest that competition will drive down the market share
of discriminatory firms even in the absence of government intervention. If non-
minority clients have a disutility from soliciting non-discriminatory
businesses, however, there is a stable equilibrium of discriminatory firms that
does not change over time. The research team builds and analyzes a stylized
model that captures the nature of the relationship between the share of firms
that serve members of the minority group and that group's share of the
population. The model predicts that the number of discriminatory firms is
decreasing in the share of the minority population. To test the modelâ€™s
implications, the team will create a unique county-level data set of Green Book
establishment counts to proxy for the number of non-discriminatory firms and
then exploit exogenous shocks to the white prime-aged population caused by World
War II mortality to see if changing consumer demographics are related to the
number of non-discriminatory firms. Consistent with the notion that
discrimination on the part of white consumers provided firms with incentives to
discriminate, preliminary results show that counties with the highest number of
white casualties in WWII had larger increases in the share of non-discriminatory
firms. The completed project will advance our understanding of the theory and
empirical evidence of discrimination and racial
segregation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.