* 1949730
* Statistical Machine Learning Methods for Complex Data Sets
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Kean Ming Tan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2022
* USD 75,028.00

Recent advances in science and technology have led to the generation of massive
amounts of large-scale data with complex structures, including genomics,
neuroimaging, and microbiology data. These large-scale datasets pose significant
statistical and computational challenges to data analysis. Firstly, widely used
statistical methods yield unstable estimates and are not computationally
scalable to modeling large-scale data sets. Secondly, complex data sets are
often accompanied by outliers due to possibly measurement error or heavy-tailed
random noise. For instance, in genomic studies, it has been observed that the
distribution of gene expression levels is generally heavy-tailed, that is, the
data contain a lot of extremely large values. Classical statistical methods will
yield biased estimates and spurious scientific discovery if these outliers are
not taken into account during model estimation and inference. This project aims
to develop scalable and robust multivariate statistical methods to address the
aforementioned problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator
uses a combination of regularization and statistical optimization techniques to
develop novel multivariate statistical methods for analyzing complex high-
dimensional data sets. The first part of the project concerns the sparse
generalized eigenvalue problem, which arises naturally in many statistical
models such as partial least squares, canonical correlation analysis, sufficient
dimension reduction, and Fisher's discriminant analysis. The investigator will
develop a general framework for solving the sparse generalized eigenvalue
problem and make available a wide range of statistical models for analyzing
high-dimensional data. Furthermore, the investigator will study the theoretical
properties of sparse generalized eigenvalue problem, and this will lead to the
understanding of various statistical models that are previously not well
understood in the high-dimensional setting. The second part of the research
project focuses on a class of robust sparse reduced rank regression models. The
investigator will develop efficient algorithms and high-dimensional asymptotic
analysis for the resulting estimators under the Huber loss function, and
quantify the bias-robust tradeoff between using Huber loss and squared error
loss. This research project will also deliver easy-to-use software packages for
fitting the developed methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.