* 1949366
* Procedural Complexity and Economic Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Ryan Oprea, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 304,975.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economists traditionally assume that humans are
capable of using very complex decision rules to make optimal choices in markets
and organizations. Economists also traditionally assume that humans are capable
of complying with very complex rules set by governments and organizational
bureaucracies, such as complex tax codes and auction rules. Several decades of
research both in controlled laboratory experiments and using field data call
these traditional assumptions into question. Economists understand that there
exist bounds on the complexity of tasks humans are able to perform, but it has
proved difficult to formally define and measure complexity and put the notion to
use in making predictions and setting policy. This proposal uses conceptual and
empirical tools from economics, psychology and computer science to carefully
experimentally measure what features of rules make them complex in terms of
difficulty and personal burden for humans to perform. This corpus of data will
improve our ability to predict human behavior when faced with complexity, and
allow us to develop effective, streamlined policies that realistically account
for human capacities to cope with complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both internal
decision procedures and external rules can be modeled as algorithms, implemented
not by machines but by humans. For instance, strategies in repeated games, and
procedures in many decision problems, can be described as simple formal models
of algorithms from theoretical computer science. This research consists of a
series of experiments designed to evaluate various ways of classifying the
algorithms underlying procedures and rules as more or less complex for humans,
and to understand which measures of complexity accurately predict and describe
human mistakes and subjective costs. The proposal considers distinct ways of
modeling the complexity of algorithms and examines how well they predict
subjectsâ€™ difficulty with implementing decision rules. The goal of the research
is to develop an empirically grounded characterization of the determinants of
procedural complexity for humans, which will be useful for building predictive
models of human behavior, and for designing more effective
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.