* 1949012
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The impacts of public policy on rural social organization
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Glenn Stone, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 5,613.00

Rural development and agricultural extension form crucial components of
government programming in countries with large agricultural economies. Efforts
to harmonize national growth strategies with the interests of small-scale family
farmers have led to rapid changes in the quantity and quality of policies
available to rural populations. These include public infrastructure projects,
subsidized credit programs, land reform efforts, and payments for ecosystem
services. While the successes and failures of individual initiatives are well-
known to planners and development practitioners, the ability of farming
communities to adapt their economic, productive, and organizational strategies
to the changing priorities of state development policy is less well understood.
Does increasing access to public subsidies and extension services encourage
farmers to decrease or increase investments in production? Does it allow farmers
to increase investments in household and community infrastructure? And what are
the social impacts of repeated government interventions over time? Do
communities collaborate to exchange information and build organizations
surrounding the administration of public policies? Or do rapid changes in
government development policy generate conflicts as local leaders monopolize
knowledge of and control over key public resources? In addition to supporting
the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, findings from this research will
provide insights into the way changing state policy impacts community
organization over time and will therefore have significant implications for
planners and practitioners working in both domestic and international
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted in farming
communities in an estuary region where contending pressures from
conservationists, landowners, and other stakeholders have created a complex
policy landscape that has undergone rapid changes over the past three decades.
This will provide an apt setting to study community-level responses to changing
government development interventions. Moreover, the investigator's prior
experience in the region will furnish crucial local support. The investigator
will focus on the estuary's traditional riverine communities. These communities
have historically drawn on extended family networks to mobilize relatives to
pursue small-scale farming and agroforestry activities along floodplains but
have recently become to targets of several overlapping government policies.
Research will involve the collection of interviews with state development
agencies, histories of local associations formed by farmers, and census data
from four rural villages. Using this data, the investigator will explore whether
wealth inequalities, secondary occupational status, affiliation with religious
organizations, or access to extended family networks are more important factors
in farmers' ability to gain access to public development funding and
successfully navigate changing government policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.