* 1949160
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Exhumation History of the Aleutians with Zircon and Apatite Thermochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Claire Bucholz, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2023
* USD 38,334.00

Island arcs are chains of volcanic islands that form at subduction zone plate
boundaries where one plate is being dragged beneath another, recycling old crust
to the Earth’s mantle and creating new continental crust through volcanism. A
central question surrounding these systems is whether processes that occur
deeply in the subduction zone affect processes that are observed on the surface.
This is especially debated for what drives surface uplift and related island arc
exhumation and erosion. Uplift and exhumation of island arcs in other localities
have been attributed to a variety of factors, from deep tectonic drivers to
climate-surface interactions, with exhumation rates and erosion estimates that
vary by orders of magnitude. In many locations, the arc exhumation history is
difficult to study because it may be overprinted by later thermal or physical
processes. The Aleutian Arc is unique in that it includes over 50 islands
composed of both active and inactive volcanoes over 1,900 miles from Alaska to
Russia, and has limited overprinting by secondary events. In addition, it has a
volcanic history that spans 50 million years, so that the ancient magma chambers
of past volcanoes are now exposed on the islands’ surfaces today. These plutonic
rocks hold a record of past island uplift, exhumation, and erosion that can
address key questions regarding: When were the Aleutians uplifted? When and how
much has been eroded through time? Was uplift and subsequent erosion constant or
cyclical? How does it vary geographically along the length of the arc?
Specifically, the answers to these questions will shed light on the link between
plate-scale processes and uplift; the timing and magnitude of erosion,
contributing sediment and geochemical inputs to North Pacific; and the
relationship between plutonic exhumation rates, geochemistry, and emplacement
depth. The Aleutians have functioned as a natural laboratory to test fundamental
principles regarding subduction zone evolution for more than four decades. This
study will make a novel contribution to the existing extensive geochemical and
geodynamic research. In terms of Broader Impacts, this award supports a new PI
and engages underrepresented minority students and teachers, from the
undergraduate through K-12 level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In order to quantify
when and by how much the Aleutians experienced surface uplift and erosion,
plutonic samples from ~10 islands that span 870 miles of arc length will be
analyzed for emplacement depth and subsequent uplift rates. This work will place
the exhumation history of the Central Aleutians in the context of 1) driving
forces involving regional tectonics and subduction zone processes; and 2)
geochemical inputs to the N. Pacific via erosion of arc material. In order to
answer these questions, previously sampled and well-characterized plutonic rocks
from across the central Aleutians will be characterized by pluton
crystallization age, emplacement depth, and 2 or more thermochronometers with
different thermal sensitivities (e.g., apatite and/or zircon, (U-Th)/He and/or
fission track). Thermochronology techniques, particularly the use of multiple
chronometers with different temperature sensitivities within the same sample,
can constrain exhumation rates and be used to estimate erosion rates over time.
Coupling the thermochronological data with emplacement depth will help constrain
the amount of material eroded over that time. The timing and geographic trends
revealed by these data can then be related in time and space to previously
proposed drivers for uplift, including plate rotation, change in convergence
angle and rate, or the development of an accretionary
prism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.