* 1949362
* Extreme Effects of Uncertainty on Social Learning: An Investigation of Endogenously Limited Communication, Skepticism, and Biased Beliefs
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Arun Chandrasekhar, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2024
* USD 502,000.00

This research project will use economic theory and experiments to study how
uncertainty affects social learning and affects communication in networks.
Social learning, such as those that occur in public health announcements,
political advertising and government program announcements is extremely
important for the functioning of a modern democratic society. Understanding
factors that improves or impede social learning contributes to economic science
as well to efficient policy making and therefore improve the living standards in
open democratic societies. The proposed research consists of three interrelated
projects. The first project investigates how uncertainty affects communication
within and among groups; the second will study whether uncertainty affects the
trust recipients put in the information they receive and how this affects
communication, while the third project will study whether recipients of biased
information change their beliefs in response to this biased information and pass
those biases on to others. This research project will contribute to improving
business communication, public policy debates, advertising and several applied
areas of social learning as it provides guidance on how best to craft and
communicate effective messages and what may impede effective social learning.
The results of this research will extremely important especially in emergencies
when clear communication is needed. The research project also involves training
graduate students in cutting edge economic research methods, thus contributing
to the US global leadership in high caliber economic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use both theoretical
modelling and field experiments to study how the introduction of noise affects
communication in social networks. Specifically, the PIs will study how
individuals in a network deal with noise and how this affects information
aggregation and diffusion in social learning within a network. The proposed
research consists of three parts. This first part will investigate how the
introduction of uncertainty reduces endogenous communication in a way that
accounts for the changing expected value of the information itself. The second
project will study whether noise affects the trust agents place in the signals
contained in the information they receive and how this affects communication.
The model incorporate how intrapersonal and interpersonal beliefs (biases
towards other groups) affect the transmission of information within a network.
The third project will study whether recipients recognize biased (censored)
information passed on to them and whether they incorporate these biases into
their beliefs. The results of this research project will not only significantly
contribute to the literature on social learning and network economics but also
lead to improved social communication. The results will provide inputs into
crafting better messaging in business, politics, economics, and public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.