* 1949718
* REU Site: Smart Manufacturing Research Experiences for Undergraduates (SMREU)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Masoud Soroush, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 437,439.00

Smart manufacturing is a critical area of national interest for the US economy.
This Smart Manufacturing Research Experiences for Undergraduates (SMREU) program
will address scientific challenges in smart manufacturing while contributing to
the quality of the domestic workforce ablility to deploy, use, and maintain
smart manufacturing technologies. It therefore contributes to
cyberinfrastructure workforce development, one of the most critical needs in
human resources currently faced by our nation. Importantly, SMREU focuses on
recruiting efforts at local primarily-undergraduate-institutions (PUIs),
including community colleges and historically black colleges and universities
(HBCUs). Recruiting specifically from these nearby institutions is expected to
establish meaningful, long-term relationships between Drexel University and
local PUIs including research collaborations between faculty, feeder programs
for Drexel BS, MS, and PhD students, and undergraduate research exchange, such
that the impacts of the REU last long after the project has completed. With
concerted recruitment of minorities, women, other underrepresented groups, and
those who do not have access to advanced research facilities at their own
educational institutions, the SMREU hopes to open new career paths to some of
the best and brightest students in our nation who might otherwise miss out on
these opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the proposed
SMREU Site is to provide hands-on experience in cutting-edge research relevant
to smart manufacturing to twelve students per year from institutions that do not
typically offer research experiences to undergraduate students, with a
particular emphasis on under-represented minority groups. Specific research
topics relevant to smart manufacturing will be set annually by research active
faculty from a broad cross-section of educational units at Drexel University,
including Chemical, Biochemical, Electrical and Computer, Materials, and
Mechanical Engineering, and Computer Science. Research topics will be selected
such that there will be a synergy among these areas and the overall smart
manufacturing theme. Faculty members from these diverse fields will mentor SMREU
participants. This experience is expected to encourage students to continue STEM
careers (especially in the area of smart manufacturing), including pursuit of
graduate education, by immersing them in a dynamic research environment where
they will develop: (i) Technical skills including mathematical modeling, data
analytics, optimization, design of experiments, automation, and other areas
related to smart manufacturing; (ii) Critical thinking skills that are necessary
to define, diagnose, and solve open-ended problems; and (iii) Communication
(both oral and written), time and resource management, and other “soft” but
vital skills for modern engineers. In addition to research projects, students
will attend professional development workshops, sessions for active reflection
and feedback on the research process, invited seminars from industry, and field
trips to local manufacturing companies. The synergy of the activities will help
students understand the role of their own efforts in the broader scientific and
engineering challenges of smart manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.