* 1949329
* Explorations in the Economics of Choice and Chance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Lones Smith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 281,999.00

This award funds research in economic theory. The researcher plans four distinct
projects. The first models an individual who is searching across possible
options one-by-one. The goal is to understand the best way to search when the
individual already knows that there is a specified number of options and has
some information about options. This project will help us understand the value
of providing information to people before they search through structured search
lists. Applications include optimal design of web searches and optimal design of
job/ hiring searches. The second project builds and analyzes a model of medical
testing, to determine optimal testing protocols when definitive clinical tests
are more expensive than less informative alternatives. The third project will
develop a modified model of contagions that accounts for evasive human behavior
that increasingly slows the contagion as it grows more prevalent. The model
could contribute to more accurate epidemiological forecasting. The final project
will look at demand for risky investments, and in particular investments that
are similar to rollover lotteries. The goal is to better understand why these
investments are rapidly growing and how best to design them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contains four methodologically related sub-
projects on the economics of choice and chance. The first research project will
develop a sequential model of search in environments with finitely many options
and prior knowledge of the options. This is an essential innovation on search
theory, since rarely does one search in the stereotypical informational vacuum.
This project rather explores search that transpires in smartly ordered lists, as
offered in web search contexts. Recall optimally occurs, with older options more
often recalled. Early work suggests an answer to a long open question: one
expects to search longer when the prize distribution is more disperse. The
second project will enrich a standard epidemiological model with a random
pairwise matching population game where individuals choose how vigilantly to
avoid acquiring it. The unique Nash equilibrium will yield a behavioral twist on
the SIR Model. We will estimate this parametric model with data from the 2009
H1N1 influenza pandemic, and show that allowing for human ingenuity facing an
ongoing contagion improves the explanation of the data. The third project will
explore how should one proceed with costly but informative medical tests before
acting. Our main qualitative conjecture, motivated by numerical simulations,
will determine when one transitions from low cost to high cost medical testing,
depending on the testing precision or medical urgency. The main conjecture of
the project upends an insight from a well-known 2001 paper on the optimal level
of experimentation that assumed continuous time. The final project will explore
an implicit market cleared by probabilities. This proposes a simple economic
explanation for lottery gambling that is consistent with the larger set of facts
revealed by rollover lotteries: People gamble because they derive utility both
from the money gains (varying across people), and the gambling experience. The
results are applicable to a range of investments with risky
payoffs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.