* 1949157
* I-Corps: Smart Robotics Assistants
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Satyandra Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves
improving the competitiveness of US manufacturers by enabling them to utilize
robots on the high mix and low production volume applications. Use of robots on
these manufacturing applications is expected to eliminate the need for humans to
perform ergonomically challenging tasks and reduce the possibility of worker
injury. The increased use of robots also is expected to reduce the need for
touch labor and increase human productivity. This can be used to increase the
production rate and reduce the order fulfillment time in applications where the
availability of skilled human operators is limited. Robots are expected to
improve the consistency and quality of the manufacturing operations. This
reduces the need for rework and scrap. The use of robots in automating low-
volume manufacturing challenging tasks will enable the human operators to focus
on high-level decision making and the creative aspects of the tasks, while the
robotic assistants will perform the low-level tedious tasks.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will leverage the software technology developed
as part of NSF-funded research at the University of Southern California. The
project team has developed planning algorithms and software that enable robots
to program themselves from the task description. This includes path planning
technology for tools, point-to-point trajectory planning technology for
manipulators, path-constrained trajectory planning technology for manipulators,
setup planning technologies for manipulators, integrated task and motion
planning technologies for complex operations, vision and contact-based workpiece
registration, self-directed learning technologies, and safe trajectory
execution. Testing in the laboratory has demonstrated that the developed
technology may reduce programming and work cell design time for robotic
automation by a factor of ten. This project will focus on identifying the
applications of the developed technologies, and determining the product-market
fit for the developed software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.