* 1949171
* Study of the impact of seamount subduction on the outer wedge of the Hikurangi margin from combined lab analyses of rock properties and marine seismic data
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Nathan Bangs, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 417,473.00

A subduction zone runs along the Hikurangi margin of New Zealand, and the faults
along the margin move at different rates. Along this subduction zone, sediments
on the incoming Pacific tectonic plate are either stripped off and transferred
to the upper tectonic plate or carried down deep into the mantle on the lower,
subducting tectonic plate. Some of this may be due to the distribution of
seamounts on the subducting oceanic plate. Seamounts can enhance sediment
subduction by taking the sediments with them. Fluids from the sediments may in
turn affect movement on the faults. To improve understanding of how faults slip,
this study looks at the effects of seamounts on subduction along the Hikurangi
margin. This project uses existing marine seismic data to calculate seismic wave
speeds and properties of rocks and sediments beneath the continental shelf of
the Hikurangi margin to depths of 7-10 km. The study compares those properties
with laboratory experiments on rock samples from the Hikurangi margin to get a
better understanding of subduction zone processes. The study supports the
training of graduate students. An educational model will be developed and used
for undergraduate education and at local high schools. Through hands-on
experiments, students will discover connections between rock properties and
seismic hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The megathrust fault along the
Hikurangi subduction zone of New Zealand changes its slip behavior dramatically
from south to north along the margin. The megathrust along the southern section
of the margin is geodetically locked and will likely slip coseismically.
However, along the central and northern margin it appears to creep and generate
regular slow-slip events. Recent studies have also shown that the ground motion
of regional seismic waves is amplified much more at the northern Hikurangi
margin than to the south. To gain a better understanding of these geological
processes, likely factors that control slip behavior will be studied. These
include accretionary wedge and underthrust sediment properties and the impact of
seamounts on the accretionary prism of the Hikurangi margin. In this synthesis
project existing marine active-source seismic data will be used to image seismic
velocity structure and reflectivity of sediments and the underlying basement of
the Hikurangi margin to depths of 7-10 km. The imaged properties of the shallow
subduction zone will be compared with ultrasonic wavespeeds measured in rock
samples from representative segments along the Hikurangi margin. Confining and
pore pressures will be applied to the rock samples within the range expected for
the subduction zone setting to determine their consolidation characteristics and
stress history. In a two-year project the following hypotheses will be
addressed: 1) Seismic velocities of the accretionary prism in southern Hikurangi
are higher than northern Hikurangi in proportion to the differences in the
degree of consolidation of Neogene rocks accreted along the margin. 2) The
differences in compaction and dewatering inferred from seismic velocities along
the Hikurangi margin is driven locally by the lateral stress imparted by
subducting seamounts. 3) More severe shaking at the northern Hikurangi margin
after the 2016 Kaikoura earthquake was caused by lower shear-wave velocities
broadly distributed in the prism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.