* 1949818
* Collaborative US - Ireland: Reuse and Recycling of Decommissioned Composite Material Wind Turbine Blades
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Lawrence Bank, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 109,834.00

The proposal for this research project was submitted under the US-Ireland
tripartite program which supports collaborative research between researchers in
the United States, the Republic of Ireland, and Northern Ireland. The objective
of this research project is to establish a methodology to compare sustainable
end-of-life reuse and recycling strategies for wind turbine blades made of
composite materials. The methodology is being developed using a Geographic
Information Science (GIS) platform coupled with environmental, economic and
social life-cycle assessments. The very rapid growth in wind energy technology
in the last 15 years has led to a commensurate rapid growth in the amount of
non-biodegradable, thermosetting fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) composite
materials used in wind turbine blades. The hypothesis behind this research
project is that reuse and recycling strategies can be found that will prevent
environmentally and socially unpalatable and unsustainable landfilling and
incineration disposal methods. Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland are
being used as a test-bed for this research. Numerical models of turbine blades
from SANDIA National Labs are being used, and physical tests are being conducted
on a donated turbine blade. A team of researchers from the City College of New
York, Georgia Institute of Technology, the University College Cork, Ireland and
Queen's University Belfast, Northern Ireland in disciplines of engineering,
architecture, geography, sociology, and political science are conducting the
research project.

The research is being conducted in four parts with the following intellectual
foci: (1) Wind Energy - social, environmental and economic sustainability of
reuse and recycling and disposal options for decommissioned wind turbine blades.
(2) Design for the Built Environment - design of architectural and engineering
structures and products from decommissioned wind turbine blades in the highly-
constrained contexts of the blade properties and the potential reuse sites. (3)
Structural Mechanics - understanding the residual properties of wind blade
composite materials at the end of their service lives, the appropriate load
cases for the reused structures or products and their structural design, and,
(4) Geographic Information Science (GIS) - an open GIS for wind blade reuse and
recycling, containing embedded reuse design options and their environmental,
economic and social impacts, for subsequent network analysis. Advances are
anticipated in many fields of science including social, environmental and
economic modeling of reuse and recycling, life-cycle assessments, conceptual
design, parametric modeling, design of fiber reinforced polymer composite
structures, residual properties of composite materials, databases for Geographic
Information Science (GIS), and network analysis for sustainability. The broader
impacts of the research can be divided into three categories: (1) Scientific -
the methodology created in this research could be broadly applicable to other
large manufacturing industries in addition to the wind energy industry. It will
also provide guidance to policy-makers and community leaders on best-practices
to positively impact both the industry and local communities and to avoid
friction. Additionally, this research is may contribute to the emerging field of
social life-cycle assessment. (2) Societal - the most important societal impact
of this research is intended to be methodology that will enable policy and
community stakeholders to inform and educate the public and improve the
acceptability of wind energy. In addition, reuse of wind turbine blades will
have positive impacts on air quality and water quality and decrease a major non-
biodegradable waste stream. (3) Education and Training - the unique combination
of institutions in this research will expose all faculty, staff and student
researchers to cultural, ethnic and economic diversity. Since most wind farms
are situated in rural areas, it is likely that much of the re-fabricating
activities envisioned for reusing wind blades will occur in rural areas. Rural
areas tend to suffer from higher than average unemployment and as such this
research could have an impact on the local economy and job creation in some
regions.

This award is co-funded by the CBET/ENG Environmental Sustainability program and
the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.