* 1949796
* A mechanistic approach to predicting the ecological and evolutionary consequences of environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Priyanga Amarasekare, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 03/31/2024
* USD 670,140.00

Rapid environmental changes influence the interactions between insect pests and
their natural enemies (predators, parasites). Pest insects that attack crops
cause harm, but insects that parasitize pests are beneficial because they
provide an alternative to pesticide use. Rising temperatures across the globe
are benefiting harmful insects while harming beneficial ones, increasing the
risk of pest outbreaks that can compromise the nationâ€™s food supply.
Understanding how species withstand and adjust to changing temperatures is
therefore a critical research priority. The project will provide training at
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate levels, a key aspect of which is the
integration of theory and data to address scientific problems that have
significant societal applications. Through the development of models that can
forecast the effects of rising temperatures on biological pest control, this
project will directly contribute to improving existing methods of Integrated
Pest Management (IPM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop theory
and experiments to elucidate the mechanisms by which insects and other
ectotherms respond to temperature changes in the short term (acclimation) and
the long-term (adaptation). The theoretical component involves developing
mathematical models that explicitly incorporate the developmental time delays
that characterize the complex life cycles of ectotherms. The goal is to
understand how such delays influence acclimation and adaptation of pests and
natural enemies to temperature changes involving both an increase in the mean
temperature as well as the size of temperature fluctuations. The empirical
component of the project involves testing model predictions using an insect
community that shares many features of pest-enemy interactions and thus serves
as a model system for investigating how rising temperatures influence the
efficacy of biological pest control. A novel aspect of the experiments is that
they will allow observations of acclimation and adaptation in real time, through
the monitoring of insect populations in controlled environmental chambers. The
tight integration of theory and data serves to yield results that can not only
explain how past increases in temperature influence species interactions in
general and pest-enemy interactions in particular, but also to predict how
future increases will influence biodiversity and pest
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.