* 1949821
* Mechanisms for Long-Term Coexistence of Selfish DNA Elements and Their Host Genomes: The Yeast Plasmid Paradigm
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Vishwanath Iyer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/29/2024
* USD 899,998.00

Selfish DNA elements—such as plasmids or virus episomes that are present in a
wide range of organisms—utilize strategies to ensure their transmission to the
next generation, without benefit or detriment to the host organism. One strategy
utilized by a plasmid present in budding yeast is to attach itself to the host
chromosomes and “hitchhike” to daughter cells within a growing cell population.
Research supported by this project will map the chromosomal locations where one
such yeast plasmid attaches, and then characterize the plasmid and host factors
that contribute to hitchhiking. The experimental approaches will utilize current
genome-wide methodologies that will be performed by post-doctoral fellows,
graduate students, undergraduate students and high-school seniors (as summer
trainees). The findings from this study will be incorporated into 4-5 lectures
on Selfish DNA that will form part of an upper division undergraduate course and
a first year graduate course. Some of the experiments will be carried out under
the Freshmen Research Initiative Program at UT Austin. Through the ‘UT Austin
Community Outreach,’ High School seniors from urban areas of minority and low
socioeconomic status will also participate in a program of supervised research.
In coordination with UTeach Outreach Institute, a learning module on
‘Selfishness of Genes and Genomes’ designed to awaken scientific curiosity among
middle and high school students will be developed. Overall, this scientific
undertaking is expected to have far-reaching societal impact by advancing basic
science, developing new technologies and contributing to human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current evidence suggests that the partitioning
system of the yeast 2-micron plasmid tethers plasmid sisters formed by
replication to sister chromatids, enabling their chromosome-like 1:1
segregation. Yet direct proof of this hitchhiking model is lacking. According to
the investigator's working hypothesis, interactions between plasmid partitioning
proteins and host chromatin binding proteins are responsible for plasmid
localization to chromosomal loci. The researchers will identify and characterize
plasmid tethering sites on chromosomes by two independent but complementary
high-throughput approaches: ChIP-seq and 4C-seq. The expectation is that there
will be considerable overlap between DNA sequences enriched by the two methods.
By refining the data from the two approaches using multiple controls, and by
filtering the data sets from one against the other, the investigators will be
able to define authentic plasmid tethering sites on chromosomes with high
confidence. They will then test how tethering efficiency and plasmid stability
are affected by mutational inactivation of a number of plasmid and host proteins
that are implicated in tethering. This study will provide the most rigorous test
of the hitchhiking model for plasmid segregation and will impact a model for the
convergent evolution of chromosome-coupled survival strategies among selfish DNA
elements as diverse as the yeast plasmid and mammalian viruses. It will thus
shed new light on the mechanistic understanding of the shared lifestyles of
selfish DNA elements that inhabit evolutionarily distant hosts. It will also
help design simple, effective and innovative strategies for maintaining
beneficial extra-chromosomal elements in eukaryotic host cells and for
eliminating harmful elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.