* 1949505
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Spatial Equilibrium and the Value of Public Transit
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Donald Davis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Senay Agca
* 03/31/2021
* USD 24,300.00

Abstract One of the important issues in an urbanizing world is understanding how
public transportation affects the growth and development of regions. Public
infrastructure investments are costly and thus understanding their contribution
to regional development is imperative to assess the benefits given the high
costs. Since public transportation is not randomly distributed across space, it
is challenging to disentangle the amenity value of neighborhoods from that of
the transportation network itself. This research considers an unexpected closure
of a major transit network due to a hurricane and examines how this closure
affected businesses, neighborhoods and commuters by utilizing a detailed
dataset. This proposal will highlight the economic forces driving the complex
relationship between public transportation and neighborhood dynamics. Thus the
research will inform policy makers in what ways infrastructure projects may be
funded and how these decisions shape the development of neighborhoods.

Finding credible evidence of the value that commuters place on proximity to
public transport is of first-order importance in an urbanizing world. This
proposal utilizes as an exogenous shock, the unexpected closure of a major
transit line for an extended period in a large city due to a hurricane. This
closure was expected to cause major disruption to hundreds of thousands of
commuters and thousands of businesses in the affected neighborhoods. This
project utilizes this large information shock to disentangle the spatial
equilibrium of urban networks into their component parts. In order to do this,
the project will construct a novel dataset of residential history, detailed
housing characteristics and rental price history. The project will explore
fundamental questions about the nature of cities and neighborhoods and how the
individual choices of consumers when choosing housing endogenously change the
urban landscape, including how much, and in what ways, policy makers should fund
transportation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.