* 1950126
* REU Site: Chemistry Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (Chem-SURF) Program at UCI
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Sergey Nizkorodov, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2024
* USD 312,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of California – Irvine, located in Irvine, CA, supports eight students for ten
weeks of research and professional development during the summers of 2020-2022.
This site, funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate, helps students develop collaboration, communication, and
critical thinking skills as well as experimental and computational techniques in
chemistry. Alongside education and professional development, students also
undertake independent research projects spanning chemistry. The program provides
an opportunity to interact with mentors and peers in both professional and
social environments that have been designed to increase students’ knowledge and
research skills and &lt;br/&gt;increase their identities as
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students participate in research projects with
state-of-the-art equipment and facilities, and are mentored by faculty,
postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students. Projects include the molecular
modeling of structural proteins, developing bioluminescent probes for in vivo
imaging, studying the optical properties of particulate air pollutants, and
integrating machine learning with organic synthesis. Students also attend
workshops and seminars designed for their professional development, including
ethics training, graduate school and fellowship application preparation, and
communication skills. REU students interact with other on-campus summer research
programs and graduate school preparation programs during shared and crossover
activities including conferences, seminars, and symposia. Students leave the
program well-prepared to present their results at scientific meetings and to
continue with graduate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.