* 1950304
* REU Site: Collaborative Approaches among Scientists and Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Cordelia Brown, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 404,476.00

The Auburn University Collaborative Approaches among Scientists and Engineers
(CASE) Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) aims to foster increased
understanding of different approaches to experimental design through cross-
disciplinary problem solving while also addressing the unique challenges faced
by students who are traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. During the
10-week summer program undergraduate students will engage in research that
increases their understanding of the collaborative nature of STEM as well as how
to utilize the convergence of disciplines to problem-solve. Students will
utilize a team-based approach to conduct research on projects led by two faculty
mentors from different disciplines. Cross-disciplinary projects include
collaborations between Aerospace Engineering and Biological Sciences; Civil
Engineering and Geosciences; Biosystems Engineering and Fisheries, Aquaculture,
and Aquatic Sciences; as well as Chemistry and Physics. In addition to
laboratory experience, the CASE REU will offer weekly professional development
workshops that cover a wide-range of topics which address critical-thinking
skills, scientific communication, sense of belonging, self-efficacy, and
cultural competency. A key component of the CASE REU focuses on fostering
effective mentor-mentee relationships both inside and outside of the laboratory,
in order to provide students with an opportunity to further develop their
scientific identity. This is accomplished in part through collaborative
workshops with faculty mentors and participants. The program also includes
social activities that provide networking opportunities with faculty, students,
and colleagues across REU programs on campus. Upon completion of the program,
participants will present their research to the Auburn community and also be
provided with resources to travel to national conferences to present their work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CASE REU will recruit heavily from national
conferences and partner institutions with an emphasis on broadening
participation from students traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields.
Novice, early-career students as well as those with prior research experience
are encouraged to apply. Through participation in the CASE REU students will not
only enhance their ability to examine real-world problems utilizing
multidisciplinary approaches but also increase their exposure to scientific role
models/potential mentors who will provide a supportive environment designed to
increase retention and success in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.