* 1950585
* REU Site: Integration of Chemical Theory, Computation and Experiment at Duquesne University
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Jeffrey Evanseck, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2023
* USD 390,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Duquesne
University, located in Pittsburgh, PA, supports the training of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. Funded by the Division of Chemistry in
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, the Duquesne REU site
impacts the education and professional chemistry careers of undergraduates and
faculty from Appalachian regional institutions with limited research
infrastructure and/or from underrepresented populations. Alongside conducting
research that integrates computational and experimental chemistry, students
receive training that reinforces the scientific method, scientific writing and
speaking, ethics, safety, and workshops on state-of-the-art instrumentation to
complement their experimental research. Faculty establish meaningful, year-
round, and long-term research collaborations driven by the need for academic
productivity and excellence in undergraduate training. Taken together, this REU
site promotes collaborative science while training the next generation of
chemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student research projects include the synthesis
of non-addictive analgesics driven by computational prediction; developing
theory for asymmetric catalyst design; understanding the wear of protective
organic thin films on metals; and studying electron transfer processes in copper
complexes. This site also offers research support for PUI/HBCU/LSAMP faculty,
who in turn directly impact students and learning environments at their home
institutions. Ultimately students expand their professional exposure and network
to make more informed career decisions and best prepare for graduate school,
while faculty are empowered through meaningful and productive academic
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.