* 1950222
* Developing Exemplary Mathematics Teacher Leaders for High-Need Schools:  Content, Equity and Leadership
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2026
* Matthew McLeod, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,780,538.00

This project aims to serve national need for a greater number of outstanding
mathematics teacher leaders in high-need schools. The students in these schools
are less likely to become part of the nation's future STEM workforce. Thus,
increasing the quality of mathematics teaching is a critical need for broadening
participation in STEM and increasing the nation's competitiveness in the global
economy. This project will focus on master mathematics teachers in high-need
school districts in the greater Boston area. It will connect mathematicians,
mathematics educators, teachers, and mentor experts to create a professional
community focused on mathematics content, equitable teaching and learning
approaches, and teacher leadership development. As a part of the project, a
broad group of mathematics teachers will systematically learn mentorship and
leadership skills. These teachers will then draw on their leadership skills to
improve professional development in their schools and districts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Boston College includes partnerships with
the Boston and Revere Public Schools and with the Education Development Center,
a global nonprofit with a focus on innovation in education curriculum and
resources for students, teachers, and practitioners. The project will offer a
comprehensive, five-year program of professional leadership development for 14
exemplary Master Teaching Fellows, within two cohorts of seven teachers each.
These teachers will be prepared to assume leadership roles in their schools and
within the high-need school districts in which they teach. A tripartite approach
will focus on developing mathematical expertise through engagement in authentic
mathematical experiences, developing tools to promote equitable pedagogy and
school outcomes, and on systematically developing mentorship and leadership
skills. Project evaluation will include teachers' gains in content knowledge,
use of equity-focused pedagogy, and broader impacts of the project activities.
This project will serve as a model for combining disciplinary expertise with an
understanding of the diverse U.S. classroom and with developing leadership, a
combination of critical importance in preparing teachers for our nation's
increasingly diverse classrooms. This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.