* 1950251
* Building Capacity for New Pathways to a Career in Mathematics Teaching in Central Alabama
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* W. Gary Martin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2022
* USD 75,000.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing highly effective
mathematics teachers to meet the acute national shortage of secondary
mathematics teachers. In Alabama, many teaching positions are filled through
Provisional and Emergency Certification status. The shortage of certified
teachers is particularly acute in rural and high-need schools. Adding to the
problem, there has been a sharp drop in the number of undergraduates enrolled in
teacher education programs nationwide. This project will engage partners within
and outside the University to design a program that will prepare “career
changers” who already have a strong background in mathematics to pursue a career
in teaching mathematics. The project will collect data to design a streamlined
entry into a teacher education program. This program will emphasize development
of the candidates’ knowledge of mathematics teaching and learning, so they are
prepared for success in the classroom. Such a streamlined approach is
anticipated to make participation in the program more feasible for potential
candidates and provide immediate assistance to high-need school districts
struggling to find qualified mathematics teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Capacity Building project is led by Auburn University and includes partnerships
within its College of Education, Department of Curriculum and Teaching, College
of Sciences and Mathematics, and the Department of Mathematics and Statistics;
with high-needs school districts including Tallapoosa County Schools, Russell
County Schools, Opelika City Schools, and Auburn City Schools; and with two
state-funded organizations supporting teacher professional development (Alabama
Mathematics, Science, and Technology Initiative and the East Alabama Regional
Inservice Center). Project objectives include: (1) Building partnerships among
those with a stake in ensuring an adequate supply of mathematics teachers; (2)
Collaboratively exploring new efficient, effective, and practical approaches for
career changers to enter the teaching profession; (3) Beginning the course and
curriculum design needed for approval by Auburn University and the State
Department of Education; and (4) Exploration of recruitment strategies. The
project design will build on research done by other teacher education programs
across the nation. This Capacity Building project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.