* 1950121
* REU Site: BIGDatA - Big Data Analytics for Cyber-physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Huiping Cao, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 02/29/2024
* USD 404,571.00

The funding renews a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at New
Mexico State University. Undergraduate students will participate in summer
research projects guided by faculty research mentors using state-of-the-art labs
and facilities. Cyber-physical systems are real-world systems, such as
automotive systems, medical systems, smart homes, and manufacturing systems,
that have computer algorithms and software monitoring and controlling them.
These systems generate large amounts data that is complex and diverse. Big data
analytics are essential to effectively use, protect, and enhance most cyber-
physical systems. The REU students will participate in a variety of activities
including team-based research projects, training workshops, field trips,
conference participation, and other professional development opportunities that
will prepare them for research in the timely and important field of big data for
cyber-physical systems and prepare them for future careers as computing
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by researchers currently
exploring aspects of big data and cyber-physical systems. The research explores
big data analytics for cyber-physical systems in three intertwined dimensions:
systems and architectures, models and algorithms, and visualization. The
research spans four application areas including unmanned systems, smart grids,
wireless sensor networks, and smart homes. The goals of the project include:
motivating and solidifying studentsâ€™ interest in computer science and in big
data analytics and security for cyber-physical systems; providing students with
problem solving and research skills; equipping students with knowledge of data
management and data analytics techniques; enhancing self-confidence and self-
efficacy of the student participants; equipping students with professional
knowledge and skills including communication, teamwork, and ethics; and
broadening participation in computing and the computing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.