* 1950894
* REU Site: MedIX: Medical Informatics Experiences in Undergraduate Research
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Jacob Furst, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2024
* USD 487,836.00

The main objectives of the Medical Informatics (MedIX) Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site program are to engage undergraduate students in
challenging research projects, encourage them to pursue graduate education, and
expose students to interdisciplinary research, especially at the border of
information technology and medicine. The MedIX REU Site runs for three summers,
with ten student participants doing research ten weeks each summer under the
supervision of five mentors dedicated to undergraduate research. The REU Site is
hosted by two interdisciplinary laboratories: the Medical Informatics Laboratory
at DePaul University and the Imaging Research Institute at the University of
Chicago. The research environment offers the students the opportunity to
interact with computer scientists, medical physicists, and medical doctors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the projects are inspired by state-of-the-art
research questions in medical informatics and will address issues related to the
coordinated, workflow-driven acquisition of image data in an electronic medical
record environment and the subsequent processing of the image and clinical
report text information. Students work as part of faculty-undergraduate teams on
new problems ranging from traditional image processing (e.g., computer-aided
diagnosis for lung cancer, breast density assessment, age-related macular
degeneration prognosis) to structured reporting and natural language processing
of radiology reports to visualization and annotation of images from multiple
imaging modalities using novel computer vision, artificial intelligence, machine
learning, and data science algorithms. Ultimately, this REU site will help
support students interested in medical informatics and broaden participation in
computer science. In addition, each project has the long-term potential to
improve the accuracy, reliability and efficiency of the consumers of this
information, notably radiologists. More information on the program can be found
at the MedIX REU Site web site
(http://facweb.cs.depaul.edu/research/vc/medix).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.