* 1950031
* Advancing Computational Thinking for Teacher Education in Central California
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2025
* Emily Walter, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 12/31/2025
* USD 763,711.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing computing-capable
teachers for high-need school districts. To achieve this goal, the project aims
to build a sustainable national model for preparing K-12 teachers who are
skilled in computational thinking. The project will give scholarships to sixty
individuals who have a four-year STEM degree so they can complete a one-year
teacher certification program. To help broaden participation, the project will
include efforts to recruit Scholars from diverse backgrounds, including those
that are underrepresented in computer science. The project will design new
courses to help the Scholars gain computational thinking and computer
programming skills, which in turn will help them teach these skills to their
students. During their first two years of teaching, the Scholars will receive
financial and other supports to enhance their success and retention as teachers.
The project's teacher preparation curricula, advisory activities, and two years
of scholar induction support are designed to equip the Scholars with the skills
they need to make a positive impact in high-need school districts. Over the five
years of the project, the project's Scholars are expected to directly impact at
least 7,000 high school students, many of whom are from less resourced
socioeconomic backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will be carried
out at California State University - Fresno, a Hispanic Serving Institution and
an Asian American &amp; Native American Pacific Islander-Serving Institution.
The project includes a partnership with three local high-need Unified School
Districts (Fresno, Sanger, and Central). The project's major components include:
(1) Pedagogical preparation integrating situated practice, cultural
competencies, transdisciplinary avocations, and computational thinking; (2)
Professional development of future teachers through workshops and one-on-one
meetings with discipline-specific advisors; and (3) Development of a community
of practice during the initial teaching years. The project aims to recruit five
cohorts of twelve STEM post-baccalaureate Scholars annually, preparing a total
of sixty new STEM teachers over five years. The project's Scholars are expected
to complete courses in programming concepts, algorithmic thinking, and
transdisciplinary applications of computational thinking. These courses align
with the new and emerging standards for computer science teacher education and
the Next Generation Science Standards crosscutting concepts. The
interdisciplinary investigator and researcher team aims to widely disseminate
the project's research findings, including to regional non-profit educational
institutions and national computing alliances. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program. The Noyce Program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.