* 1950487
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Underground Infrastructure
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Clay Naito, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 146,831.00

This collaborative Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to
Colorado School of Mines, Lehigh University, and California State University,
Los Angeles focuses on Underground Infrastructure. Underground infrastructure
refers to any physical infrastructure that is placed beneath the surface,
including transportation, utilities, building foundations, and any other
structures built underground. While the nation’s underground infrastructure is
in critical state of disrepair, innovative design, construction methods, and
materials with improved durability and longer service lives would lead directly
to less frequent maintenance carried out at lower cost, enhanced resilience, and
improved safety for the public. Through this multisite REU collaborative award,
twelve undergraduate students will participate in a ten-week REU program each
summer. This REU program targets qualified science and engineering students from
diverse backgrounds and various regions of the US. By engaging students in
cutting-edge research, a stimulating opportunity and an impactful program to
educate and train future globally competitive researchers in the underground
infrastructure area are created. The REU students will work collaboratively with
their mentors to advance fundamental research and field applications, which in
addition will help students find a permanent set of mentors to aid in the
pursuit of their STEM careers. This REU program will result in an increase in
the diversity of well-positioned students in the pipeline to graduate school in
a STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this REU program are to (a)
attract, engage, and educate undergraduate students from institutions that have
limited research activities in underground construction and engineering
research; (b) offer hands-on high-quality research experience in state-of-the-
art laboratory and computing facilities in combination with a series of
professional development activities; and (c) motivate undergraduate students to
pursue and prepare themselves to succeed in advanced degrees in STEM, with an
emphasis on women and minorities. The primary outcomes from the project are
high-quality research and research capacity development (student training). The
program offers hands-on high-quality research experience in state-of-the-art
laboratory and computing facilities in combination with a series of professional
development activities. The program strengthens the academic credentials and
research skills of students through participation in mentored research projects
that address underground infrastructure problems with real-world
relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.