* 1950409
* REU Site:  An Inclusive REU Program in Physics and Astronomy at the University of Utah
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jordan Gerton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2024
* USD 352,886.00

This award supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Physics
and Astronomy site at the University of Utah. The site will support eight
students for nine weeks of summer research per year. The Department of Physics
and Astronomy at the University of Utah currently offers a wide variety of
research opportunities and has a history of developing and managing high-
quality, cohort-based summer research programs both for its own students and
those visiting from other institutions. The objectives of the University of Utah
Physics and Astronomy REU site program are to: &lt;br/&gt;1. engage students in
full-time active research; &lt;br/&gt;2. provide professional development
opportunities for students and mentors; &lt;br/&gt;3. motivate students towards
science and STEM careers by constructing an engaging, inclusive, and supportive
cohort experience; and &lt;br/&gt;4. improve students' science literacy and oral
and written communication skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students who participate
in this site will engage in a variety of activities that encompass: 1) rigorous
and diverse research projects; 2) professional and career development workshops;
3) introduction into the scientific community culture; 4) community building;
and 5) personalized mentorship. Students may also find research projects at
Telescope Array (Delta, UT); VERITAS (Tucson, AZ); Frisco Peak Observatory
(Milford, UT); and HAWC (Sierra Negra, MX). Students will participate in
professional and career development activities to further their careers beyond
the REU experience. This award is supported by the Division of Physics and the
Division of Astronomical Sciences within the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.