* 1950142
* Enhanced Noyce Explorer, Scholar, and Teacher Development for High-Need Schools in New York City
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Andrew Douglas, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 04/30/2025
* USD 866,668.00

This project aims to help address the shortage of qualified STEM teachers in New
York City. These shortages often result in New York City schools filling STEM
teacher vacancies with teachers who lack the relevant subject certification. The
project’s main goal is to develop highly effective STEM teachers to teach in New
York City high-need schools. To do so, the project will recruit undergraduate
STEM majors to become teachers, starting by introducing STEM teaching careers to
more than 300 first- and second-year undergraduates. The project will select
upper division undergraduate STEM majors to become Noyce Scholars. It will
support them as they earn their STEM degree and take courses in mathematics
education or technology education so they can achieve initial teaching
certification. Supports for Noyce Scholars include scholarships, internships,
summer support programs, and mentoring by STEM and Education faculty and school
district partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five-year project at New York City
College of Technology includes partnerships with Borough of Manhattan Community
College and New York City public schools. Project goals include: (i) preparing
at least twenty-seven New York State-certified STEM teachers to teach
mathematics and computer science in New York City; and (ii) enhancing an
existing three-tier structure (explorer-scholar-teacher) to create a STEM
teacher preparation pathway that will lead to New York State licensure in
teaching. First- and second-year undergraduate students will be designated as
Explorers and third- and fourth-year students as Scholars. The project's
teachers will be the graduates who will teach at high need schools. The project
aims to contribute to a systemic educational infrastructure that provides the
high-quality STEM education needed to prepare students to become effective STEM
teachers of tomorrow. The project's collaborative partnership between New York
City College of Technology and Borough of Manhattan Community College, both
Hispanic-Serving Institutions, will provide a sustainable long-term pathway for
preparing underrepresented racial and ethnic minority students to become
teachers. In doing so, the project has the potential to increase the number of
certified STEM teachers in New York City who are from underrepresented
populations. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.