* 1950534
* REU Site: Computational Imaging and Mixed-Reality for Visual Media Creation and Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Robert LiKamWa, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2023
* USD 324,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds a new site
focused on the creation of visual computing systems at the School of Arts, Media
and Engineering at Arizona State University. The REU Site will recruit eight
students each summer for a ten-week long experience in computational imaging and
mixed-reality research. From augmented and virtual reality to computational
photography and the Internet of Things, applications built on real-time, high-
quality visual sensing are becoming central to everyday computing. All of these
applications exhibit two competing demands: complex, domain-specific sensing
capabilities on one hand and systems considerations such as energy efficiency,
data bandwidth, and latency on the other. This REU site aims to enable students
to conduct research on the design of new visual computing systems for these
applications to solve these challenges. Further, students will be exposed to the
emerging area of media arts and sciences to understand how the systems they
build can be utilized for visual media creation. Students will have the
opportunity to present their work in both scientific publications and
conferences as well as novel dissemination through public exhibition, outreach
to the local community, and engagement with a wider audience interested in
visual media. Undergraduate students will be recruited from a broad range of
fields including computer science, electrical engineering, and digital media
arts and sciences. Recruitment efforts will focus on students from state
universities, minority-serving institutions, and community colleges,
particularly from under-served populations who are interested in visual media
technologies. This will enable new, diverse audiences to be exposed to visual
computing research and its applications in society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of this REU site is to train undergraduate researchers in the
areas of computational imaging and photography, virtual/augmented/mixed reality,
and visualization technologies. These students will work on projects that
addresses research questions such as: (a) How can the physics of light and sound
transport be incorporated/exploited into acquisition systems effectively? (b)
What are the signal processing constraints for sampling high-dimensional visual
data effectively? (c) How can we characterize the energy, performance, and
scalability of efficient system architectures and algorithms for the sensing,
distribution, and playback of high-quality immersive spatial data? As part of
these projects, hardware and software co-design will be emphasized to realize
mobile and embedded systems which are energy-efficient and extend the visual
capabilities of sensing and processing. The second objective is to have
students' engagement with the general public through applications demonstrating
their research projects. This is primarily accomplished through tools from the
media arts and sciences that emphasize real-time demonstrations, public
exhibition, digital media content creation, and on-going dialogue about the
science and engineering behind these systems. These combined objectives will
train undergraduate researchers to build exciting, novel visual computing
systems that have wide application to relevant sensor, visualization, gaming,
and entertainment industries that utilize this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.