* 1950254
* HIV Persistence During Antiretroviral Therapy: Mechanisms, Models, Computation, and Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Libin Rong, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 178,850.00

HIV persists in patients despite effective antiretroviral therapy. HIV latent
infection of CD4+ T cells might be a major obstacle to viral eradication and has
been extensively investigated. However, some other factors may also contribute
to HIV persistence. The goal of this project is to develop new approaches in
mathematical modeling and experimental data analysis to address questions of HIV
persistence. Although HIV preferentially infects CD4+ T cells, it also infects
other cells, such as macrophages. Macrophages are white blood cells that engulf
and digest cellular debris and pathogens. During the engulfment of HIV-infected
CD4+ T cells, macrophages can also get infected, contributing to viral
production and persistence. In addition to the viral infection of CD4+ T cells,
HIV can also be transferred directly from infected to uninfected CD4+ T cells.
Such cell-to-cell transmission can take place within the same cell types and
also in different cell populations such as macrophages. The relative
contributions to HIV persistence from these sources remain largely unknown, but
such information is crucial for finding a cure or control of HIV infection.
Graduate students will be trained in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, mechanism-based mathematical models will be developed, analyzed, and
compared with experimental data to study the relative contributions of various
sources to HIV persistence during highly active antiretroviral therapy. In the
first part, models with macrophages will be developed to analyze the data of
macrophage infection with/without CD4+ T cell infection in different mouse
models. The relative contributions from CD4+ T cell infection, macrophage
infection, and CD4-to-macrophage transmission to HIV persistence will be
evaluated. The second part studies whether cell-to-cell transmission can explain
viral persistence during antiretroviral therapy and whether it also contributes
to multiple HIV infection. The PI shall develop a new cell-to-cell transmission
model including infected cells structured continuously according to their
activation status. This provides a new cell-to-cell modeling framework to study
HIV latency, low viral load persistence, and emergence of viral blips during
suppressive therapy. The results obtained from this project will provide
quantitative information on the sources contributing to HIV persistence, which
can help develop treatment strategies targeting HIV eradication or
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.