* 1950073
* Building STEM Teachers' Capacity to Create Authentic and Original Classroom Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2026
* William Velhagen, Caldwell University Inc
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2026
* USD 696,499.00

This project aims to serve the national need for high-quality STEM teachers in
high-need school districts. To accomplish this goal, it intends to recruit STEM
majors and provide them with financial and other supports as they earn their
STEM degree as well as certification in secondary mathematics or science
teaching. The project will leverage the University's growing population of
Hispanic undergraduate students to increase the number of Hispanic STEM
secondary teachers in the region. The project will build upon existing education
and STEM degree programs and emphasize “Doing and Teaching STEM,” an approach
that is designed to create authentic classroom experiences in math and science.
This effort will include the Create to Educate initiative, which will partner
the Noyce Scholars with faculty members to develop multimedia STEM instructional
materials to use during the Scholars’ field placements and in-service
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Caldwell University includes
partnerships with Passaic City and Clifton Public Schools and with two community
colleges, Union County College and Passaic County Community College. Project
goals include recruiting and supporting 21 qualified Biology, Chemistry, or
Mathematics majors across four cohorts. These Scholars will advance to receive
baccalaureate degrees in these disciplines, as well as secondary teacher
certification in science or mathematics. The program is designed to support its
Noyce Scholars by providing field experiences in high-need districts, followed
by in-service observations of recently graduated teachers, and by creating a
social network for alumni and practicing teachers. The Create to Educate portion
of the program will engage Noyce Scholars in collaborations with Caldwell
University faculty members to develop a portfolio of multimedia STEM
instructional materials for use during a Scholar's field placements and in-
service teaching. More broadly, the project team will investigate how the
Scholars use instructional time to emphasize and practice STEM in their
classrooms as they progress from pre-service to in-service professional
practice. Scholars and their faculty mentors will have opportunities to discuss
challenges, strategies, and progress during advising sessions. The themes that
emerge from these discussions will inform future efforts to recruit, support,
and retain undergraduates pursuing a career in STEM secondary education. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.