* 1950555
* REU Site: Renewable Energy Generation and Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jeffrey Mativetsky, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 330,309.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Along with the growing need for renewable energy
generation and storage technologies is the need for a well-trained workforce
with the skills to develop, deploy, and manage future energy technologies.
Taking advantage of Binghamton University’s extensive infrastructure and faculty
strength in renewable energy research, this Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site addresses scientific and training needs in materials
research relating to the energy sector. The site brings together undergraduates
from across the country, with a majority of participants coming from groups that
are underrepresented in science and engineering, and from community colleges or
small universities with limited research infrastructure. The participants engage
in 10 weeks of intensive research on energy-related materials, while weekly
workshops foster professional development and career planning. Building on past
successes, this third phase of the REU site adds new opportunities for
participants to learn about industry careers through interactions with companies
at the Southern Tier Clean Energy Incubator. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: This REU site’s activities center on fostering development of the
undergraduate participants into highly qualified scientists and engineers who
are prepared to work in the energy sector. Towards this end, a supportive
environment is created for the participants to solve fundamental materials
research problems with connections to renewable energy generation and storage,
using both experimental and computational strategies. Mentored by faculty
spanning five science and engineering departments, and research teams in the
NorthEast Center for Chemical Energy Storage, the Center for Autonomous Solar
Power, and the Advanced Catalysis for Energy Sustainability Center, students
tackle challenges in developing materials for solar energy conversion,
mechanical energy harvesting, heat transfer, battery storage, and clean fuel
generation. In partnership with the Southern Tier Clean Energy Incubator,
participants learn about industry careers and the steps involved in translating
laboratory innovations into commercial products. Students gain further
preparation for science and engineering careers through workshops on
communication, collaboration, and career pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.