* 1950469
* Panel Conditioning Effects on Mortality: Evidence from a Large-Scale Experimental Study
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Andrew Halpern-Manners, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2023
* USD 310,000.00

The research project will advance understanding of the consequences for
Americans of participating in surveys that re-interview them on many occasions
across their entire lives, especially surveys that ask questions about health,
health behaviors, and health care. Evidence suggests that participating in
surveys can impact an individual's health, either by communicating new health
information or by causing health-related changes in behaviors. Prior research,
however, has not examined the relationship between survey participation and
respondents' longevity. This project will address that question by conducting an
experimental study using data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study. Public
policy makers and researchers rely heavily on data in which the same people are
repeatedly interviewed over time. The results of this project will help policy
makers and researchers understand and improve the accuracy of their data. A
graduate student will be involved throughout the project. Results will be
disseminated to the research community and the broader public.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine experimentally the effects of panel
conditioning on adult mortality. The project will evaluate the extent to which
repeatedly answering survey questions (including questions about health
behaviors/outcomes and/or aspects of people's lives that are known to correlate
strongly with health) influences the timing of respondents' death. The project
also will determine whether mortality effects from panel conditioning are
distributed evenly across the population or whether they vary systematically
depending on respondents' background characteristics (e.g., gender, family
socioeconomic background, educational performance). In 1957, the state of
Wisconsin administered surveys to all 33,596 graduating high school seniors. One
third of them were selected strictly at random for follow-up and have become the
Wisconsin Longitudinal Study cohort. The project will achieve its research
objectives by comparing the mortality outcomes of people in the Wisconsin
Longitudinal Study panel (who have completed multiple, lengthy surveys about
health) to those who have never been re-interviewed since
1957.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.