* 1950996
* Collaborative Research: Caldera Dynamics and Eruption Cycles at Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 411,288.00

Volcanic eruptions are one of the most important processes that shape the
Earthâ€™s surface. However, eruptions are difficult to study up close because they
are so destructive. The deep seafloor provides an opportunity to collect
detailed observations of eruptions immediately atop a volcano. Since 2014, the
NSF Ocean Observatories Initiative has operated a cabled observatory in the
southern half of the summit caldera of Axial Seamount, an active volcano located
300 miles off the coast of Oregon. In 2015, the volcano erupted and the records
from cabled instruments provided many insights. Among these insights were
improvements in forecasting eruptions. Axial Seamount is rapidly inflating, and
another eruption is now predicted in a few years. This proposal will operate 15
remote seafloor instruments for earthquake detection. Over 2 years the project
will seek to record the next eruption. These new observations will improve
understanding of how magma and fractures interact in volcanoes. Such
interactions create the pathways of magma to the seafloor. This experiment is
part of a broader effort in the volcano science community to develop Community
Experiments. These experiments include different kinds of eruptions. Through the
comparison of the different eruptions scientists will improve the understanding
of volcano hazards. The data from this project will be available to all of the
public. Among the science community this data sharing will help scientists
interpret geological, hydrothermal and biological observations from submarine
volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axial Seamount is a submarine volcano at the
intersection of the Cobb hotspot and the Juan de Fuca ridge that erupted in
1998, 2011 and 2015. The 2015 eruption was captured in real time by the
instrumentation on Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) Cabled Array shortly
after the observatory came online. The geophysical observations yielded new
insights into eruption forecasting, the dynamics of caldera ring faults, and the
generation of explosive signals on the seafloor as lava erupts. However, the
small footprint of the 7-station cabled seismic network limited the spatial
extent of well-resolved earthquake locations to the southern portion of the
caldera and the short duration of observations prior to the eruption complicated
the search for precursory signals. As a result, there are unresolved questions
related to the dynamics of the northern caldera, the interactions of the caldera
ring faults and eruptive rifts, the impacts of magmatic processes during
eruption cycle on the time-dependent seismic structure of the upper crust, and
the links to deeper magmatic processes. This project will support a 2-year field
experiment in the predicted time window of the next eruption that will deploy 15
autonomous ocean bottom seismographs (OBS) to extend seismic coverage of the
cabled network to cover the whole caldera and portions of the south and north
rifts. The open access data will be used to create earthquake catalogs and
support a variety of studies to constrain the dynamics of the whole caldera,
characterize the interaction the eruptive dikes with the caldera, observe the
spatiotemporal evolution of shallow magmatic and tectonic process and search for
signals associated with deeper magmatic processes. It will address three
hypotheses, that: 1) magmatic processes related to the shallow reservoir exert
primary control on caldera and rift structure; 2) the complex shallow reservoir
geometry reflects and affects the evolution of magma transport and storage; and
3) magma from the deeper part of the system can be rapidly mobilized and
interact with the shallow reservoir over short timescales
(weeks/months).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.