* 1950810
* REU Site: Summer Program in Chihuahuan Desert Biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Michael Moody, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 280,554.00

This REU Site award to the University of Texas at El Paso, located in El Paso,
TX, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2020-2022. The research will be conducted on campus and at Chihuahuan Desert
field sites in New Mexico and Texas. It is anticipated that a total of 24
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from an
under-represented group, will be trained in the program. Targeted students will
be current sophomores or juniors; exceptional freshmen will be considered.
Students will be guided through hypothesis driven collaborative research
projects to generate knowledge that may ultimately inform actions for
environmental sustainability and human well-being. Students will present their
research at a UTEP campus-wide summer research symposium and will be encouraged
to present their research results at scientific conferences. Assessment of the
program will be done using the BIO REU common survey through the online SALG
URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine
student career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chihuahuan Desert Biodiversity
(CDB) REU program emphasizes studies on CDB evolution and ecology linked to the
interests of UTEP Biological Sciences faculty, who will serve as mentors.
Projects span topics such as desert grassland ecology, animal tracking and
behavior, molecular systematics and population genetics. Students are expected
to perform full-time field and lab research and participate in seminars and
workshops, such as responsible conduct in research, professional communication
skills, among others. REU students will have access to well-equipped labs of
mentors and interdepartmental research facilities. Fields sites include the
Indio Mountains Research Station, Jornada Basin, Hueco Tanks State Park among
several other Chihuahuan Desert natural lands. Students are selected based on
academic record, research interest and potential, and faculty recommendations.
More information about the program is available by visiting
http://science.utep.edu/cdb-reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Michael Moody at
mlmoody@utep.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Jerry Johnson at
jjohnson@utep.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.