* 1950285
* Building Capacity to Modernize a Master of Arts in Teaching Program by Infusing Data Science and Analytics
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Sandra Rucker, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 74,940.00

This project aims to build the capacity to address STEM teacher shortages in
high-need schools, an important national need. The project will use a holistic
approach to create a pathway for STEM professionals to earn mathematics teacher
certification. As a part of this effort, the existing Master of Arts in Teaching
curriculum at Clark Atlanta University will be revamped and modernized into an
innovative 14-month distance learning program. The newly designed Master of Arts
in Teaching program will enable graduates to gain the support, skills, and
competence needed to excel as a teacher in a high-need school. The Master of
Arts in Teaching program will also provide enrolled students with opportunities
to use data science techniques to analyze data that can transform the teaching
and learning process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Clark Atlanta
University, a Historically Black College and University, includes a partnership
with Clayton County Public Schools. The goal of the project is to enhance the
curriculum of the institution's Master of Arts in Teaching program to support
student enrollment, retention, and graduation, ultimately producing well-
prepared mathematics teachers that have sound content knowledge, effective
pedagogical strategies, and data science skills. The project will focus on five
objectives: (1) Construct a proposal to restructure the Master of Arts in
Teaching (Mathematics) program for currency and marketability; (2) Redesign
course content in the Master of Arts in Teaching program to embed data science
and analytics modules; (3) Reinforce partnerships with internal stakeholders;
(4) Survey organizations to determine the potential for substantive partnerships
with external stakeholders; and (5) Identify resources for a future cost-sharing
commitment. The outlined activities have potential to lead to the development of
a model program for preparing underrepresented science and mathematics teachers
to incorporate data science and analytics teaching methods into mathematics
curricula in high-need schools. This Capacity Building project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.