* 1950233
* Preparing and Retaining Diverse, High-Quality Secondary School STEM Teachers in Maryland High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Elena Klimova, Bowie State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 06/30/2025
* USD 955,372.00

This project aims to help build a diverse STEM teacher workforce in Maryland
high-need school districts. Since 2004, Maryland has had a statewide teacher
shortage in mathematics and science. The need for mathematics and science
teachers is persistently critical in Prince George’s County Public Schools, with
whom the project will work. More than ninety percent of the students in Prince
George’s County Public Schools are underrepresented minorities. Research has
shown that the success of children in school is positively affected by having
same-race teachers. Bowie State University, a historically black institution
within Prince George’s County, provides an ideal population from which to
recruit and prepare highly skilled teachers who match the demographics of the
school district. Through internship opportunities, academic scholarships,
pedagogical training, and mentoring activities, this project seeks to attract,
prepare, support, and retain talented underrepresented minority secondary
teachers in Prince George’s County Public Schools and other Maryland high-need
school districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes a partnership with
Prince George’s County Public Schools, a high-need school district through
achieving three main goals: 1. To support the recruitment and retention of
undergraduate STEM majors into Math Education and Science Education programs. 2.
To support career development of Noyce scholars committed to teaching in high-
need schools. 3. To support success and retention of induction-phase Noyce
scholar teachers. This project is modeled on social cognitive career theory,
which posits that personal experiences shape and alter career interests. By
providing students with meaningful teaching and mentorship opportunities, this
project aims to recruit undergraduates majoring in biology and mathematics into
teaching careers. To support the success and retention of the Noyce scholars
committed to teaching in high-need schools, the project plans continued support
during the induction phase of teaching in Prince George’s County Public Schools.
A supportive community of educational professionals will be developed through
the engagement of Noyce Scholars in a mentoring network with master teachers. To
develop teaching self-efficacy, Noyce Scholars will attend pedagogy seminars on
culturally responsive educational approaches and career development. The
Scholars will have opportunities to attend Praxis II prep workshops, perform
action research projects in their yearlong practical classroom experience,
attend conferences, and engage in educator networking opportunities. As part of
the project’s recruitment and development efforts, a STEM communication club
will be created to engage community members in science at public events. For
each of the first three years of funding, the project intends to offer 40 paid,
semester-long tutoring internships in a Prince George’s County Public School and
18 paid summer internships in the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research’s GEMS
program summer camp program. By the end of the award, the project intends to
produce at least 23 new secondary teachers who are prepared to engage students
in successful learning experiences in high school biology and mathematics. The
project’s research and evaluation agenda will measure how program activities
impact Scholars’ self-efficacy and outcome expectancy toward choosing teaching
as a career. Overall, this project intends to increase the number of
underrepresented minority teachers who are well-prepared to teach in high-need
schools. It also aims to provide insights into successful methods for training
and retaining underrepresented minorities in STEM teaching careers. This Track
1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.