* 1950078
* OPUS CRS: Integrating Forty Years of Parasitism Research
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,12/31/2023
* John Werren, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 350,794.00

Parasitism is pervasive and parasites come in all shapes and forms, from
viruses, and bacteria to fungi, nematode worms, parasitic plants, and
invertebrates such as fleas, mites, lice, bedbugs, and little “parasitoid”
insects who lay their eggs on other insects. In fact, nearly every species on
our planet has associated parasites that shape their biology. Even parasites
have parasites. If we look on even smaller microscopic scales, DNA parasites are
found in the genetic material of nearly every organism. How do species survive
this onslaught of parasitism, and how do hosts respond to keep them in check? A
major focus of this project is to investigate parasitism across different
biological levels, and to identify common principles among the very diverse
kinds of parasitic relationships. This research is relevant to improving
agriculture and advancing human health. The second major goal of this project
concerns a specific kind of parasite called “parasitoids”. Parasitoids are small
insects that lay their eggs in other invertebrates, and the resulting young then
feed on and kill the “host”. Parasitoids are among the most abundant of all
insects, and they play a major role in controlling insect numbers in nature,
including pests and disease vectors. The parasitoid group called Nasonia (jewel
wasps) is a highly tractable study group for research and teaching. It has
emerged as an insect model for both parasitoid biology and basic research. Yet,
a synthetic treatment of Nasonia, including major advances and uses of the
system, has not been done in over fifty years. To fill this gap, and to make the
system more available to researchers and educators, a synthetic review of
Nasonia will be conducted. This will include methods, research advances, and
information on on-line tools for research and education. The review will both
advance research on parasitoids, and increase public awareness and knowledge
about this very important but under-recognized group of insects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will identify common principles among the
very diverse kinds of parasitic relationships to achieve a synthetic analysis,
spanning parasitism from genomic parasites to ecological communities. Important
themes to be illustrated in the monograph include biological levels of
selection, the parasitism-mutualism continuum, genetic conflict, evolved
dependencies, antagonistic coevolution versus unidirectional adaptation,
coinheritance and fidelity of association, host defenses, and cooption of
parasites by hosts. A synthetic monograph will be produced on the insect
parasitoid Nasonia, and its uses in research and teaching. This work builds on
the principle investigator’s 40 years of experience on these and other
parasitoids, during which Nasonia has emerged as an insect model system. The
monograph will feature the biology of Nasonia and related insects, genetic,
genomic, and other resources, methods, and significant contributions of Nasonia
to science, including in behavior, genetics, comparative biology, development,
and symbiosis. Nasonia is also an excellent system for teaching at the high
school and college levels. The monograph will feature its uses and advantages in
teaching, tools, and examples of exercises. Online resources will be updated to
assist researchers and teachers in utilizing Nasonia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.