* 1950536
* REU Site: Ecological and Evolutionary Responses to Rapid Environmental Change (EERREC)
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Richard Grosberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 412,500.00

This REU Site award to the University of California, Davis, CA, will support the
training of eight students for nine weeks during the summers of 2021- 2023.
Research is conducted at laboratories at UC Davis or nearby field sites. It is
anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities (including partner institutions Howard University, CSU
Fullerton, CSU Sacramento, and CSU Sonoma) or from an under-represented group,
will be trained in the program. Students will learn how to conduct research
aimed at understanding ecological and evolutionary responses of organisms,
communities and ecosystems to rapid environmental change and will present the
results of their work at scientific conferences. Program assessment will be done
thru the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in
order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UC Davis REU
Site focuses on two major research themes: (a) ecological and evolutionary
effects of changing environmental regimes and (b) the biology of organisms in
human-dominated ecosystems. These areas (1) encompass important challenges that
organisms and ecosystems face as a result of rapid environmental change, (2)
reflect shared interests of UC Davis and partner-institution faculty, and (3)
include specific research questions in urban, rural, agricultural, and natural
systems and thus span the spectrum of effects of rapid environmental change that
must be addressed by a diverse society. Faculty and graduate student mentors
from the College of Biological Sciences or College of Agriculture and
Environmental Sciences will guide REU scholars in projects that include studies
of marine invertebrate range limits, plant phenology, thermal stress in
butterfly caterpillars, salmonid physiology, ecological interactions in managed
terrestrial ecosystems, human influences on bees or birds, and estuarine
restoration ecology. The program includes instruction in responsible conduct of
research, scientific communication, and the scripting language R, discussion
about careers in environmental biology, field trips to nearby research reserves,
and post-program mentoring. Review of applications will begin on 1 February,
with applicants reviewed by faculty from UC Davis and partners. For more
information and to apply, please see https://eerrec.ucdavis.edu, or contact
Program Coordinator Dr. Carole Hom (clhom@ucdavis.edu) or the PI Dr. Rick
Grosberg (rkgrosberg@ucdavis.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.