* 1950619
* REU Site: Materials Connection (MacReu R'Side)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Kevin Esterling, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/29/2024
* USD 390,000.00

This Site is jointly funded by the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research
in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This REU Site
offers undergraduate students from diverse background experience in research
labs that target the preparation, characterization and application of thin-film
materials in a wide range of fields including chemical catalysis, electronic
devices and medical implants. The REU students join research groups from
chemistry, physics, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering,
bioengineering and chemical engineering, reflecting the broad importance of thin
film materials. Participating students gain hands-on experience in laboratory
techniques for making and analyzing advanced materials; they also receive
guidance toward transfers from 2-year to 4-year colleges, training towards the
Graduate Record Examination (GRE), and expert support in planning potential
graduate careers. REU recruits actively from 2-year and 4-year institutions,
including many Hispanic Serving Institutions, in Southern California. Besides
providing REU students with exciting research experience, this project creates
an outreach team that presents seminars at their home colleges, actively
promotes science and engineering education to their peers, and aids in
recruiting the next year's REU cohort. This Site is located in the US Metro Area
(Riverside/San-Bernardino) that has the lowest fraction of college graduates in
the population (according to the US Census) â€“ rendering such outreach
particularly impactful. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This REU Site
offers students hands-on experience in experimental techniques associated with
the preparation and characterization of thin film and 2D-materials. Thin films
and 2D materials play crucial roles in a wide spectrum of technologies, from
activating catalysts for crude oil refining to next generation microelectronic
devices and medical implants. REU students are trained in facilities in
semiconductor cleanroom processing, electron microscopy, and chemical analysis
techniques such as Raman and infrared spectroscopy. Through their interaction
and weekly seminars, students gain a broad understanding of the importance of
thin films in a wide spectrum of industries and potential career pathways. This
project also generates quantitative and qualitative measures of the success of
the REU site including actionable and unbiased evaluation of the educational
concept and effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.