* 1950785
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics and Astronomy at the University of Toledo
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Sanjay Khare, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2023
* USD 221,610.00

This award supports the funding of the REU site in Physics and Astronomy at the
University of Toledo. Undergraduate students have a variety of cutting edge
research opportunities in topics: Astrophysics; Atomic/Molecular/Optical
Physics; Biological/Health/Medical Physics; Condensed Matter/Materials;
Computational Physics; (with specialization in thin films and photovoltaics);
and Plasma Physics. Opportunities exist for some of the research projects to be
conducted with their faculty mentors at national facilities. The research
projects are chosen such that they will lead to eventual publication in the
appropriate professional research journals. REU students will be involved in
exciting research in a department that allows individualized attention yet is
large enough to give students experiences in a variety of physics subfields. A
variety of social activities for the REU students are also planned. The REU site
is committed to involving students from diverse backgrounds in this research
experience. A majority of tracked former REU students have successfully gone
onto graduate school for an M.S. or Ph.D. in physics, astronomy, and related
areas. This program contributes to the generation of the STEM workforce in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.