* 1950106
* Pathways to Culturally Sustaining STEM Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Andrea Munro, Pacific Lutheran University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 615,659.00

This project will address the national need to prepare and retain effective K-12
STEM teachers who are proficient at teaching STEM content and skills in
culturally sustaining ways. Culturally sustaining teaching seeks to achieve high
levels of student learning, while honoring and building upon students’ cultural
perspectivess and experiences. The project will provide competitive scholarships
to both STEM majors and STEM professionals from all STEM disciplines. The
scholarships will support these Noyce Scholars as they earn STEM and/or
education degrees and obtain teaching credentials. The project will focus on
providing access to groups that are underrepresented in the teacher population.
The Noyce Scholars will participate in equity-focused seminars and receive
mentoring to develop their ability to teach in culturally relevant ways. The
Noyce Scholars will have teaching placements in specifically selected high-need
school classrooms, to maximize the Scholars’ learning and success. For the first
two years of their teaching career, the new teachers will receive support to
broaden their teaching skills and help them remain in
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Pacific Lutheran University
includes partnerships with two local high-need school districts, Clover Park and
Franklin Pierce. The project supports two entry points into the Master of Arts
in Education program and teacher certification: STEM undergraduates can continue
into and STEM graduates can directly enter the master’s program. Project goals
include: 1) Providing scholarships to 21 students over five years; 2) Developing
the Scholar’s STEM content knowledge and cultural competency for teaching
diverse learners; 3) Establishing a research-based, equity-oriented induction
program for the newly certified STEM teachers; and 4) Improving partner school
district collaboration to meet pre- and in-service teacher needs. The project
builds upon culturally sustaining mathematics and science teaching, teacher
education, and induction research. The intellectual merit of integrating these
areas advances the knowledge and practice-base for the preparation and retention
of STEM teachers who teach in ambitious and culturally responsive ways. Broader
impacts include: contributing to STEM teacher education reform; preparing highly
qualified, equity-oriented, STEM teachers; and diversifying the STEM teaching
force. To widen the impact, materials created and knowledge gained will be
disseminated through presentations at regional and national meetings and in
publications in STEM education journals. This Track 1: Scholars and Stipends
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.