* 1950842
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Architecture of Earthquakes in the Deep Crust: International Arctic Expedition Science for Students
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Joseph Allen, Concord University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,326.00

Concord University and Montana State University will organize a new Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that will involve a total of eight
students each year in an international geologic field experience in Greenland.
Students will spend five weeks at a field site on the west coast of Greenland
while mapping geologic structures in the newly established Aasivissuit - Nipisat
UNESCO World Heritage site. This unique location will allow the students to
learn important field mapping and sampling skills, contribute to an improved
understanding of this important location and make connections with the local
communities. Travel expenses to the program and logistic support for fieldwork
in Greenland will be provided. Students will receive stipends to support their
work while in the field and while completing final analysis, reporting and
preparation of publications at their home institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a cutting-edge question in
earthquake dynamics from a geologic perspective. By mapping and sampling a
pseudotachylyte system exposed for more than 34 km along strike, REU students
will test a new hypothesis for the origin of multi-fault earthquake rupture and
generate a geologic data set that will provide a unique compliment to
geophysical and geodynamic investigations for multi-fault rupture processes.
Students will participate in an intensive field research experience in a remote
international setting. The REU will be hosted by a primarily undergraduate
institution and recruitment will focus on students who are historically
disadvantaged or from groups underrepresented in the geosciences. The field
research will take place within the Aasivissuit - Nipisat UNESCO World Heritage
site in western Greenland; thus, the project will incorporate lessons about the
indigenous heritage of the region and students will share science findings with
local educators and community members in Greenland. This project is supported by
the Division of Earth Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs in the
Geoscience Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.