* 1950941
* REU Site:  Earth Science on Volcanic Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Paul Wessel, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2024
* USD 586,363.00

The NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site Earth Science on
Volcanic Islands (ESVI) at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa’s (UHM) School of
Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST) aims to support the education,
training, and professional development of thirty emerging science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) undergraduate students from across the
nation. The ESVI REU Site provides a place-based learning and research
environment supported by field excursions, thematic workshops and seminars, and
research projects that target the significance of Earth science on volcanic
islands. Students will have the opportunity to participate in a 10-week
internship and conduct independent research on environmental, (bio)geochemical,
geophysical, and oceanographic topics. Hawai‘i’s rich geologic setting allows
students to explore geologic and environmental challenges of interest to
society, including coastal erosion, sea level rise, landslides, volcanic
eruptions, tsunamis, hurricanes, floods, and drought compounded by urban
stresses. Recruitment will focus on engaging a diverse cohort of students,
including students who are from historically underrepresented groups, such as
Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander (NHPI) and students who are attending
institutions that are STEM-limited. The goal of this REU is to provide students
with a first-time exposure to field work and research, that will encourage them
to consider future career opportunities in the geosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emphasizing the unique place-based learning opportunities
that the Hawaiian Islands provide, the NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site Earth Science on Volcanic Islands (ESVI) at the
University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa’s (UHM) School of Ocean and Earth Science and
Technology (SOEST) is structured around a wide range of environmental,
(bio)geochemical, geophysical, and oceanographic research. The objectives of the
ESVI REU Site are to provide cutting-edge STEM research and professional
development opportunities that will (1) Promote an increased participation of
underrepresented groups, including NHPI students, as well as those from STEM-
limited institutions, in the geosciences; (2) Expose students to extraordinary
field excursions that illuminate the pioneering efforts of geoscientists
studying Earth science on volcanic islands; (3) Strengthen students’ writing and
presentation skills; (4) Foster a supportive, collegial, and connected
relationship to enable long-term tracking of our REU students and follow their
progress through graduate school and beyond. To meet these objectives, the ESVI
REU Site requires a broad range of programmatic elements: (1) Maintenance of a
strong REU site presence online and via social media that promotes the
solicitation of applications from students with diverse backgrounds and levels
of experience; (2) Collection of geophysical and geological data on a multi-day
marine research expedition aboard the R/V Kilo Moana and organization of a
multi-day field trip to Hawai‘i Island to observe active or very recent
volcanism; (3) Provision of writing workshops and mentoring to assist with the
development of oral/poster presentations and research reports; and (4)
Facilitation of team-building activities throughout the REU program to promote a
healthy, collegial, connected, and motivated cohort. Anticipated outcomes are a
diverse cohort of students that will gain invaluable exposure to geoscience
research and career opportunities, receive personal mentoring and skillset
development on scientific writing and presentation delivery, perceive a
beneficial and collegial association with the ESVI ‘ohana (family), and remain
socially active with the ESVI program for many years to come.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Education and Human
Resources Program in the Division of Earth Sciences, the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Ocean Education Program in the
Division of Ocean Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.