* 1950969
* Frameworks for Generic Robust Inference, Mismeasured Spatial and Network Data, and Nonlinear Dimension Reduction
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Susanne Schennach, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2024
* USD 290,000.00

This research project will conduct three sub-projects to improve upon existing
statistical inference methods. There is a need for more generally applicable
easy-to-use simulation-based statistical inference methods that exploit the
availability of machine learning and other advanced data processing techniques.
This project will develop more broadly applicable simulation-based inference
methods. It will enable measurement-error robust inference in models based on
spatial or network data. Finally, the project will improve the scalability of
nonlinear dimension-reduction techniques. The simulation-based statistical
inference methods developed under this project will have significant impact on
data science in general. Research efforts increasingly rely on sophisticated
data analysis methods where traditional simulation methods fail to provide
reliable inference. Studies in the social, medical, and natural sciences
increasingly are leveraging the broad availability of spatial or network data as
well as high-dimensional data. These fields will be significantly impacted by
the methods to be developed. Graduate students will play an important role in
the development and implementation of the proposed
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will push the boundary of existing
inferential methods via the use of a broad range of novel concepts. The
investigator will use the idea of super-sampling, in which an augmented sample,
larger than the dataset itself, is generated and optimized to represent the true
population. The research will exploit the idea of using neighboring data points
in spatial or network data to disentangle the true signal from noise. The
project extends that domain of applicability of existing resampling methods that
are based on the observed sample or subsets to carefully constructed
hypothetical populations larger than the sample. The project also will address
the presence of measurement error in spatial or network contexts by viewing
neighboring data points as repeated measurements of the true underlying
variables of interest. These measurements do not conform to classical frameworks
based on statistically independent errors and thus demand dedicated techniques.
Finally, the nonlinear dimension-reduction techniques to be used will merge the
concepts of optimal transport, entropy maximization, and simulation-based
estimation in novel ways. Dimension reduction techniques have applications in
fields as diverse as finance, psychology, neurology, data compression,
information retrieval and processing, and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.