* 1950627
* REU SITE: Summer Undergraduate Program for Experiential Research (SUPER) in Molecular Biosciences.
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Alan Lloyd, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 393,089.00

This REU Site award to The University of Texas at Austin supports the training
of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020 - 2022. Rising
sophomores, juniors, and seniors from underrepresented groups majoring in life-
science fields will be trained each year. Students will conduct research, and
many will present at scientific conferences. The program will be assessed using
the SALG URSSA tool and students will be tracked afterwards to determine their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SUPER REU Site focuses on molecular
biosciences with a theme of Cell and Developmental Biology. Projects encompass
work in subdisciplines that support Cell and Development including: Imaging,
Molecular Cloning, Biochemistry, Systems and Synthetic Biology, Big Data,
Genetics, Genetic Transformation, and others. Examples of student projects could
include: genome editing experiments to test the role of identified proteins
during embryogenesis; testing the impact of recombinant proteins on synthetic
liposome shapes to model vesicle formation and trafficking; or the analysis of
transgenic flies or plants to determine the role of specific proteins in cell
fate determination. The program’s home is the Institute for Cellular and
Molecular Biology (ICMB). Host labs are in multiple departments: Molecular
Biosciences, Integrative Biology, Neurosciences, Biomedical Engineering, and
Physics. The program will foster a strong sense of community in many ways: dorm
housing with SUPER students and students from other summer programs in close
proximity; frequent meetings for professional development and social activities;
multiple student presentations, including the Summer Research Symposium. SUPER
includes training in ethics, responsible conduct of research, and biosafety.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students can apply through the SUPER web site. Application
materials consist of a transcript, a current CV, one letter of reference, and
short essay statements. A committee consisting of 4 faculty members and 2 former
SUPER mentors will select students based on student interest in a research
career, diversity needs of the program, and the holistic strength of the
application. Detailed program is available by visiting
https://icmb.utexas.edu/about/summer-undergraduate-research or by contacting the
PI (Dr. Alan Lloyd, amlloyd@utexas.edu), the co-PI (Dr. Antonio Gonzalez,
antonio.gonzalez@austin.utexas.edu), or the SUPER coordinator (Justine Mecchio,
justine.meccio@austin.utexas.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.