* 1950689
* REU Site: Pharmaceutical Engineering at Virginia Commonwealth University
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Sandro da Rocha, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 05/31/2024
* USD 386,521.00

The REU site in Pharmaceutical Engineering at Virginia Commonwealth University
(VCU)is co-sponsored by the VCU College of Engineering the VCU School of
Pharmacy and Virginia State University (VSU). The 10-week program will annually
engage 10 undergraduates and approximatley 20 faculty members in research
projects in areas related to pharmaceutical engineering. Pharmaceutical
Engineering REU projects will engage students in collaborative projects that
have the potential to transform the quality, cost, and availability of
medications, while enhancing global competitiveness of the US pharmaceutical and
healthcare industries. The REU site seeks to inspire a diverse group of
undergraduate students to pursue careers in the science and engineering of
pharmaceutical products, thus addressing the growing need of a multidisciplinary
workforce of researchers, educators, entrepreneurs and regulators capable of
solving health challenges of the future. By working with undergraduate
institutions with limited STEM education and research opportunities, and
recruiting a diverse team of student researchers, we aim to increase
participation in science and engineering from underrepresented groups. Each
student cohort will participate in a co-curriculum comprised of seminars,
workshops, field trips, and social activities with support from mentors from
VCU, VSU and industrial partners. Students will gain skills in research, product
innovation, scientific communication and publication writing, as well as
teamwork, and grant writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU in Pharmaceutical
Engineering at VCU will conduct research in three fundamental areas: i) the
engineering of pharmaceutical materials; ii) the engineering of complex
formulations and iii) the generation and control of active pharmaceutical
ingredients. Students will gain skills and experiences by engaging in research
that supports the development of complex and novel pharmaceutical products. REU
students will be involved both in experimental work and also learn the
theoretical concepts of pharmaceutical engineering that address
interdisciplinary challenges related to the design and development of
pharmaceutical products. The projects that will be undertaken address a growing
need for a team-based approach to solving challenges related to pharmaceutical
engineering and include topics in drug delivery, inhaled therapeutics, and
continuous manufacturing, combination chemotherapy and
nanomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.