* 1950768
* REU Site: Statistical Models with Applications to Geoscience
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Steven Lazarus, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 304,077.00

In an effort to broaden participation in the geosciences, this 8-week summer
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the Florida Institute of
Technology will recruit students from community colleges and minority serving
institutions. Eight undergraduate students per summer will be immersed in hands-
on learning activities and research projects designed to both encourage them
into and prepare them for careers in the geosciences. To accomplish this,
participants will first be exposed to basic statistical models and computer
programming skills and then will apply those skills to their geoscience related
projects. To promote teamwork and esprit de corps, students will work in groups
of two in four specific project areas that share a common theme related to a
changing climate. The individual projects, which link climate impact on rainfall
patterns to water quality and sea level rise with melting glaciers, address key
geoscientific problems and issues. Making these connections between projects and
disciplines is an important outcome that will be achieved through various
activities including workshops, engaging discussion, and mentorship.
Professional development activities include team building, presentation and
personal interaction skills, preparing for and applying to graduate school, and
career opportunities and options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an 8-week
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the Florida Institute of
Technology. This REU Site will recruit underserved and underrepresented students
from community colleges and minority institutions. The participating
undergraduate students will be immersed in hands-on learning activities and
research projects designed to both encourage and prepare them for careers in the
geosciences. Eight students per summer in groups of two will work on four
research projects with a unifying theme of statistical models with applications
to real geoscience problems. Cross-fertilization and connections are important
components in geoscience research and synthesizing various scientific
disciplines can help to emphasize areas of common interest. Students will work
on four diverse projects in this REU program of which climate change forms the
nexus. These projects address climate-related impacts involving changes in
precipitation patterns, mountain glaciers, benthic communities/coastal estuarine
water quality, and ciguatoxins that make fish poisonous. The diverse set of
projects integrates accumulated knowledge from individual disciplines and
applies that knowledge toward the understanding of connected geoscience
processes ranging from the local to global scale. Students will learn basic
statistical analysis methods and tools and then implement them using a
programming language applied to their geoscience projects. The participants will
also learn how to interpret and present their research findings. Professional
development activities include team building and personal interaction skills,
preparing for and applying to graduate school, and career opportunities and
options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.