* 1950992
* SBIR Phase II:  Developing a Platform for Multiplexed Drug Profiling Using Yeast Synthetic Agglutination
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2024
* David Younger, A-Alpha Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,170,453.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a platform technology for
discovering molecular glues. Many illnesses, including cancers, autoimmune
diseases, and neurological diseases, can be treated by controlling the activity
or abundance of specific proteins in the cell. However, many proteins cannot be
targeted by traditional drugs. Instead, pharmaceutical companies are now using a
new strategy to hijack the cellâ€™s native quality control pathways and degrade
proteins to control their abundance rather than their activity. This approach
has been validated as a powerful therapeutic strategy, but significant
challenges remain for discovering molecular glues. The proposed platform for
molecular glue discovery is expected to have a major commercial and societal
impact by conducting high-throughput screening. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to advance the
development of a novel platform for discovering molecular glues, or drugs that
function by agonizing protein-protein interactions. This platform combines the
throughput of a cell-based assay with the accuracy of a bioanalytical technique
by linking yeast haploid mating efficiency to the affinity of proteins displayed
on the cells' surfaces. Initial results demonstrate that next generation
sequencing of diploid cells can be used to simultaneously measure the affinity
of many protein-protein interactions with high accuracy and correctly determine
the effect of well-characterized small molecules that inhibit or enhance
particular protein-protein interactions. Additionally, the platform is
functional in a 96-well plate format, which is important for compatibility with
standard high-throughput screening workflows. The primary goals of this project
are to improve the sensitivity of the platform for the detection of molecular
glues that induce a weak protein-protein interaction, reduce the per-well
screening cost by improving assay efficiency, and incorporate new proteins into
the platform and validate their function with existing small-
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.