* 1950649
* REU Site: Center for Neural Science Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURP)
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Chiye Aoki, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 472,899.00

This REU Site Award to New York University Washington Square Campus, located in
New York City, NY, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during
the summers of 2020-2022. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students will be
from schools with limited neuroscience research opportunities or from an under-
represented group, including first generations to attend college. The program
will include students from junior colleges or with marginal GPAs but with
recommendation letters and personal statements revealing self-directed,
inquisitive minds. Students will learn how neuroscience research is designed and
conducted. They will practice writing their scientific research paper and
research proposal through weekly written assignments. All students will be
coached on oral presentation skills, leading them to present their research
activities at scientific conferences. Students will witness the diversity of
paths available for growing up in science through small weekly group luncheons
with research mentors. Assessment of the program will be done through the online
SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus of the
REU-Site is neural science. Students will be placed in one of the laboratories
that are within Center for Neural Science of NYU Washington Square Campus.
Almost all CNS faculty mentors have joint appointments with other departments,
encompassing Psychology, Biology, Economics, Data Science, NYU Courant Institute
of Mathematical Sciences, the Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research,
and others These collaborative research activities will provide students with
the glimpse of the highly synergistic nature and societal relevance of
neuroscience research, demonstrating to them the Broad Impact of neuroscience
research. All students will receive weekly in-person training in
ethics/responsible conduct of research. Students initiate the online application
process (currently by obtaining an NSF_REU ID by registering at
https://www.nsfreu.org). The ten NSF-REU participants, from an applicant pool of
&gt;300, will be selected jointly by the PI, co-PI, and research mentors. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://as.nyu.edu/content/nyu-as/as/departments/cns/UndergraduateProgram/summer-
research-program.html or by contacting the PI at
surpinfo@cns.nyu.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.