* 1950364
* REU Site: Summer Research Program in Ecology at Harvard Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Audrey Barker-Plotkin, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 583,434.00

This REU Site award to Harvard University’s Harvard Forest, located in
Petersham, MA, will support the training of 12 students for 11 weeks during the
summers of 2020-2022. It is anticipated that a total of 36 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities or from an underrepresented
group, will be trained in the program. Students and mentors will work in teams
who will connect long-term, site-based research and ecological research networks
to solve fundamental ecological challenges relevant to society. Students will
enhance their ability to undertake high-quality interdisciplinary research in a
collaborative, collegial environment, and many will present the results of their
work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will use the online
SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Harvard Forest REU Site
will train the next generation of ecological data scientists to responsibly
‘harness the data revolution’ – one of NSF’s 10 Big Ideas for future research.
An REU Site since 1993, the program will leverage Harvard Forest’s deep site-
based knowledge and membership in intersecting ecological research networks to
advance knowledge of the earth system and the ability to predict responses to
environmental change. Projects range from measuring and modeling bacterial
evolution in response to long-term experimental soil warming, to incorporating
land-use data into interpretations of NEON eddy-flux and organismal data, to
developing software tools to improve replicability in science. All projects will
involve ecological data and data science from networks of sites (e.g., LTER,
NEON, ForestGEO, Ameriflux). Many projects will include virtual collaborations;
students will have a primary on-site mentor to guide their work and will
simultaneously work in teams with remote mentors. Educational components include
an orientation, seminars and professional development workshops, and training in
responsible conduct of research. Students apply online and applicants are
interviewed and selected by research mentors in consultation with program
leadership. In addition to the SALG URSSA tool, student outcomes will be tracked
using a 10-year, IRB-approved longitudinal study. More information about the
program is available by visiting
https://harvardforest.fas.harvard.edu/summerprogram, or by contacting
hfreuapp@fas.harvard.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.