* 1950208
* REU Site: Computational Methods with applications in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Rudolf Clay, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 310,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Computational methods
and data analysis are now widely used to predict the properties of materials and
to understand data from materials experiments and simulations. While these
computational techniques are commonly taught in graduate programs in science,
math, and engineering, few undergraduate students have an opportunity to learn
about them or participate in this rapidly expanding research field. This
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site addresses this shortcoming
and provides a unique opportunity for undergraduate students to participate in
meaningful research with a group of researchers from the Center for
Computational Sciences (CCS), an interdisciplinary computational research center
at Mississippi State University (MSU). A significant portion of participants for
this REU program are recruited from historically black colleges and universities
and primarily undergraduate institutions from across the United States. An
annual one-day workshop for high school teachers offers the teachers guidance on
research that they can perform with their own students. Graduates of this REU
site are well prepared for graduate study in science, engineering, or
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The student participants
recruited for this REU spend 10 weeks over the summer in multidisciplinary
research with eight faculty mentors in Mathematics, Statistics, Physics, and
Chemistry from CCS. The students are first trained in the basic science and
computational techniques necessary for their research projects. Additional
training activities improve the participants’ computational skills as well as
written and oral presentation skills. The eight research projects are: (1)
electron-electron correlation physics; (2) numerical Methods for Phase Field
Models; (3) interfacial properties in high-performance composite materials; (4)
materials research for rare earth-free permanent magnets; (5) image denoising
and segmentation methods for material analysis; (6) Bayesian parameter
estimation and model comparison; (7) photophysical properties of novel
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and their complexes; and (8) high-dimensional
material data analysis. REU participants are given access to supercomputing
resources at the MSU High Performance Computing Collaboratory. The students
participate in weekly group meetings, seminars and training sessions on
scientific and computational topics, and a Graduate Record Exam workshop. At the
end of the summer they present the final results of their project to the REU
group and at the MSU Summer Undergraduate Research
Symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.