* 1950485
* REU Site: Cross-disciplinary Research Experience for Undergraduates on Big Data Analytics in Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Lei Yang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2024
* USD 324,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site aims to deliver a unique
and holistic cross-disciplinary research experience on the cutting edge topics
of big data for future smart cities development. As the fields of big data and
smart cities are reshaping our societies, changing our everyday life, and
providing new opportunities for economic growth, the overarching goal is to
inspire and prepare undergraduate researchers to pursue academic studies and
careers in STEM via cross-disciplinary research, education, and training on big
data analytics in smart cities. The project will provide 10 undergraduates per
summer the opportunity to work with faculty mentors on important research
projects. The participants will also be involved in various professional
development activities that will help them to build not only important research
skills but also self-confidence to pursue graduate education in big data for
smart cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site leverages the unique
infrastructures at University of Nevada-Reno (e.g., AlertTahoe Fire Camera
Network and the intelligent mobility facilities) that provide real data and
experimental environments to enhance undergraduates' cross-disciplinary research
experience. Undergraduates will work with faculty mentors to address the
multitude of open challenges in big data theory and big data computing, and
provide big data analytics based solutions to enhance the situational awareness
and decision making in smart city applications. The cross-disciplinary research
work will explore novel framings and solutions for research problems with the
focus on big data analytics in smart cities, by fostering the collaborations
among researchers with diverse expertise. The research projects will integrate
big data analytics into various smart city applications, advance the state-of-
the-art in each domain, and ultimately form novel data analytics frameworks for
addressing scientific and societal challenges and opportunities. In order to
generate a true data revolution, the REU Site will make significant efforts on
the cross-disciplinary education and training for undergraduate students, with a
particular focus on underrepresented students. The research and training
activities will prepare these students for graduate programs in big data and
smart cities, and thereby meet the national need for trained workforce in cross-
disciplinary fields of big data and smart cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.