* 1950113
* On the physics of crystal-rich mush
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* George Bergantz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 336,921.00

There is great uncertainty about the processes that occur under volcanoes,
yielding eruptions and other unseen processes that form the Earth's crust. Both
the chemical composition of erupted materials and the related 'frozen' bodies of
rock, suggests that the natural state of these magmas (molten rock) is a mushy,
or crystal-rich material. An obstacle to understanding the processes that
produce the diversity in volcanoes and chemical compositions is that there is
only a poor understanding of the physical behavior of these mushes. The
objective of this research is to illuminate in new detail how the physical
processes occurring in crystal mush can control volcanic and plutonic systems.
The broader impacts of this work are that it will enhance our ability to
understand, anticipate and communicate hazards and to explain why certain
processes have particular timescales. It will also bring new concepts from
material science into the study of geological processes, and train students in
new problem solving skills of wide application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research effort is one part of a collaboration involving a total fourteen
researchers at five institutions, in the USA and France. The research objective
is to describe and rationalize the behavior of magma mush by a combination of
novel, linked experimental and numerical modeling techniques. This will be the
first time that high resolution numerical and laboratory experiments will be
employed in an initially coordinated fashion using natural materials at the same
scale. The specific research products from the experimental work provide
kinematic elements of mush description: local and system fabric (expressed by
their tensors calculated by image analysis) and bulk rheology. The numerical
experiments provide information unavailable from the lab experiments: force
tensors and fabric. Combining these two descriptions yields a unified,
extensible framework to reveal the controls on mush behavior without ad hoc
assumptions across a wide variety of magmatic compositions and conditions. The
experimental work includes both high-pressure apparatus, The Griggs rig, as well
as more moderate pressure, the Paterson press. Thus the project will explore a
pressure range from the Moho to the near surface with shared elements of
description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.