* 1950415
* REU Site Mystic Aquarium: Collaborative Research: Plankton to Whales, Consequences of Global Change within Marine Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Michael Finiguerra, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 67,697.00

This REU Site award to Mystic Aquarium (MA), located in Mystic, CT, will support
the training of 10 students annually for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020 -
2022. Research is conducted at the University of Connecticut’s (UConn) Avery
Point campus, in Groton, CT, which currently hosts both MA’s laboratories and
MA’s collaborative partner UConn’s Department of Marine Sciences. It is
anticipated that a majority of the 30 students trained over 3 years will come
from schools with limited research opportunities and from underrepresented
groups. Students will learn how research is conducted, and will present their
findings to both scientific and public audiences. Many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done
thru the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in
order to determine their career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program
focuses on how global environmental change affects marine organisms and their
ecosystems. Students will be mentored by Aquarium and UConn scientists that
specialize in aquatic animal physiology, behavior, and ecological processes.
Projects will span multiple trophic levels of the marine ecosystem, with all
students working together to address the overarching question. Field trips to MA
will be a major component of this immersive experience, including educational
tours, animal and ecosystem exhibit observations, job shadowing,
ethics/responsible conduct of research, and science communication. Motivated
students should apply on-line at http:www.mysticaquarium.org/reu). Students will
be selected by the PIs based on a personal statement of their interest in marine
sciences, academic record, and letters of recommendation. Students are
encouraged to provide a brief explanation of their desired research mentors.
Communication with prospective project mentors in advance is encouraged. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.mysticaquarium.org/reu or by contacting the PI (Dr. Tracy Romano at
tromano@mysticaquarium.org) or Co-PI (Dr. Michael Finiguerra at
michael.finiguerra@uconn.edu). This award is supported by the Division of Ocean
Sciences (OCE) in the Directorate for Geosciences (GEO)and the Division for
Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate for Biosciences
(BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.