* 1950189
* REU Site: Extremal Graph Theory and Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Laura Munoz, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 02/29/2024
* USD 323,995.00

The NSF-REU Site in Extremal Graph Theory and Dynamical Systems at the Rochester
Institute of Technology (RIT) will actively engage ten students in each of the
summers 2020, 2021, and 2022 in research experiences in mathematics. Research
projects will be in the areas of graph theory and dynamical systems, some of
which are linked to mathematical biology. All students will work directly with
RIT faculty for the entirety of the program and will receive mentoring in
mathematical research practices, as well as in written and oral communication.
Students will give presentations on their research findings at the end of each
week. The program will have a heavy emphasis on networking with other
mathematicians and will include "Researchers in Residence," where experts from
outside of our university visit the program and collaborate with students and
faculty. Results from research projects will be disseminated through
publications in refereed journals, presentations at national and regional
mathematical meetings, and at the students' home institutions. Students will be
encouraged to pursue graduate studies and employment in the mathematical
sciences. During the program students will also participate in an Ethics in
Science Workshop. The recruitment efforts will target students from
universities, liberal arts colleges, and community colleges. Inclusion of women
and minorities will be an important element of the program. We plan to have 50
percent of the students be female and aim to have 25 percent of the students be
from underrepresented minority groups. We will also aim to have 80 percent of
the participants from outside of the host institution, with an emphasis on
recruiting students from colleges without Ph.D. programs or have limited
research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects will impact the
areas of discrete and applied mathematics. Applied projects will include
modeling of cardiac arrhythmia, and analysis of biological and social networks.
Projects with a theoretical focus will include problems from extremal and
structural graph theory, graph labeling, and delay differential equations. We
will utilize mathematical software packages including Mathematica, Matlab, Sage,
and Nauty to help with computations and simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.