* 1950528
* REU Site: Undergraduate Biology Education Research Version 3 (UBERV3)
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Julie Luft, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 04/30/2023
* USD 291,600.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Georgia will provide a nine-week summer undergraduate research experience in
biology education research. Discipline-based education research in biology is a
young field that has expanded to become a major driver of positive change in
undergraduate biology teaching. Many biology education researchers have
completed formal science education research training provided by a growing
number of doctoral programs in biology education. This REU Site aims to broaden
participation in biology education research by focusing on recruiting students
who are first generation college students, from underrepresented groups, and
from schools with limited research opportunities. This focus will contribute to
both the number and diversity of students interested in entering formal biology
education research graduate programs. As a result, it will contribute to growing
and diversifying the field of biology education research, while increasing
knowledge about biology teaching and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
undergraduate students who participate in this REU will engage in high-quality,
state-of-the-art, faculty-mentored undergraduate research. Students will select
from a range of research projects that pose important questions that will
develop their understanding of biology education research, as well as add theory
and knowledge about biology teaching and learning. Students will engage in
programmatic activities organized around three areas: a research strand, a
professionalism strand, and an equity strand. Specific aims for student learning
include developing and/or improving their ability to: use appropriate methods to
collect, analyze, and critique data associated with biology education research;
communicate their research findings in scientific formats; investigate issues of
access and equity to scientific careers; outline a potential career pathway in
or related to biology education research and other areas of science education
research; and participate in a community of biology education researchers. The
major intellectual merit of this project is based in its potential to contribute
to biology education research. The broader impacts of this project include
contributions to the talent pool of biology education researchers, which can
lead to improvements in undergraduate STEM education. The REU program supports
active research participation by undergraduate students in areas of research
funded by NSF. This REU project is supported by NSF's Education &amp; Human
Resources Directorate Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.