* 1950819
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Phenotypic plasticity research experience for community college students
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Alison Bell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 347,708.00

This REU Site award to the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and
Parkland College, located in Champaign, IL, will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. It is anticipated that 30
students from community colleges will be trained in the program. Students will
participate in a research training boot-camp at Parkland followed by the
completion of a research project at the University of Illinois. The program will
increase the participation of community college students in research. Assessment
of the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their further education and
eventual career paths. Students will learn how research is conducted and many
will present the results of their work as a research poster at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will conduct research in the area of
phenotypic plasticity, the ability of one genotype to produce more than one
phenotype when exposed to different environments. Faculty from multiple
departments at the University of Illinois serve as mentors. Examples of past
projects include examining the role of stress on neuroanatomy in nematodes, the
effect of elevated ozone on soybean growth, and the impact of parental care on
reproduction in fish. Applications are accepted from January until March.
Applications are evaluated by the program directors and faculty mentors.
Successful applications include strong letters of reference and personal
statements describing their motivation for participating in the program. The
program begins in late May with a research boot camp where students receive
training in navigating scientific literature, understanding research ethics,
scientific note taking, and selected scientific techniques. During the research
immersion component, students also participate in activities designed to help
ease the transfer process from community college to four-year colleges or
universities. Other training sessions include workshops on analyzing and
presenting scientific data and applying to graduate school. Students also
participate in a scientific outreach program for the local community. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://precs.igb.illinois.edu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Nathan Schroeder
at nes@illinois.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Carlson at
ccarlson@parkland.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.