* 1950269
* Preparing Resourceful, Innovative Science and Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2026
* Rose Stiffin, Florida Memorial University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 781,919.00

This project seeks to serve the national need for high-quality STEM teaching by
encouraging talented undergraduate mathematics, chemistry, or biology majors at
Florida Memorial University to become certified secondary STEM teachers. As part
of the recruitment strategy, sophomore STEM majors will serve as interns in
mathematics/science-related summer programs for local K-12 students. Selected
students will receive scholarships to help them pursue both their STEM degree
and a second major in science or mathematics education. The Scholars will be
mentored by experienced high school teachers who serve in high-need settings.
During their last year of college, the Scholars will complete a teaching
internship and an education action research project focused on STEM teaching and
learning in an urban environment. This combination of academics, financial
support, and mentoring is expected to help students gain the knowledge and
skills needed to be highly effective STEM teachers at high-need schools in the
Miami-Dade Public School System. The projectâ€™s broader impacts include
enhancement of the undergraduate students' learning experiences through the
interdisciplinary focus of the curriculum and through the project's student
cohort-based structure. The project intends to emphasize recruitment of
academically talented underrepresented and/or first-generation college students.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project at Florida Memorial University is in
partnership with Miami-Dade County Public Schools. The project includes
collaborative relationships among high-need schools, the College of Arts and
Sciences, and the College of Education at the University. The project goals are
to provide scholarships for 14 talented STEM majors and to prepare them to be
effective STEM teachers in high-need schools. Implementation plans include
activities that are known to improve student outcomes such as strategic course
placement, tutoring, advising, mentoring, seminars, and opportunities to engage
in research projects and internships. Findings and best practices of this
project will be disseminated through research and scholarly publications and
presentations at professional conferences. The evaluation will be conducted by
an external evaluator using surveys and student performance in specific courses
and certification exams to gather both quantitative and qualitative information.
The results will be used to improve all aspects of the project, many of which
will continue beyond the project's duration. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.