* 1950643
* OPUS: CRS -- A Cross-Scale Synthesis in a Disturbance-Mediated System: Integrating Population, Community, and Metacommunity Perspectives
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Michael Willig, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/29/2024
* USD 293,023.00

We live in a time of rapid environmental change, challenging the ability of
species to persist and of ecosystems to thrive. Thus, it is important to
understand how living things respond to environmental disturbances. This project
will use a long-term data set to determine how hurricanes and droughts in Puerto
Rico have affected the lives of snails and slugs. These creatures may seem
trivial but are not -- they play an important role in forests by breaking down
dead plants and recycling nutrients. Yet, they are increasingly threatened by
unusually strong hurricanes and harsh droughts. The main goal of this project is
to predict how populations and groups of species change over time. How resistant
or vulnerable are snails and slugs to environmental change, and why? What can we
learn from them? In addition to new analyses of long-term data, the researcher
will synthesize results of his past work, focusing on changes that take place at
different scales and thatare somehow linked across those scales. The project
will also help break down disciplinary barriers by offering courses that bring
together teams of students and faculty from basic and applied environmental
sciences, statistics and geography to learn together about tough environmental
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic research will produce theoretical and
empirical discoveries that integrate perspectives on disturbance and succession,
cross-scale interactions, and metacommunities. A monograph will focus on
conceptual refinement and integration of theory on disturbance and succession
with that on metacommunities. A second monograph will focus on long-term
spatiotemporal patterns at the levels of populations, communities, and
metacommunities. Population-level attributes include incidence (presence-
absence) and abundance, whereas community-level attributes comprise species
richness, evenness, dominance, diversity, and rarity. Each metric will be
decomposed into spatial components based on multiplicative and additive models
to understand how the hierarchical spatial structure responds to disturbances
and subsequently changes during secondary succession. Metacommunity analyses
will integrate process-based (i.e., patch dynamics, species sorting, mass
effects, and neutrality) and pattern-based (i.e., coherence, range turnover, and
range boundary clumping) approaches for understanding the ways in which
metacommunities change over time in a hurricane-prone system. A hierarchical
approach to variance decomposition will be used to quantify unique variation
explained by environmental characteristics, spatial variation of unknown origin,
and spatially structured environmental variation. Several emerging statistical
approaches for understanding spatiotemporal variation will be explored,
including (1) intervention analysis or segmented regression; (2) extended
generalized linear mixed model frameworks; and (3) multivariate time series
approaches and simultaneous inference procedures that accommodate Poisson or
negative binomial error terms for rare or uncommon
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.