* 1950599
* REU Site: Data-driven Security
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Edoardo Serra, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2024
* USD 393,488.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
focused on data-driven security at Boise State University. Data-driven security
is an emerging interdisciplinary field that applies data science and artificial
intelligence to mitigate cyberattacks and other security risks and threats.
Undergraduate students will participate in summer research activities with
faculty mentors from the computer science and mathematics disciplines. The
students will work in teams to explore important research questions and will
also participate in other professional development activities that will prepare
them for future careers in the computing fields. The site will target students
from groups traditionally under-represented in computer science as well as
students from two-year colleges in the Pacific
Northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site will feature transformative
interdisciplinary research in the field of data-driven security. Research
problems include: a novel data-driven approach to learn the characteristic
function of a coalition game that models a covert network to improve key actor
identification; new approaches to detect misbehavior and mitigate
misinformation; innovative robust traffic-flow behavioral model extraction for
detecting anomalous situations in enterprise networks; development of new
lightweight cryptographic algorithms that are robust to both algorithmic
weaknesses and side-channel attacks performed with machine learning. All of the
research requires deep integration of data science, artificial intelligence,
mathematics, and security. Students will learn to work in teams and communicate
their results to a diverse audience by participating in activities that use
investigative methodologies based on constructive dialogue and collaborative
design. The projects have the potential to broaden knowledge in several domains,
including game theory, intrusion detection systems, misinformation mitigation,
and lightweight cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.