* 1950227
* REU/RET Site: Preparing the Next Generation of Scholars through Community Geographic Information Systems and Citizen Science
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Timothy Hawthorne, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 465,968.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits in addition to integrating research and education. The REU/RET Site at
University of Central Florida, in partnership with George Mason University and
the Smithsonian Caribbean Coral Reef Ecosystems Program (CCRE), provides
intensive, community-based research experiences for 24 undergraduate students
and 6 K-12 educators with a focus on developing new researchers and educators
from underrepresented groups. The REU/RET Site supports the NSF mission by
promoting new discoveries in interdisciplinary science, while supporting 30
students and teachers over the span of three project years. The REU/RET Site
also supports the NSF mission of strengthening U.S. science and national
research and education priorities by having students and K-12 teachers
participate in interdisciplinary research teams, increasing their understanding
of research ethics, and sharing their research results with broad audiences
through diverse modes of scientific communication. REU/RET participants work
with faculty mentors, geospatial technology industry leaders, non-profits, and
community members. The REU/RET Site provides research methods training and
advanced fieldwork, and works with participants to share results through co-
authored publications, conference co-presentations, social media, and industry
visits. The REU/RET Site contributes to NSFâ€™s mission of broadening
participation in science and industry by recruiting 75% of its participants from
underrepresented groups (e.g. women, minorities, veterans, persons with
disabilities, first-generation college students).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
the transformative seven-week research program and post-program dissemination of
results, the REU/RET Site will: 1) critically assess the opportunities for and
challenges to community-based models for international undergraduate research
training, especially important as U.S. higher education institutions and
industry push for more globally-minded thinkers to increase U.S. competitiveness
around the world; 2) engage 24 student researchers (in addition to 6 pre-service
or in-service teachers) in community-based international fieldwork focused on
GIS and related geospatial research techniques to examine social and
environmental disparities; and 3) broadly share conceptual and methodological
frameworks for international community GIS and citizen science research and
education efforts. The REU/RET Site has several broader societal impacts to
support U.S. and NSF priorities. It serves as the first international research
training program for students and K-12 teachers focused explicitly on
interdisciplinary, team-based inquiry using community GIS and citizen science
methods. REU/RET participants will develop an understanding of and appreciation
for community-based geographic and GIS-based inquiry in U.S. and international
settings through team-based science, fostering both scientific and technical
skills and other essential career skills like communication, problem solving,
and adaptability. Knowledge gained by participants will lead to a transformative
experience helping students and K-12 teachers develop into more globally aware,
ethical researchers that can support U.S. interests across the globe, both in
academic and non-academic environments. With the added RET component, additional
educational opportunities for K-12 educators and K-12 students will be developed
allowing for stronger exposure to geospatial technologies in U.S. classrooms and
through open access, online educational materials created by the REU/RET
Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.