* 1950621
* REU Site: CSHL NSF-REU Bioinformatics and Computational Neuroscience Summer Undergraduate Program
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jesse Gillis, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 393,840.00

This REU Site award to Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, located in Cold Spring
Harbor, NY, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2020- 2022. Research is conducted at the main campus in Cold Spring
Harbor and at the Woodbury Genome Center in Woodbury, NY. It is anticipated that
a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities or are from an under-represented group, will be trained in the
program. The program will provide students with research training and
development of professional skills. Many of the students will present the
results of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will
be done thru the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology REU program at CSHL provides
undergraduates with research training in genomics, computational neuroscience,
and quantitative biology, and helps them develop their scientific identities.
The students undertake a research project with a CSHL faculty mentor, and attend
programming workshops and lectures in bioinformatics and computational
neuroscience presented by CSHLâ€™s faculty and program alumni. They also attend
professional development workshops that educate them on research ethics and
trains them in scientific communication. The summer culminates with a research
symposium in which the students present their work to the CSHL community.
Throughout the program students are provided with numerous opportunities in a
collegial environment to network with CSHL scientists, and visiting scientists
from the Meetings and Courses Program at CSHL. Guidance on career development is
provided during and after the program. More information about the program is
available by visiting https://www.cshl.edu/education/undergraduate-research-
program/#nsf-reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Jesse Gillis at JGillis@cshl.edu)
or the co-PI (Dr. Christopher Hammell at
chammell@cshl.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.