* 1950016
* REU Site: Bridge to Research in Marine Sciences: A Summer REU Program in Savannah, Georgia
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Christopher Hintz, Savannah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/29/2024
* USD 384,292.00

Savannah State University (SSU) in Savannah, Georgia will host an eight-week
summer Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program in marine sciences
for ten undergraduate students, and the program will run for three years
(2020-2022). The goal of this REU Site is the early recruitment and support of
undergraduate students, with a focus on recruiting students who have limited
background knowledge of and access to academic research. The program includes a
two-day research cruise opportunity for undergraduate students aboard an
oceanographic research vessel and a specific emphasis on training non-
traditional students, veterans, and students with disabilities. SSU's local
partners include the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography, Gray's Reef National
Marine Sanctuary, and UGA MAREX Aquarium and Shellfish Laboratory. Each of the
partners has experienced research mentors and high level research facilities
that provide an excellent environment for student research projects. Students
are recruited nationally, and support provided to interns includes stipends,
travel to and from the site, housing and an allowance for
meals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase I of the REU program, or weeks 1-2, focuses on
whole-group activities including short courses, guest lectures, field trips and
visits to marine laboratories along the Georgia/South Carolina coast. Short
course topics include introductory marine science lectures and fundamental
research skills and the 2-day research cruise. The six-week Phase II switches
focus to the students' research in mentor labs at SSU or one of the
participating institutions. Each student will complete an oral and written
presentation of their research and a completed program
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.