* 1950242
* REU Site: Coastal Marine Science Research Opportunities for Undergraduates at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS)
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Linda Schaffner, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2024
* USD 455,599.00

William and Mary’s Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS,) which is located
in Gloucester Pt., VA., will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site during the summers of 2020-2022. The coastal ocean is an accessible
natural laboratory, faces significant environmental pressures, and is of high
socio-economic value to the nation. Through this intern program, VIMS provides
hands-on opportunities in coastal ocean science research training and STEM
education for talented undergraduate students. Interns accepted into the program
contribute to the advancement of scientific knowledge through independent
research and participation in ongoing long-term faculty research projects. The
Site will support twelve undergraduates each year during a 10-week internship,
involving a total of thirty-six students over three years. Student participants
are recruited from throughout the United States and include individuals from
under-represented groups and from non-research colleges and universities.
Students receive a stipend, housing and travel support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VIMS Summer Intern Program introduces undergraduate
students to the complex environmental issues facing coastal ocean and estuarine
systems globally. The program seeks to provide meaningful research and training
opportunities for undergraduates in coastal marine science. Internships are
available in the areas of marine ecology, biological and chemical oceanography,
biogeochemistry, geological and physical oceanography, and marine policy. The
research activities of enrolled interns often result in peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.