* 1950052
* REU Site: Data + Computing = Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Alan Calder, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2024
* USD 405,000.00

Data + Computing = Discovery (DCD) combines faculty from many programs at Stony
Brook University to work with enthusiastic undergraduate students and advance
knowledge in many disciplines, including life sciences, social sciences,
engineering, and physical sciences. The unifying themes for the REU site are
computational and data sciences, which are inherently interdisciplinary and
becoming complementary avenues for scientific investigation alongside experiment
and theory. Furthermore, the number of students, particularly undergraduates,
who develop the required skills for success in computational and data sciences
without access to training is very small. Thus, DCD offers resources and
training to undergraduate students in computational and data sciences, which
will drive new lines of scientific inquiry and research. Once at DCD,
participants will learn computer programming skills, apply these skills to
research, practice communicating ideas for broad audiences, and meet other
outstanding young students. The primary impact of DCD is the lifetime of
contributions to many fields of study from the participants that DCD helps
assemble, train, and inspire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these goals,
DCD will host undergraduate participants for a 9-week program every summer.
Participants will be matched with Stony Brook faculty who are expert in the
physical sciences, life sciences, engineering, and social sciences and have
established records of high productivity both in computational research and in
fostering student engagement. In addition to working on an original research
project with these faculty members, every DCD participant will (i) participate
in a course on computer programming with Python, (ii) complete a research
methods workshop on the practice of research from ideation to publication, (iii)
learn about careers and graduate school opportunities in computational and data
sciences, (iv) practice communicating their ideas to a variety of technical and
non-technical audiences, (v) present their research in a poster symposium, and
(vi) enjoy social and networking activities with other students to form long-
term collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.