* 1950581
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Nanotechnology and Biomedicine
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jonathan Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 404,071.00

Nanobiotechnology is an interdisciplinary science at the convergence of diverse
scientific disciplines that leverages the principles and experimental tools from
the physical sciences and engineering to facilitate a better understanding of
biological systems. This emerging field is particularly important in
biomedicine, where new tools are needed to address complex, long-standing
challenges in such fields as cancer biology, cell and developmental biology,
infectious diseases and regenerative biology. However, interdisciplinary
research in nanobiotechnology often does not resonate with undergraduates, due
to the limited access and availability of facilities and research programs in
the university setting, and the intimidating prospects of mastering multiple
disciplines. This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at
the University of Georgia (UGA) offers an interdisciplinary research experience
at the interface of nanotechnology and biomedicine to underrepresented minority
and female undergraduate students from other institutions, leveraging the
diverse interdisciplinary expertise, resources, and training opportunities in
this area at UGA. The Site will host 10 REU students over a 10-week summer
program where they will participate in existing, interdisciplinary research
projects that apply nanotechnology to specific biomedical questions. Each REU
student will be co-mentored by paired faculty from the nanotechnology and
biomedical disciplines on a collaborative research project. In addition to a
total-immersion and hands-on research experience, REU students will participate
in enrichment activities that include an ethics-in-science workshop, weekly
presentations on interdisciplinary research, what to expect in graduate school,
career workshops, facility tours, and presenting research findings at national
and international conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal is to
attract and retain underrepresented minority and female students from
institutions with limited research opportunities in science and engineering, and
prepare them for graduate programs and careers in these fields. To accomplish
this goal, the proposed program will provide an interdisciplinary research
experience at the interface of nanotechnology and biomedicine to students.
Through the program, students will (1) design hypotheses-driven research
experiments to solve biomedical problems with engineering tools; (2) develop
skills for conducting interdisciplinary research; (3) gain confidence and a
sense of self-efficacy to participate in science and engineering research, (4)
develop a greater understanding and appreciation for the benefits of
interdisciplinary research. Research mentors will also gain expertise in
mentoring minority and female students in interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.