* 1950289
* REU Site: Linking Applied Knowledge in Environmental Sustainability (LAKES)
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Tina Lee, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 342,128.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. This project brings
together a dynamic and creative group of faculty from the University of
Wisconsin-Stout for an 8-week interdisciplinary REU site to train first
generation and minority students underrepresented in the scientific community.
Students and faculty will engage in an apprentice-style training model with the
overall theme of studying phosphorus pollution in a highly eutrophic Wisconsin
watershed. We will study inclusive decision-making, community capacity, the
psychology of social influence, responsive policy implementation, social and
economic impacts of pollution, remediation strategies, and technical and long-
term monitoring solutions. Data will be integrated into a comprehensive strategy
for economically sustainable land use practices and building community capacity.
Students and faculty will participate in professional development programming,
interdisciplinary data sharing, and original research activities designed to
empower and prepare students, particularly those underrepresented in the
scientific community, for graduate school and careers in interdisciplinary
teams. Ultimately, this investment in human capital will produce students
trained in the interdisciplinary and collaborative thinking necessary to solve
21st century problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work offers significant
intellectual contributions by improving student learning and development in
response to research experiences, creating innovative approaches to
interdisciplinary research, and understanding the complex processes contributing
to phosphorus pollution while developing sustainable solutions. The proposed
project will result in lasting impacts for students, faculty, and the local
community alike. The efforts at synthesizing different research projects
centered on the same substantive problems will improve effectiveness in
collaborative problem solving. The results will be broadly disseminated via
student presentations, peer-reviewed literature, local media outlets, and policy
stakeholders. By sharing the results with land users in the watershed, other
citizens, and government workers, the new knowledge will impact public policy,
the local economy, and regional water quality. This project overall will have a
significant impact on developing a more competitive work force in the social and
natural sciences in the US, increasing participation of underrepresented
minority groups and women in the sciences, expanding public scientific literacy,
advancing water quality remediation efforts, and improving undergraduate
education in the social and natural sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.