* 1950376
* MCA-PGR: Cycling below-ground: Circadian regulation in wild and domesticated potato
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Arjun Krishnan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,217,260.00

The circadian clock allows organisms to adjust their physiology to daily
light/dark cycles. In humans, jet lag and poor health associated with shift work
are due to the desynchronization of our body's circadian clock with the current
environmental cycle. In plants, the circadian clock regulates a wide array of
processes ranging from photosynthesis to stress responses. Moreover, the
circadian clock enables plants to measure day length, and therefore, anticipate
seasonal changes, which vary depending on the latitude. With changes in global
climate, growth of crops at more northern and cooler latitudes will require
adaptation to altered daylengths. Circadian clocks generate oscillations with a
period of about, but not exactly, 24h. Natural variation in this endogenous
circadian period has been measured in animals, including humans, and plants.
Potato displays natural variation of circadian period and changes in this period
have been linked by the PI’s to the process of potato domestication. The project
supported by this award will investigate the role of the circadian period in the
optimization of potato growth under different daylengths. Moreover, this project
will also impact future generations of science teachers. School teachers are at
the frontline of improving public scientific literacy and this project will not
only train pre-service science educators on science practices and science
teaching but also investigate the role research experiences in teacher
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad objective of this project is to
understand how circadian rhythms contribute to the development of heterotrophic
organs and adaptation to different photoperiods using potato as a model. This
work will define the circadian and photoperiod regulatory gene networks in
potato and their association with physiological traits; identify loci involved
in circadian rhythm variation using a diversity panel of wild potato species
that spans geographic diversity; and employ functional genomics approaches to
characterize the role of circadian clock-associated loci in potato growth and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.