* 1950374
* REU Site: Multi-Scale Systems Bioengineering and Biomedical Data Sciences
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Timothy Allen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 406,817.00

The employment of biomedical engineers is projected to grow 23% over the period
from 2019-2024, creating a critical need for those who can support the design,
development and production of new devices, systems, and software used in
healthcare. Advances in the biomedical sciences and medicine will increasingly
depend upon the application of rigorous and quantitative engineering-based
approaches to characterize and interrogate biological systems, as well as tools
of data science for mining and analyzing the massive amounts of clinical and
biological data needed to diagnose and treat disease going forward. To meet the
growing need for workforce pipeline development specifically in the areas of
systems bioengineering and biomedical data sciences, the REU Site in Multi-Scale
Systems Bioengineering and Biomedical Data Sciences at the University of
Virginia will recruit and train ten undergraduate participants per summer in
state-of-the-art systems bioengineering and biomedical data sciences research.
While open to a broad national pool of top students in STEM, the REU Site will
specifically target talented undergraduates majoring in STEM fields at
institutions with limited research opportunities in the field, with an emphasis
on recruiting students from underrepresented groups. The research experience and
mentorship will help prepare these REU students for work in this fast-growing
and pioneering field that would otherwise be unavailable to them at their home
institutions. Faculty mentors will maintain continuing relationships with the
participants after completing the program, helping to improve the likelihood
that the students will remain in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of the REU is to train a diverse corps of young engineers and scientists from a
variety of STEM backgrounds and provide them with the skills, confidence, and
mentorship necessary for successful careers in the exciting—and growing—area of
systems bioengineering and biomedical data sciences. Students will be matched
with faculty mentors for a 10-week summer research project, culminating in an
abstract and public symposium, and with most students also having the
opportunity to present at a national conference. The students will participate
in collaborative, hands-on, and closely mentored projects that will immerse them
in a combination of experimentation, computation, and data science. Students
will acquire the practical skills, knowledge, ethical grounding, and
communication skills necessary to be productive in advanced graduate study and
be successfully employed in the modern biotechnology industry. The program will
also provide students with career advising, grounding in research ethics,
training in scientific communication, and ongoing mentorship after completion of
the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.