* 1950910
* REU Site: Ocean and Coastal ResEArch ExperieNces for UndergraduateS (REU-OCEANUS)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Jenna Lamphere, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2024
* USD 399,058.00

In order to address the increasing vulnerability of coastal systems wrought by
climate change, greater scientific understanding of social, economic, and
ecological processes is needed to inform decision-making. Texas A&amp;M
University's Galveston (TAMG) campus will host a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site program that will pair ten students with TAMUG faculty
mentors who have ongoing, research projects related to the sustainability of
coastal systems. Proposed research opportunities emphasize, but are not limited
to, the northern Gulf of Mexico. REU students will have access to state-of-the-
art scientific facilities and engage in research and professional development
workshops. The workshops are designed to enhance their research and
metacognitive skills, especially for work in interdisciplinary environments.
Workshop topics include: research design and analysis; scientific communication;
ethics in STEM research; diversity in STEM; graduate school matriculation; and,
careers in STEM. REU students will present their research in three different
formats (i.e., oral, poster, and video presentations), which will enhance their
research communication skills. Overall, the program is designed to advance
scientific understanding of coastal system sustainability, while also training
the next generation of scientists and engineers who are essential for making the
scientific discoveries and technologies of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program will be run each summer for three years, starting in 2021. Each summer,
he program will engage ten undergraduates in research projects during a ten-week
summer internship, eventually involving a total of thirty students. Mentors will
be drawn from TAMUG faculty in the departments of Marine Biology, Marine
Sciences, Marine Engineering Technology, Maritime Administration and Liberal
Studies. REU students will engage in diverse research topics related to social,
economic, and ecological sustainability, including coastal wetland response to
climate change, reconstruction of extreme weather events from sediment cores,
and use of augmented reality to inform for storm surge protection. Program
objectives are: (1) provide a diverse cohort of students with high-impact
learning experiences that enhance their research and metacognitive skills; (2)
offer students opportunities to experience and establish strong collaborative
ties and mentorship relationships with TAMUG faculty; (3) strengthen students'
abilities to navigate the academic pipeline; and, (4) foster students' interests
and retention in baccalaureate completion, graduate school matriculation, and
STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.