* 1950782
* REU Site: Astrophysics and Condensed Matter Physics at Villanova University
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Amber Stuver, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 10/31/2023
* USD 227,802.00

This award supports a new Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) site at
Villanova University (VU), led by a collaboration between the VU Department of
Physics and the Department of Astronomy and Planetary Science. The site will
engage six undergraduate students per year in discovery-based research,
professional training, and community building activities. As a part of the
professional training, students will travel to the NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center to interact with other scientists and explore various career paths in
astrophysics. They will present their research at a regional symposium hosted at
VU as a capstone activity. Participant mentoring will continue after the
completion of the program and students will receive support to present their
work at a national or regional meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program is
focused on research in astrophysics with targeted opportunities in condensed
matter physics. Participants will gain competence addressing real-world
scientific problems through observation, experimentation, critical thinking, and
data analysis - preparing them for a career in science or other technical
fields. They will have opportunities to present their work at conferences
(including support for presentations at professional meetings during the
following academic year) and through peer-reviewed papers in which they would
share authorship with their mentors. Students will receive professional training
and experience in a variety of areas needed for successful careers in STEM,
including: research ethics; computer programming; hardware and software
operations as required by their specific research topic; and finally the
presentation of their results and professional interactions. Mentors will
receive valuable annual training in mentoring skills and establish and grow a
mutually beneficial network with institutions targeted for recruitment. The
local community will benefit from the “Regional Physics &amp; Astronomy Research
Symposium” gathering summer research students from the local area to share their
research, practice their communication skills, and expand their network. This
site is supported by the Division of Physics and the Division of Materials
Research within the Mathematics and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.