* 1950207
* REU Site: Propulsion, Aerodynamics, Materials and Controls of Aerial Vehicles
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Mosfequr Rahman, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 05/31/2024
* USD 404,865.00

The Allen E. Paulson College of Engineering and Computing (CEC) at Georgia
Southern University will host a three year 10 week summer-term,
interdisciplinary REU Site. The project team will recruit ten students per year
from freshman to seniors from HBCUs and minority-serving institutions (MSI),
2-year and community colleges, and 4-year colleges where research opportunities
are limited. The program addresses pressing societal problems and 21st Century
Grand Challenges and will promote the progress of science and advancing the
national prosperity, while strengthening the national defense. The high-quality
research environment and exposure to hands-on learning, STEM problem-solving,
and mentoring, will prepare students to apply interdisciplinary concepts in
solving complex challenges. The projects proposed for this REU will challenge
students, advance knowledge and produce valuable scholarship. In addition to
their research projects, all REU participants will be mentored to develop their
scientific knowledge and skills; research methods, including workplace ethics;
and technical writing and oral communication. They will participate in
industrial visits and cultural activities. The REU site will prepare a new
generation of scientific leaders from diverse populations by establishing novel
collaborations between Georgia Southern, HBCUs, minority-serving institutions
and community colleges; promote exciting undergraduate research that will
advance the fundamental body of knowledge in “Propulsion, Aerodynamics,
Materials and Controls of Aerial Vehicles” and respond to 21st-Century
Challenges while the research results will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
journals. Answering the need for full participation of women, persons with
disabilities, and minorities in STEM, the REU Site will develop, implement, and
coordinate a series of field experiences for underrepresented high school
students. The outreach focus will be the high-need rural counties that are home
to high populations of underrepresented minorities, very disadvantaged
economically and special needs students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year
new REU site will host ten students per year. Students will work on a variety of
research projects across the research laboratories (Aerospace, Aerodynamics,
Subsonic tunnel and Wind Energy, Advanced Sensing, Intelligent Control,
Fundamental Combustion, Ballistic Impacts) in the CEC at Georgia Southern
University. The state of the art multidisciplinary research program will advance
fundamental knowledge on rotorcraft aerodynamics performance and stability by
bringing new knowledge through an original computational approach employing
synthetic jets for flow control in rotorcraft applications. The wing’s
aerodynamics research will advance knowledge on flow transitions from laminar to
turbulent regimes for increased safety and efficiency of civilian and military
aircraft. The combustion team will identify the timing of appearance of cool
flames, Negative Temperature Coefficient Region behavior, and the transition to
High Temperature Heat Release for synthetic kerosene used in jet engines. It
will make advances into the elucidation of the mechanisms of thermo-acoustic
instabilities of synthetic jet fuels combustion that can inform a significant
reduction in NVH and pollution. Research on UAV will use face gestures and
electroencephalography signals in a three-dimensional physical space with new
feature extraction techniques that include cross-correlation and the logistic
regression method for UAV telematics control, while, the waves’ propagation at
high speed impact in anisotropic aerospace materials will bring a contribution
to capturing the damage and failure modes during aircraft ballistic impact
events. The multiple research thrusts respond to both civilian and defense
research questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.