* 1950348
* REU/RET Site: Radio Science in Astronomy, Geodesy, and Geospace Science at MIT Haystack Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Philip Erickson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 03/31/2024
* USD 507,948.00

MIT's Haystack Observatory will host a combined summer REU (Research Experiences
for Undergraduates) and RET (Research Experiences for Teachers) site in
astronomy, space sciences, geodesy, and informatics. The program will strive to
recruit diverse student cohorts including students from underrepresented groups,
as well as students from colleges and universities with limited local research
infrastructure. The research and professional development programs will help
students to understand the nature and ethics of scientific research and the
skills and process necessary to become a professional scientist. Instructional
Units developed by RET participants will be used in classrooms worldwide. This
program is a renewal of an existing REU/RET site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
activities are linked through an overarching radio science theme. Each summer,
seven undergraduate students and two K-12 teachers will spend ten weeks at
Haystack engaged in research. Most of these will utilize major on-site
facilities and instrumentation. Opportunities also exist for students to get
involved with the Event Horizon Telescope, very long baseline interferometry,
the Murchison Widefield Array, and in designing instrumentation for these and
future facilities. The program is also a gateway to opportunities in various
geospace and magnetospheric physics projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.