* 1950394
* Developing the Science of Science Communication in Early Career Scientists: Incorporating Lessons Learned - February 2020 in San Diego, CA
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Rebecca Stone, Suffolk University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 10/31/2020
* USD 36,996.00

A workshop for students and early career scientists will be held in conjunction
with the bi-annual conference known as the Ocean Sciences Meeting 2020, which is
co-sponsored by the Association of the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography
(ASLO), the American Geophysical Union (AGU and The Oceanography Society (TOS)
and which will be held in February 2020 in San Diego, CA. The one-day workshop
is designed to train students and early career scientists in the oral and visual
communication skills needed to effectively communicate with a variety of
audiences. Workshop organization and evaluation will be managed by Drs. Schiebel
and Stone, from Suffolk University. The main speakers will be Dr. Jessamyn A.
Fairfield, a physicist and Lecturer, National University of Ireland Galway's
School of Physics and Dr. Echo A. Rivera, owner of Creative Research
Communications, LLC. Both speakers are highly experienced and well qualified,
with expertise in training scientists to give effective presentations to a
variety of audiences. Evaluation of the workshop will be conducted by Dr.
Rebecca Stone, Assistant Professor of Sociology, Suffolk University.

This workshop will offer a group of approximately forty students and early
career scientists an opportunity to improve their presentation skills. The plan
for the workshop is solid, and the event is likely to be well-attended and
highly successful because it will be held in conjunction with a large bi-annual
conference. The broader impacts of the workshop include training and
professional development for a diverse group of participants. In addition to the
training provided to participants, this award will support two early career
scientists who will gain experience in workshop organization, grant management
and scientific leadership.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.