* 1950024
* REU Site: Big Data Science and Science Communication
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Atom Lesiak, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 405,140.00

This REU Site award to the Genome Sciences Department at the University of
Washington, located in Seattle, WA, will support the training of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. It is anticipated that a total of 30
students, from across the United States with limited research opportunities
and/or from an underrepresented minority group will participate. Students will
learn how research is conducted and will present their findings at a poster
session at UW. In addition, many students will present their research at
scientific conferences. Students will leave the program with experience in
programming methods related to biological sciences, enhanced science
communication skills, and greater awareness of how to navigate their careers in
science. Assessment of the program will be done thru the online SALG URSSA tool,
and students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The summer research program provides
opportunities to gain outstanding research experience by working with leading
researchers in the field of genomics and proteomics at the University of
Washington. The program will introduce a wide range of research questions,
applications, and career opportunities accessible through big data analysis and
computational biology. Research projects span human and model organism genetics,
genomics, computational biology, and proteomics. This program will train
students to be more effective communicators. They will learn how to share their
research findings with other scientists, tell their personal journeys as
scientists in PhD applications, and develop skills on how to communicate science
principles with the general public. Competitive applicants will have had some
college-level science coursework. Applicants from predominantly undergraduate
institutions are encouraged to apply. Prior experience with programming is not
required, as all students will leave the program having learned introductory
programming concepts related to biological datasets. Applicants interested in
computational biology labs will be expected to have taken college-level calculus
and have basic programming skills. More information about the program is
available by visiting
https://www.gs.washington.edu/academics/summer/gssummer/index.htm, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Queitsch, queitsch@u.washington.edu), or the co-PI (Dr.
Lesiak, alesiak@uw.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.