* 1950610
* REU SITE: Systematics, Evolution and Conservation for the 21st Century
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Cheryl Hayashi, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 615,612.00

This REU Site award to the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH), located in
New York, NY, will support the training of 12 undergraduate students for 10
weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. It is anticipated that a total of 36
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from
under-represented groups, will be trained in the program. Students will write a
report and give a public presentation on their research accomplishments and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of
the program will be done thru the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the REU program is systematics and
evolution and how those inform conservation priorities. Students will be
mentored by the museum curators and scientists conducting research on specific
groups of organisms. In selecting participants, emphasis is placed on effective
student-project and student-mentor matching; transcripts and test scores are not
accepted in the application. Projects will explore biodiversity disciplines from
paleontology to conservation genetics that comprise the full research scope of
the museum. Students will engage in data gathering methodologies, including
morphology, advanced DNA sequencing, computed tomography, and massively parallel
next-generation genomics. Participants will be trained in computational
analytics including morphometrics, ecological modelling and phylogenetics.
Students’ knowledge of the role and responsibility of museums as stewards of
diversity through time and space will be enhanced through on-boarding in-depth
familiarity with the over 34 million specimens collected over 150 years, weekly
lectures and training sessions as well as workshops on ethics and responsible
scientific conduct. Students will engage in near-peer mentoring of high-school
students who are participants in the museum’s other summer programs. More
information about the program can be found by visiting www.amnh.org/REU/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Mark Siddall at
siddall@amnh.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.