* 1950174
* Building Reciprocal Relationships: Mentorships to Strengthen and Sustain STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Ezra Miller, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 09/30/2025
* USD 711,241.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing highly qualified STEM
teachers. The project seeks to recruit STEM graduates to participate as Noyce
Scholars in a Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) program at Duke University. The
project intends to provide the Noyce Scholars with significant financial support
as they earn their degree and strong mentoring that starts in their first year
in the MAT program and continues during their first years of STEM teaching in a
high-need school district. The project focuses on recruiting a diverse group of
individuals with STEM degrees. Additionally, the project intends to conduct
research on issues of self-efficacy and professional identity for early career
teachers. The research results can contribute to what is known about retaining
STEM teachers and help develop ways to increase the number of teachers who have
long careers in teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Duke University
includes a partnership with Durham Public Schools. Project goals include to: 1)
recruit and enroll five cohorts of five highly-qualified STEM graduates and mid-
career professionals for a total of 25 Noyce Scholars; 2) provide the Noyce
Scholars with the resources needed to support grades 9-12 student achievement in
mathematics and science; 3) support the Noyce Scholars during the first three
years of their career as they teach in high-need school districts; and 4)
determine the factors that are most effective in recruiting, preparing, and
retaining highly-qualified teachers for high-need school districts. The research
plan will include interviews and surveys of teachers who are current Noyce
Scholars, as well as those who participated in previous Noyce grants. This
research aims to consider self-efficacy and professional identity, constructs
that have been determined to be important when considering persistence in
teaching. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.