* 1950959
* Collaborative Research: High-resolution volcanic stratigraphy and geochemical evolution of the Galapagos Platform
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Daniel Fornari, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 11/30/2023
* USD 149,499.00

Ocean island volcanos are formed from repeated eruption of lavas from the
Earth's mantle onto the overriding plate. Most mature ocean island systems
comprise a nearly linear chain of volcanoes that increase with age in one
direction, due to the tectonic plate migrating over the stationary magmatic
source. However, the modern Galapagos volcanoes are situated on top of a large,
shallow volcanic platform, which is atypical for an ocean island system. The
presence of this massive platform has allowed the volcanic islands to remain
subaerial for longer time periods, which has influenced biological speciation in
the Galapagos. Despite this cursory understanding, very little is known about
the construction, evolution, or composition of the Galapagos Platform. Thus, the
outstanding goal of this research is to determine the compositions of lavas that
make up the Galapagos Platform and relate them to spatial heterogeneity in the
mantle source and the overlying islands. The project is in collaboration with UK
scientists and will take place on a U.K. research vessel and use their remotely
operated vehicle ISIS to sample the Galapagos Platform. This work represents an
opportunity to collaborate with UK scientists on multidisciplinary oceanographic
studies in the Galapagos. In addition, the ecosystems of the deep submarine
environment around the Galapagos Islands remain virtually unexplored, despite
the importance of the archipelago in evolutionary and biogeography studies, and
the establishment of the Galapagos Marine Reserve, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
The PIs will collaborate with the Galapagos National Park, the Ecuadorian Navy's
Oceanography Institute, and Charles Darwin Research Station, which is the
principal organization supporting scientific research in the area. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained during the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike many ocean island systems, the
modern Galapagos Islands are situated on top of a large volcanic Platform that
has been understudied compared to the subaerial portions of the islands. The
goal of this work is to determine the chemical compositions of lavas forming the
Galapagos Platform and relate those findings to the spatial heterogeneity in the
mantle plume and the overlying islands with an overarching goal of understanding
how the Galapagos Platform has formed in comparison to other ocean island
systems (e.g., Hawaii). The ~21 days on-station field program using the ROV ISIS
and the research vessel James Cook will be dedicated to sampling deep-sea corals
(from a UK NERC funded portion of the proposal) and associated lavas from a
broad spectrum of terrains along the margins of the platform, many never before
sampled. The US-NSF component of this research involves ROV-based sampling and
geological mapping of the volcanic stratigraphy at various locations along the
margin of the Platform along with a comprehensive shore-based geochemical study
of sampled lavas. These studies will allow an investigation of the volcanic
emplacement processes involved in construction of the Platform and geochemical
relationships between the submarine platform lavas and adjacent/overlying
volcanic islands. During the planned research cruise, the most comprehensive and
systematic in situ sampling of the volumetrically largest volcanic portion of
the Galapagos Archipelago, the Galapagos Platform will be conducted. Results
will test several important questions about the Galapagos Platform: i) is the
Galapagos Platform spatially and vertically geochemically homogenous? ii) what
is the relationship between the platform lavas, the overlying volcanic islands,
and the overall evolution of the Galapagos Archiplelago. The field program is
designed to map and sample several stratigraphic sections around the platform
and will include detailed on-bottom observations, multibeam mapping, and in situ
rock sampling. This will be followed by shore-based geochemical and textural
analysis of lavas; including measuring major and trace element contents and
radiogenic isotope ratios of the lavas. The results will be used to construct
stratigraphic profiles of the Platform and compare submarine lava compositions
to adjacent, overlying islands and deep-water lava flows to produce a
comprehensive model for the formation of the Galapagos
Platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.