* 1950193
* REU Site: CAS: Advancing Chemistry Research by Integrating Green Chemistry and Science Policy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Stephen Boyes, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 404,000.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site award to The George
Washington University, located in Washington, DC, supports the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2021-2023. In this program, funded
by the Division of Chemistry, participants pursue collaborative research
projects, with a focus on green and environmental chemistry and their relation
to applications in renewable energy, water purification, renewable feedstocks,
and healthcare. Participants also take part in a professional development and
ethics training program, with a focus on science policy and the role it plays in
the development of technologies consistent with sustainability. Through
independent research projects, workshops, and interactions with a variety of
government agencies in the DC area, this site broadens participation in STEM and
encourages students to adopt new approaches in the development of chemical
technologies with minimal environmental impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
students undertake individual projects encompassing a variety fields of
chemistry with the unifying theme of developing technologies consistent with the
principles of green chemistry and environmental sustainability. These projects
include integrated processes for upgrading lignocellulosic biomass using ionic
liquids, in silico design of biodegradable pesticides, and optical properties of
carbon nanodots for environmental sensing applications, among many others. The
professional development series includes a workshop in science policy, seminars
by local government and academic professionals involved in science policy, and
student involvement in the annual cross-disciplinary Green Chemistry,
Environmental Health and Science Policy Forum. Students also participate in a
workshop on K-12 education in science and engineering with a focus on green
chemistry and sustainability. To increase diversity in STEM students and
exposure to scientific research, this site emphasizes the recruitment of
students from non-PhD granting and minority serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.