* 1950421
* REU Site: Ecology, Genetics, and Adaptation on the Colorado Plateau
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Theodore Martinez, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 314,428.00

This REU Site award to Northern Arizona University, located in Flagstaff,
Arizona, will support the training of 9 students for 10 weeks during the summers
of 2021 - 2023. It is anticipated that a total of 27 students, primarily from
community and tribal colleges, and with emphasis on Native American and Hispanic
students, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. The research theme of the program is place-based and utilizes the
unique ecology and cultural diversity of the Colorado Plateau and Four Corners
region. A web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure, the SALG URSSA tool, will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will conduct research projects that are
relevant to the local ecology and cultures (e.g., research questions involving
climate change, fish populations, mate recognition among ecologically similar
species). The primary goal of the program is to enhance the scientific and
critical thinking skills of students and encourage continued studies in the
sciences. Each student will conduct all of the phases of scientific research,
including scientific literature review, experimentation, data analysis and
interpretation, and paper and poster presentations of their results. The program
includes seminars on career options, developing research skills, responsible
conduct in research, Native American and western science perspectives, and
cohort-building activities. Mentors have extensive experience mentoring
undergraduates and in funded research. Students will be selected from the
applicant pool by PIs Holeski and Martinez. More information about the program
is available by visiting https://nau.edu/Merriam-Powell/Research-Experience, or
by contacting the PI (Dr. Holeski at liza.holeski@nau.edu) or the co-PI (Ted
Martinez at ted.martinez@nau.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.