* 1950246
* A Community-focused Pathway for Mathematics Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2026
* Scott Norris, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 849,274.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality
mathematics teachers from diverse backgrounds. It intends to do so by building a
Dallas-area mathematics teacher pipeline with a novel, community-focused
approach to teacher recruitment, preparation, and induction. The project will
recruit cohorts of five to ten students, mostly transfer students from local
community colleges. At the University, these Noyce Scholars will receive
scholarships as they complete a double major in mathematics and education. They
will also have coursework and teaching experiences in West Dallas schools, a
community with particularly high need. Following graduation and certification,
the Noyce Scholars will also teach in West Dallas schools, where they will
receive continued mentoring and other supports to help them succeed as teachers.
If this community-focused model of teacher education proves feasible and
effective, it will increase understanding about how mathematics teacher
vacancies might be filled, while simultaneously building teacher support
capacity in high-need schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Southern
Methodist University includes partnerships with Dallas Independent School
District and the Dallas County Community College District. Project goals
include: (a) recruiting 27 new Mathematics teachers from Dallas County Community
College over five years; (b) preparing these students for careers as mathematics
teachers via double majors in Mathematics and Education; (c) placing graduates
in a high-need school within Dallas Independent School District; and (d)
building a network of former participants who were served by this project. To
build a regional mathematics teacher pipeline with a community-focused approach,
recruitment will focus on Dallas County Community College studentsm which is
expected to enhance the retention of students as teachers in the local
community. Preparation of the students at Southern Methodist University will
include integration of the teaching context and pre-service teacher training in
West Dallas schools. Finally, induction will be focused on West Dallas, where
the University has existing partnerships with schools. This focus on a single
community is intended to strengthen the partnering school district, as well as
enhance the Noyce Scholars' teaching knowledge and skills. The research focus of
the project includes identifying best practices for collaborations among
universities, community colleges, and public-school districts to address the
shortage and attrition of well-prepared mathematics teachers in high-need
schools. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.