* 1950357
* REU/RET Site: Mathematics Research Experience for Pre-Service and for In-Service Teachers
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Saad El-Zanati, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 03/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The Illinois State University REU for Pre-Service and In-Service Secondary
Mathematics Teachers (ISU REU) will offer projects in discrete mathematics
during the summers of 2020, 2021, and 2022. The ISU REU is an eight-week summer
research experience for 7 preservice and 4 in-service secondary mathematics
teachers. Additional Illinois State undergraduate participants are funded by a
scholarship. Participants explore research topics in discrete mathematics with
emphasis on experimentation, formulation of research appropriate questions,
careful reasoning and justification, and clear, precise reporting. Most of the
investigated topics are in the areas of graph and hypergraph designs, affine and
projective designs, graph and hypergraph decompositions and labelings, graph
coloring, and vector space partitions. An added emphasis of the project is on
the development and implementation, by the REU participants, of a one-week
Mathematics Research Camp for 16 high school students and two teachers from the
Chicago Public School (CPS) district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU participants work
in teams of three undergraduates, one practicing teacher, and a faculty mentor
on one or more problems with a common theme. The participants are on campus for
30 hours each week with a faculty member available at all times. The main
objective of the project is to provide a genuine research opportunity for the
participants, helping them to become highly qualified teachers who can meet the
national demands for increased student proficiency and adapt to the changing
needs of our technological society. Providing teachers an authentic mathematics
research experience develops in them the habits of mind of a mathematician that
can then be encouraged and fostered in their future students. The math research
camp for CPS students is held during the sixth week of the REU and is intended
to give the REU participants an opportunity to apply what they learned during
the REU in a high school classroom setting. In the final week of the site, the
project teams devote the bulk of their energy to preparation of results for
dissemination, which includes presentations at the Joint Mathematics Meetings
and other venues. Each REU project generally produces one or more conference
presentations, and many also produce papers published in undergraduate or
professional journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.