* 1950646
* REU Site: Archaeological Investigations of Colonial Maryland
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Liza Gijanto, St Mary's College of Maryland
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2024
* USD 368,278.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and integrates research and education. The REU site is a collaboration
between St. Mary’s College of Maryland and the Maryland Archeological
Conservation Lab (MAC Lab). The goals of the REU and ongoing research is to
provide undergraduates experiences in archaeology including the latest
scientific and methodological approaches to archaeological fieldwork, artifact
curation, materials analysis, curatorial interpretation and public engagement
with scholarly content. This REU will generate original research on Maryland
history and likely refocus the dominant understanding of economic and political
dynamics in the Chesapeake in the 17th and 18th centuries. The study will
investigate whether country estates served as the socio-economic foundation of
Maryland during the colonial era by steering socio-economic relations in the
region, and that its inhabitants were not dependent on the developing urban
centers. This project moves beyond traditional studies of 17th and 18th century
sites that emphasize first settlements and the estates of important personages
such as Thomas Jefferson and George Washington by investigation the former West
Ashcom Estate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU builds upon St. Mary’s College of
Maryland’s 25 years as the state’s Public Honors College. This distinction
includes a tradition of student driven research and collaboration with faculty
in line with the mission of the REU program. The REU project will provide
comprehensive training in areas of archaeological and museum practice frequently
unavailable to undergraduates. By utilizing and instructing students in the
latest technology (e.g., drone use and photogrammetry), field methods, and
laboratory procedures, participants will gain experience in all stages of
archaeological collections generation (i.e. excavation), care (conservation and
management), and analysis (materials characterization and cataloging). Twelve
students will be recruited for an 8-week summer research program, offered every
other year for a total of three times. This alternating schedule allows for
improvement of program content and structure in light of annual assessment and
evaluations. The REU will target students early in their academic career,
especially those from underrepresented populations and community colleges
interested in gaining practical field and laboratory skills. Students will
participate in archaeological excavations at West Ashcom located at Cremona
Estate, gain training in collections management and conservation at the MAC Lab,
and carry out innovative cultural materials characterization in the SMCM Museum
Studies Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.