* 1950672
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Research for Undergraduates in Nanomaterials for Energy and Biological Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Mangilal Agarwal, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 404,997.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program, which is
focused on nanomaterials for energy and biological applications, will provide a
diverse cohort of undergraduate students with an immersive research experience
infused with professional development programming. Nanotechnology represents an
exciting and multidisciplinary topic at the forefront of discovery-based
science, and is well-suited to accommodate undergraduate researchers from a
broad range of STEM disciplines. At Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis (IUPUI), the Integrated Nanosystems Development Institute (INDI)
provides a collaborative environment where undergraduates will be challenged
with nanomaterials research projects ranging from the creation for advanced
nanosensor arrays for biological applications to new nanomaterials for specific
energy conversion and storage devices. Faculty mentors span the Schools of
Engineering &amp; Technology, Science, Medicine, and Dentistry. While project
offerings are far-reaching, they all share the central focus of developing
and/or characterizing nanomaterials. This not only showcases the breadth of
nanotechnology and its applications, but provides a unique collaborative
atmosphere that encourages broad thinking and deep learning, while enhancing
students’ communication skills, problem solving, and ability to work within a
diverse community of researchers. The program’s goal is to offer a research-
based summer program designed to instill students with the skills, confidence
and resources to pursue and excel in future advanced degree programs and
professional careers. This is accomplished by combining cutting-edge science
with professional development workshops ranging from public speaking and
scientific writing, to graduate school admissions and GRE preparation, to career
opportunities and resume building. In addition, IUPUI's Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) and Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) programs allow opportunities for REU students to interact with K-12
teachers and students from surrounding metropolitan, high-needs school
districts. These interactions have the potential to enhance RET-developed
products (learning modules) and positively impact/inspire high school students
to consider undergraduate programs in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over three
years, this REU Site will: 1) Annually recruit 10 undergraduate students, a
least 60% from underrepresented minorities from underrepresented groups, to
participate in a summer program that will jumpstart their interest in academic
research and higher learning where an emphasis will be placed on recruiting
students from universities and community colleges with limited research
opportunities and graduate programming; 2) Utilize the multidisciplinary nature
of nanomaterials to impact students from across STEM fields and develop in them
the skills needed to succeed in academic research; 3) work to establish strong
professional attributes within participants, including strong communication
skills as well as ethical behavior and societal responsibilities pertaining to
STEM research; and 4) provide exciting and relevant research topics to cultivate
a positive image for STEM and inspire future career trajectories that require
advanced degrees. The organizational structure of the proposed REU-site will aid
in meeting these goals and ensuring program success. Student recruitment and
diversity will be achieved through established partnerships with local and
national undergraduate-serving universities/community colleges with limited
research offerings, as well as institutional partnerships with historically
black and minority serving institutions. In addition, IUPUI provides a campus-
wide infrastructure for undergraduate summer, academic-year research
opportunities, and a solid foundation for graduate school planning, career
development, and fostering lifelong active learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.