* 1950051
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Integrative and Evolutionary Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Rachel Skvirsky, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 385,528.00

This REU Site award to the University of Massachusetts Boston located in Boston,
MA, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2020 to 2022. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, who are primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities or are from underrepresented
groups, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. By engaging students in exciting, mentored research experiences,
this project contributes to the development of a diverse and well-trained
science workforce. Assessment of the program will be carried out through the
online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based in the Biology
Department, this program provides intensive summer research experiences in
integrative and evolutionary biology within a collegial research community.
Students are matched with faculty mentors and engage in carefully guided
research projects, thus developing independence and confidence in scientific
problem solving while learning specific research skills. The integrative and
evolutionary biology focus emphasizes common themes across the biological
sciences and cross-disciplinary approaches in research. The individual research
projects emphasize the application of molecular, genomic, and evolutionary
approaches to a variety of critical, contemporary problems in biology. Specific
projects range from cellular and molecular to ecological studies. Research
experiences are complemented by weekly professional development activities;
highlights are workshops on the responsible conduct of science, scientific
communication, preparing for graduate studies, research careers, and data
management in science. Community-building activities include a three-day retreat
to the Nantucket Field Station and field trips in and around Boston and Boston
Harbor. The program culminates in a final Research Symposium. The program aims
to select a diverse pool of students with high potential and motivation for
research. Students apply through an online application, and selection is carried
out by a faculty committee. More information about the program is available by
visiting http://www.reu.umb.edu or by contacting the PI (Dr. Skvirsky at
rachel.skvirsky@umb.edu) or the Program Coordinator (Dr. Heske at
claudia.heske@umb.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.