* 1950153
* Recruiting, Preparing and Inducting Secondary Mathematics and Science Teachers in Northeast Georgia
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Julie Luft, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 948,437.00

This project aims to prepare and ensure the success of highly qualified
secondary mathematics and science teachers in high-need school districts, which
are important national and regional needs. To increase the number of secondary
mathematics and science teachers in Northeast Georgia, the project staff intends
to expand marketing on campus about science and mathematics teaching careers. It
will also create new recruitment approaches to increase STEM majors’ interest in
teaching as a career. To better prepare potential secondary mathematics and
science teachers, faculty involved in the teacher education program intend to
embed more STEM connections in their courses and to increase instruction on
equity and diversity. The Noyce Scholars, i.e. the students in the project, will
receive financial and other supports as they pursue degrees and teaching
certification. To support their success as new teachers, the Noyce Scholars will
participate in a hybrid induction program that combines online and in-person
activities. The induction program will provide the new teachers with ongoing
support to help them continue to strengthen their teaching knowledge and skills
during their early teaching years. The expected outcomes of this project are the
development of new recruitment pathways, field experiences in diverse settings,
a hybrid induction program, expanded collaboration among STEM and education
faculty members at the University of Georgia, and publications, presentations,
and videos about the results of this project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project at the University of Georgia includes partnerships with several colleges
within the University, as well as with Northeast Georgia high-need school
districts, including the Clarke County School District in Athens, Georgia as a
project partner. The overarching goal of this project is to produce 33 secondary
science and mathematics teachers over five years who will work in high-need
schools in Northeast Georgia. These future teachers will enter the project with
degrees in biology, chemistry, physics, or mathematics, or will earn degrees in
these subjects during their tenure in the project. The Noyce Scholars that are
STEM post-baccalaureates will seek a Master of Arts in Teaching and teacher
certification. The Noyce Scholars who are working to complete their STEM
undergraduate degrees will simultaneously pursue a graduate degree that will
result in teacher certification or a Master of Arts in Teaching. Several school
districts in Northeast Georgia will serve as preparation sites for the Noyce
Scholars. This project focuses on three key points in teacher education
(recruitment, preparation, and induction) and is guided by the cross-cutting
themes of STEM Collaboration and Diversity and Equity. The Project Directors are
faculty from the College of Education, Franklin College of Arts and Sciences,
and the College of Engineering. The Project Advisory team will consist of
University faculty and local school personnel. The research associated with this
project will focus on understanding the efficacy of the different recruitment
processes, and how the mathematics and science standards are represented in the
teacher education program and in the classrooms of newly hired Noyce Scholars.
These findings, along with information about the project, will be shared through
different venues, including University’s social media and at state and national
meetings. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.