* 1950137
* REU SITE: Interdisciplinary Micro/nano/additive-manufacturing Program Addressing Challenges Today - Next Generation (IMPACT-NG)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Kevin Walsh, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 397,608.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Program at the University of
Louisville trains a diverse cohort of interdisciplinary STEM students in the
field of Advanced Manufacturing, with a special emphasis on micro/nano-
manufacturing and additive manufacturing (i.e. 3D printing). As described in the
recent 2018 Strategy for American Leadership in Advanced Manufacturing Report to
the President of the United States, “America’s global economic dominance in the
20th century was primarily due to our nation’s creative advances in
manufacturing techniques and strategies. However, this century has seen dramatic
changes with significant declines in U.S. manufacturing productivity starting in
the 1990s and accelerating losses during the 2008 recession”. The report further
emphasizes the need to reverse that trend by encouraging programs that educate
and train our next generation of workers about new manufacturing technologies
and strategies. This REU program does exactly that through structured hands-on
micro/nano/additive training classes, personalized independent research
projects, professional faculty mentorship, student professional development, and
exposure to a wide variety of applications in the fields of health, medicine,
defense, security, energy, wearables, and manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two most disruptive technologies in the field of
Advanced Manufacturing are micro/nano-manufacturing and additive manufacturing
(i.e. 3D printing). Furthermore, with recent material and resolution advances in
3D printing, we are experiencing the convergence of the two technologies, which
promises to open up a completely new set of applications and range of products
never before thought possible. The IMPACT-NG REU program at the University of
Louisville sits squarely in that interesting space. It addresses the national
need to train the next generation of students about these converging
technologies by formally educating them through intense hands-on laboratory
experiences, followed by nine supervised weeks of personalized independent
research involving an interesting interdisciplinary set of Advanced
Manufacturing projects in the fields of health, medicine, defense, security,
energy, wearables, and manufacturing. Projects range from diagnostic lab-on-a
chip devices for the human health to advanced autonomous micro-robots for the
environment to next-generation wearables for the Internet of Things. Finally,
our program supplements their technical experiences with programs to improve
their oral/written communication skills, opportunities to learn about graduate
school, seminars about entrepreneurship, lunch meetings with technical and
government leaders, tours of industry manufacturing facilities, ethics training,
and a wide variety of organized social activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.