* 1950755
* Workshop in Measurements, Modeling and Data Analysis of the Planetary Boundary Layer; Beltsville, Maryland; Summer 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Vernon Morris, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 89,810.00

A two-week summer workshop for advanced undergraduate and graduate students
focused on atmospheric weather and air pollution processes will be held during
the summer of 2020 at the Howard University Beltsville Campus in Beltsville, MD.
Students from Howard University, University of Maryland Baltimore County,
Pennsylvania State University, the University of Texas, El Paso and other
institutions will be involved. They will work with faculty mentors in
understanding how atmospheric measurements are made and how to use those
measurements to better understand weather and air pollution. Students will also
receive instruction in how to make conference quality presentations of
scientific material. The workshop will help to train the next generation of
atmospheric scientists who will be responsible for improving short- and long-
term weather forecast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will offer tracks in
three areas of planetary boundary layer (PBL) research from which the students
will choose one as their focus: 1) instrumentation, 2) numerical modeling, 3)
in-depth analysis of an existing dataset. The three tracks will overlap in such
a way that all students will be exposed to the three research areas. In
addition, students will receive professional development training through
preparation and delivery of conference-quality poster and oral scientific
presentations. The workshop will have broader impacts in STEM fields that
address important national priorities. Under-represented students will
especially be engaged, so that they will be motivated to continue the study of
atmospheric and environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.