* 1950281
* REU Site: Imaging and Mechanics-based Projects on Accidental Cases of Trauma (IMPACT)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Ashley Weaver, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 411,291.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site: Imaging and Mechanics-
based Projects on Accidental Cases of Trauma (IMPACT) at Wake Forest University
School of Medicine (WFSM) offers multidisciplinary biomedical engineering
opportunities aimed to improve the fundamental understanding of trauma and
injury. Aligned with their vision to build a diverse and robust STEM workforce
training program, objectives emphasize training, educating, mentoring, and
inspiring underrepresented students to pursue biomedical research and careers.
Students, including those from underrepresented groups, will gain a fundamental
understanding of injury research, develop critical thinking skills to grow as
independent researchers, and be encouraged to pursue educational and career
opportunities in biomedical research. The REU research will benefit society
through development of predictive models for injury; advancements to military,
automotive, sports, and spaceflight safety; and improvements to diagnostic and
therapeutic approaches to prevent, mitigate, and treat injuries and associated
sequela. Research findings will be disseminated via video snapshots,
publications, conference abstracts, presentations, patents, and reports authored
by REU students, with the goal of promoting STEM research and careers to
hundreds of students who attend the summer symposium, visit the website, or
interface with the REU students presenting at national conferences and their
undergraduate colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the ten-week summer
REU program are to (1) Offer biomedical engineering research training to
students, and teach them medical imaging and biomechanics techniques, which they
will apply to investigate mechanistic, physiological, anatomical, and other
fundamental factors related to accidental trauma; (2) Educate students on the
research process, research ethics, dissemination of findings through publication
and presentation, and the societal implications of their research, through
hands-on training paired with seminars focusing on biomedical research and
professional development topics; (3) Cultivate mentoring relationships between
REU participants, graduate students and faculty mentors that extend beyond the
duration of the REU, providing support, guidance, and encouragement to the REU
participants as they develop into more confident and independent scientific
researchers; and (4) Foster an interest in biomedical engineering research
within underrepresented groups and students with limited opportunities for STEM
research, which will impact the career plans of the REU participants, and
hundreds of students reached through the program's widespread dissemination
campaign. Each summer, 12 REU participants will receive hands-on research
training that encourages them to make creative contributions to research
projects culminating in the dissemination of their work in the form of a podium
presentation at the end-of-summer symposium, and a poster presentation at a
national conference. The intended impact of the REU site is to impart training
on engineering research and the research process, cultivate lasting mentoring
relationships, and foster an interest in STEM research and higher education in
the REU students and the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.