* 1950460
* REU Site: Computational Methods for Understanding Music, Media, and Minds
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Ajay Anand, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2024
* USD 405,000.00

How can a computer learn to read hidden text in ancient manuscripts? How can a
computer be trained to transcribe music audio into music notation or compose a
new song? Can a computer system teach a person to better use prosody — the
musical pattern of speech – to become a more effective public speaker? These are
some of the questions that students will investigate in this Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of Rochester. Students will
explore an exciting, interdisciplinary research area that combines computer
science, electrical engineering, cognitive science, and music. Each student will
be mentored by two or more faculty members from the University's schools of
engineering, sciences, arts, and music. Other activities of the REU site include
workshops on career development; scholarship community colloquiums; graduate
school preparation; Python programming for machine learning; and music-focused
activities. The goals of this REU are to increase the diversity and broaden the
horizons of students engaged in computer science research. The themes of music,
digital media, and cognitive science will attract many students from groups
under-represented in computer science. The site welcomes students from
institutions where opportunities for interdisciplinary research combining
computational methods, arts and humanities may be limited. Students who are
already majoring in computer science will discover that the research in the
field is not limited to traditional engineering applications, but can address
questions of art, culture, and human psychology. Students with experience in
combining computer science with humanistic research are already in great demand
in industry and academia and will help define what it means to be a computer
scientist in the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Students in this REU will
engage in interdisciplinary research that combines machine learning, computer
audition, music theory, and cognitive science. These disciplines are united by
their use of a common set of formal representations and computational methods;
in particular, probabilistic models and machine learning. In the research
activities, REU students will work on a variety of topics. These include:
creating human-computer collaborative music making systems; developing
electroencephalogram (EEG) analysis methods to decode musical minds; using
machine learning and multispectral imaging to read hidden text in ancient
manuscripts; studying how prosody makes a person a convincing public speaker;
developing big data techniques to analyze audio-visual scenes; and, exploring
connections between human and computer natural language processing. The program
is strengthened by the University's recently-founded audio and music engineering
program, and the partnership with the Eastman School of Music. Although the
major objective of the REU is to encourage students to enter STEM graduate
programs, many of the projects can be expected to lead to novel and publishable
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.