* 1950984
* EAGER: Exploring the Application of Transition Zone Theory to Crystallization from Solutions
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/2019,12/31/2022
* James Martin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Part I: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystallization was one of
the earliest chemical processes studied by humans, as indicated by evidence of
the practice of salt crystallization from seawater in pre-historic times. Today,
the ability to control crystal growth is essential to technological devices such
as solar cells and lasers as well as in preparation of pharmaceutical agents.
However, the fundamental mechanisms underlying crystal growth are not fully
understood. Classical nucleation theory, which is the widely accepted model for
how crystals grow, does not fully account for experimental measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research, the PI
will continue to develop a new model of crystal growth initiated in his
laboratory for formation of crystals from molten materials. The new project
extends this theory to crystal growth from solutions by studying the arrangement
of starting materials in the solutions and the speeds at which solid crystals
form under varying conditions. Taken together, these experiments will increase
understanding of crystal growth, eventually allowing scientists to develop
better procedures for growing high-quality crystals for applications. The
project also encompasses training of students and postdoctoral researchers,
including their participation in advanced experiments at national synchrotron
facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recently developed Transition Zone Theory of
crystallization, based on the cooperativity of crystallizing units rather than a
classical particle attachment/detachment conception, accurately describes the
crystal growth rates from melts of diverse materials. This project, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials
Research, tests the hypothesis that similar entropic and cooperative influences
are responsible for controlling crystallization from solution. This work extends
the model to encompass crystallization from solution by studying the kinetics of
crystal growth across binary phase diagram systems to determine the respective
activation energy requirements to form long-range order in crystals and to
exclude solvent from the crystallizing solute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
representative systems of hydrated metal salts and aromatic organic molecules,
the project uses spectroscopic and diffraction methods to investigate 1) the
structure of saturated solutions, 2) comparative crystallization rates as a
function of solvent/solute concentration from the pure phase to eutectic
compositions, and 3) comparative rates of crystallization out of diverse
solvents for which strong solvent-solute interactions are likely to inhibit
crystallization. The long-term goal is that an extension of the Transition Zone
Theory model can provide the basis for a comprehensive mechanistic understanding
of crystal growth across a continuum of systems from pure metals to saturated
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.