* 1950563
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Algebra and Discrete Mathematics at Auburn University
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Peter Johnson, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 259,200.00

This NSF award will support 8 undergraduate students for 8 weeks at Auburn
University in each of the summers 2020-2022 to conduct research in algebra and
discrete mathematics. The program is a continuation of successful NSF funded REU
programs conducted by the proposers at Auburn in 1999, 2000, 2005-2008, and
2010-2019. Almost all of our alumni who are no longer undergraduates went to
graduate school, slightly more than half in mathematics and the others in
mathematics education, computer science, statistics and statistical sciences,
including mathematical branches of biology. This shows that our program has
positive impact on undergraduates and various mathematical disciplines. Our goal
of having half of the participants to be women, our effort in recruiting
minority students, and our focus on the American Southeast support NSF's vision
of developing a diverse workforce. In 2013-2017, a number of our recent and not-
so-recent alumni participated in the Masamu Program, NSF Award No. 1343651, by
going to Southern Africa for the annual Southern Africa Mathematical Sciences
Association conference, workshop, and Masamu Advanced Study Institute for the
purpose of fostering US-Africa collaborative research with Sub-Saharan African
mathematicians; this participation will continue. This project is jointly funded
by the Workforce Program in the Mathematical Sciences and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our REU
focuses on some of the current research problems in algebra (computational
algebra, Groebner bases) and discrete mathematics (graph theory, graphs and
hypergraphs, number theory, information and coding theory). The pattern of
activities will be as before: intensive introduction to problems and problem
areas in the first 2-3 weeks, capped by an obligatory "ice-breaker" presentation
by each participant in the 3rd week, followed by a "research institute" phase in
the remaining 5 weeks, capped by a final presentation by each participant.
During the research institute phase there will be frequent talks given by
faculty and graduate students of the department, visiting mathematicians, and
the participants themselves, but the main feature of that phase will be research
carried on by the participants, in various combinations with faculty, graduate
students, and by themselves. The purpose of the program is to give the
participants an authentic experience of mathematical research with the goal of
exciting students about going to graduate school and pursuing academic research
careers. As in past years, research results will be published in books or
refereed journals and presented at research
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.