* 1950358
* REU Site: Ithaca College REU in Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Theodore Galanthay, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 287,672.00

REU Site: Ithaca College REU in Dynamical Systems. Each summer of 2021-2023, the
Research Experience for Undergraduates at Ithaca College will support nine
undergraduate students for eight and a half weeks in professional mathematical
research in the field of dynamical systems. Participants will engage in all
aspects of the mathematics research process and will develop skills in
mathematical and computational thinking, communication, problem-solving, and
collaboration. They will be provided with graduate support and mentoring to
foster individual gains in competence and independence regarding research
activities. Mentors’ goals include harnessing students' strengths while
addressing areas that could use improvement. Specific training will be provided
in computational simulation, data visualization, mathematical typesetting, and
presentation of results. The program will target students from historically
black colleges and universities, Hispanic-serving institutions, and schools
where student access to research opportunities is limited, such as community
colleges and primarily undergraduate institutions. Participants will work in
groups of three on original research problems in three distinct areas of
dynamical systems: species interactions across a spatially segregated
environment, the dynamics of the trajectories of particle flows on surfaces of
revolution, and topological structures of attractors on fractal trees. The three
projects are designed to be accessible to undergraduates with an intermediate
background in mathematics, enabling them to explore the central questions of the
projects while encouraging them to expand their knowledge in order to make
progress. Student groups will meet daily with mentors to determine the day’s
research activities. Each week students will attend faculty talks and gather for
lunch with the mentors. Throughout the summer, REU students will also have
opportunities to network with approximately 60 Ithaca College students and their
mentors who participate in annual summer research in an array of fields at
Ithaca College. Participants will be encouraged to present their research at a
regional or national conference and will continue to be supported by their
mentors after their summer experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research mentors have created research projects in the field of dynamical
systems that are accessible to undergraduates with an intermediate background in
mathematics (multivariate calculus and introductory linear algebra are
prerequisites) to enable them to begin exploring immediately the central
questions of the projects while requiring them to deepen their knowledge in
order to make progress. The specific research topics include (1) the costly
dispersal of species through fractured environments, (2) the dynamics of
trajectories of particle flows on surfaces of revolution, and (3) the
topological structure of attractors of pruned fractal trees. The proposed REU
projects will provide students opportunities to develop computer simulations, to
visualize and analyze the associated data, and to improve on skills that are
most in demand by employers, such as analytical thinking and innovation;
creativity, originality, and initiative; technology design and programming;
critical thinking, problem-solving, and analysis; work ethic; and oral/written
communications. This REU experience will provide students with a strong
foundation for future graduate studies or employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.