* 1950872
* REU Site: Smart Cities - Intelligent, Safe, And Secure Mobility
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Brendan Morris, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 05/31/2024
* USD 404,998.00

Smart Cities are no longer a futuristic dream of science fiction writers but
they are emerging as a reality in research labs, industry, and, increasingly, in
everyday life. This REU Site project aims to educate and inspire undergraduate
researchers to address the challenges of building intelligent, safe, and secure
Smart Cities with a focus on mobility. The project will have broad impacts on
both the participants and society by advancing research in this area and by
expanding and strengthening the STEM pipeline by recruiting students from a
diverse range of backgrounds. This project’s main goals are two-fold: to
accelerate advances in Smart Cities and to point students toward research
problems that are not only interesting but also critical to society as guided by
their faculty mentors at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. These overarching
goals are also synergistic with the Nevada-South Smart Community Vision with its
stated goals of increasing public sector efficiency, facilitating economic
growth, and improving citizen quality of life through mobility/transportation,
livable communities, energy efficiency, and public safety. Through the project’s
research and co-curricular activities, we aim not only to train undergraduate
researchers in specific skills but also to broaden their world view and inspire
them to engage in research that will solve the most challenging and critical
problems facing us as a discipline and as a global
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of the project are (1) to
engage 30 undergraduates in hands-on projects that (2) advance research in Smart
Cities (including subareas of embedded systems, machine learning, control,
communications, power management, cybersecurity, and computer vision) and that
(3) lead to peer-reviewed publications while also (4) providing participants
with co-curricular training that will not only support their long-term academic
or industry careers but also (5) inspires them to be leaders in the field. At
the same time these efforts will strengthen the research infrastructure in the
electrical and computer engineering and computer science departments at the
University of Nevada, Las Vegas to bolster their long-term ability to support
and mentor undergraduate researchers. The main focus of the project, Smart
Mobility, encompasses several key research areas including ITS (Intelligent
Transportation Systems), CAVs (connected autonomous vehicles), and V2X (Vehicle-
to-Everything) communication. These areas are crucial for increasing quality of
life, reducing delays, increasing quality of service for road users, securing
critical infrastructure, and providing safer roadways and more informed
decision-making based on data. Projects include automatic detection of
accidents, communication of traffic signal status, smart parking optimizations,
infrastructure-based vehicle control, development of a compact LiDAR system,
energy storage for green mobility, novel designs of V2X transceivers, and
automatic threat detection. The 30 student participants will gain hands-on
experience in challenging, timely, and engaging projects that will advance
research in Smart Cities and, in conjunction with co-curricular training, will
provide them with tools to become leaders in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of Defense
in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.