* 1950704
* REU Site: Deep Learning Driven Cybersecurity Research in a Multidisciplinary Environment
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Chunsheng Xin, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 02/29/2024
* USD 405,000.00

This award renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Old
Dominion University. The REU Site is led by faculty from the Center for
Cybersecurity Education and Research (CCSER) at the university. CCSER includes
faculty from a large number of departments and colleges across the university
that can provide multidisciplinary research projects that focus on applying deep
learning techniques to solve a broad range of cybersecurity problems.
Cybersecurity has become an important pervasive issue to our society. Machine
learning offers unique new ways to approach cybersecurity problems and develop
more robust and secure systems and cyberinfrastructure. The REU Site will host
undergraduate students from across the nation to conduct research during the
summer. The site plans to recruit a diverse cohort of undergraduate students
each year, particularly targeting students from groups traditionally under-
represented in computing and from institutions where undergraduate research
opportunities are limited. The students will also participate in other
professional development activities that will prepare them for entering the
computing workforce and for possible futures as
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site is led by faculty mentors from
the Center for Cybersecurity Education and Research. The faculty of the Center
have significant research expertise and offer state-of-the-art facilities that
should provide compelling research experiences to undergraduates. This REU Site
offers unique learning and research opportunities for undergraduate students in
the inherently multidisciplinary cybersecurity discipline. Students will use
deep learning technologies to solve problems in areas such as mobile and network
security, malware, Internet of Things security, risk management, and human
factors. The huge and complex nature of cyber-security-related data and
information often requires modern artificial intelligence techniques such as
deep learning for processing, detection, analysis, and recognition as part of
cybersecurity research. Thus, this site has the potential to address problems
that are timely and critical to providing cybersecurity for our
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.