* 1950907
* REU Site: A Materials Science and Engineering Research Experience Focusing on Sustainability
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* David Lederman, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2024
* USD 357,439.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
site continues its mission to increase the retention and graduation rates of
underrepresented minorities in the science and engineering disciplines and to
encourage these talented students to pursue post-graduate degrees in science and
engineering. Motivated students from two-year and non-Ph.D. degree granting
institutions are exposed to interdisciplinary research projects related to
materials science and engineering. The research projects for the REU student
participants focus on the understanding of materials that could be used in
electronics, the health sciences, and other technological fields where
sustainability (energy and water conservation) is
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The objectives of the REU
site are to increase the retention and graduation rates of underrepresented
minorities in the science and engineering disciplines, especially
Hispanics/Latinos from low socio-economic backgrounds and women, and
furthermore, to encourage these talented students to pursue post-graduate
degrees in science and engineering. These goals are achieved by focusing on
students attending minority-serving two- and four-year undergraduate
institutions and identifying outstanding participants that should be encouraged
to attend graduate school at a later stage. The REU site’s approach consists of
recruiting motivated students from the targeted institutions, and then providing
them with interdisciplinary research projects related to materials science and
engineering. The research activities take place at the University of California,
Santa Cruz, under the auspices of the new Materials Science and Engineering
Initiative. Student activities include professional training, weekly group
meetings, team building activities, and the final poster symposia. The mentors
for the REU site are full-time faculty at UC Santa Cruz. The research projects
include interdisciplinary methodologies to study the fundamental properties of
materials that in the future may be used in energy-efficient electronic and
optoelectronic devices, quantum computing, and new ways of harvesting, storing,
and using renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.