* 1950787
* REU Site: Summer Research Projects in Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* David Schulz, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 344,278.00

This REU Site award to the University of Missouri, Columbia, MU, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2021-2023. It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be trained in
the program. The goal is to recruit 90% of the students from non-PhD granting
institutions. Students from underrepresented groups are encouraged to apply.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done
through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program
in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site
will train undergraduates in interdisciplinary neuroscience, with a focus on
computational methods. The program starts with a one-week boot-camp on
computational tools and technical writing. Neuroscience faculty members from the
Colleges of Arts &amp; Science, Engineering, Vet Med, and Medicine train
undergraduates in research, in projects that range across the neuroscience
spectrum, e.g., neuronal homeostasis and compensation (intracellular),
mechanisms of exocytosis (cellular), fear memory formation in amygdala (cellar
and network), cortico-basal ganglia system (network/systems), attention in human
cognition (cognitive), and neural processing of motivated behaviors
(behavioral). Additional projects are described in the program website. Faculty
select candidates from the applicant pool, with the PI and his team approving
the final selections based on best fit to the program. REU students are required
to complete the responsible conduct of research (RCR) training online via the
CITI site. The campus Office of Undergraduate Research offers a series of
educational enrichment activities to enhance student skills. REU students are
expected to attend an average of 3 hours/week of educational enrichment
activities and class discussions, including RCR. More information about the
program is available by visiting
https://engineering.missouri.edu/academics/eecs/neuro/neuro-research/neuro-nsf-
reu/&lt;br/&gt;or by contacting the PI (Dr. Satish S.Nair at nairs@missouri.edu)
or the co-PI (Dr. David Schulz at schulzd@missouri.edu).This award is supported
by the Department of Defense ASSURE program thru a partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.