* 1950297
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experience in Frontiers of Data-Driven Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Shou-Hsuan Huang, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2024
* USD 402,726.00

This funding renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
University of Houston. A team of experienced faculty mentors will guide
undergraduate students in summer research projects focused on data-driven
computing. A crucial aspect of most research is verifiable facts. In most
computer science research, data embodies the underlying facts. Data-driven
computing provides a reproducible and objective basis for drawing research
conclusions. The site will recruit a cohort of 10 students each summer with a
focus on students from non-research-intensive institutions as well as students
from groups traditionally under-represented in the computing fields. The
students will participate in other professional development that will help
prepare them for graduate studies and other careers in computing. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the intellectual focus
on data-driven computing and the strong faculty group guiding the research as
well as the state-of-the art facilities the students will use. In this REU Site,
projects involving analyzing various types of data, including medical data,
text, network packets, and biometric data, will expose the participating
undergraduate students to the core tenets of research, objectivity, and
verifiability. The objectives of the site are for students to: develop
competency in scientific research, presentation, and writing skills; produce
meaningful research results written up in a format acceptable for publication in
an appropriate conference or journal; sustain and increase their interest in
research careers after their summer research experience; become prepared to
apply to graduate school; and present and disseminate their research results
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.