* 1950282
* REU Site: Quantum and Materials Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* John Neumeier, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports a new Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site in
physics at Montana State University. The site will support eight students for
ten weeks of summer research per year in cutting edge Quantum and Materials
Physics topics. Their work will advance current research knowledge and
contribute to publishable results and presentations at scientific conferences.
Proposed REU research projects will be well defined and flexible to help ensure
completion of the research in the ten-week period. Students will gain unique
technical skills and REU experience will inform their future education and
career decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participants will be guided in
research projects closely associated with ongoing research activities in Quantum
Information Science and other Quantum Physics projects and teamed with
experienced researchers who will mentor them during the program. Weekly meetings
will be used to develop an awareness of ethical conduct in science, current
research, the importance of science in society, and career opportunities in
science and engineering. These meetings will also be used to develop
communication skills and will foster additional periods of interaction among the
REU students and MSU faculty mentors. Assessment will be exercised throughout
the program to make certain that each participant is appropriately mentored and
reaches their goals. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Physics
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.