* 1950525
* The Interplay Between Membrane Structure and Protein Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Ka Yee Lee, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

Protein-membrane interactions are key events in processes as diverse as
immunology and neurobiology, as they are the means by which information flows
across the cell membrane. Thus protein-membrane interactions are the key to
intercellular communication in multicellular organisms. While much work has been
done to define what features of membrane -binding proteins confer specificity
for their targets, the role of membrane lipid composition in these highly
precise interactions is less well understood. In this research project, the PI
will develop a comprehensive framework for understanding how the properties of
the membrane impact protein-lipid recognition events. The complexity of the
systems to be studied requires a truly multidisciplinary approach. With
techniques and ideas adapted from molecular immunology, neurobiology, membrane
physical chemistry, and interfacial X-ray scattering, this program will provide
a unique training opportunity for the next generation of interdisciplinary
scientists. Research opportunities will extend to qualified high school and
undergraduate students. Concepts in interdisciplinary science will be brought to
school children through the outreach activity “Physics with a Bang!” &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Regulation of protein-membrane interactions is governed in part by
the specificity of peripheral membrane proteins for specific lipids. However,
there appears to be a diverse landscape of parameters encoded into membranes
that is dynamically controlled by the cell, offering distinct but correlated
avenues to affect protein binding to membranes and subsequent functions. The
work will address two fundamental questions: (1) How is information embedded in
the composition and structure of lipid membranes properly recognized and
distinguished by peripheral membrane-binding proteins? and (2) What is the
relationship between membrane curvature and membrane tension in determining the
binding behavior and subsequent function of proteins traditionally thought to be
membrane curvature-sensing? For the former goal, the PI will largely focus on
proteins that recognize phosphatidylserine phospholipids in the outer leaflet.
For the latter goal, interactions with proteins that utilize amphipathic alpha
helical motifs such as those found in alpha-synuclein will be studied. It is
hypothesized that both classes of proteins employ sensitivity to differences in
membrane properties and geometry to mediate their differential recognition
properties. Thus, the primary focus of this research is to establish such
sensitivities of their binding to fundamental physiochemical membrane
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.