* 1950669
* REU Site: Multimessenger Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Joshua Faber, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2024
* USD 402,579.00

This award supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at the
Rochester Institute of Technology. The first observations of gravitational waves
by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) have opened up
the dawn of the gravitational wave astronomy age. Soon, we will see the birth of
multi-messenger astronomy, as gravitational wave and electromagnetic
observations are combined with theoretical models to give us new insights into
astrophysical phenomena that were previously unavailable to science. A key step
in moving this project forward will be the training of students that will form
the next generation of scientific leaders. This REU site, dedicated to the study
of multi-messenger astrophysics, will help groom the next generation of
scientists in the many and diverse skills that will allow them to pursue careers
in this growing field as well as many others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students in
the REU program will learn about and perform research on topics spanning
gravitational wave detection and data analysis, observational astronomy and
astrophysics, visualization of scientific data, and theoretical and numerical
modeling. Working in pairs, each supervised by a committed research mentor,
students will spend ten weeks performing research and participating in a wide
array of professional and scientific enrichment activities that include
developing presentation skills, acquiring familiarity with academic literature,
and learning to access and use workstations and supercomputers to perform
numerical simulations. In addition, the site will have a particular focus on
deaf and hard of hearing students, and will offer all of the REU students the
chance to learn American Sign Language through a specialized "bootcamp",
building community between hearing and deaf students in the program. This award
advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea through the
involvement of undergraduates in research in Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.