* 1950292
* Collaborative Research: Retention, Persistence, and Effectiveness of STEM Teachers in High-need School Districts-An Investigation of the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Hunter Close, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,235.00

This project aims to investigate how to build a reliable high-quality supply of
STEM teachers for high-need school districts. This work will contribute to the
national need for educating a robust and diverse STEM workforce. The project
will analyze whether and, if so, how scholarships provided by the Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program help to alleviate STEM teacher shortages. The project seeks
also to provide insights about how to create partnerships between local school
districts and higher education institutions. The collaborating institutions are
in two populous states, and together serve both rural and urban school districts
and cover multiple STEM disciplines. This research has the potential to raise
awareness of challenges STEM teachers face in high-need settings and to suggest
policy solutions to address these challenges. In addition, the project will
contribute to understanding the influence of the Noyce program on the STEM
teacher workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves three core
research institutions (Texas State University, Florida Atlantic University, and
The Brookings Institution) and four collaborating institutions with Noyce
programs (Texas State University, University of Texas at Arlington, University
of West Florida, and Florida International University). The project will mine
local and national databases for patterns that uncover the impact of Noyce
projects on the supply of STEM teachers in the school districts they serve. The
project seeks to raise awareness of challenges specific to STEM teachers in
high-need settings, generate evidence-based policy solutions, and promote a
better understanding of how Noyce projects influence the STEM teacher workforce.
Project research questions include: (1) What are the characteristics of STEM
teachers in high-need school districts and how have these characteristics
changed over time? (2) What factors are associated with STEM teacher retention
and persistence in high-need school districts? (3) What types of district or
school programs or policies are associated with stronger STEM workforce
measures? (4) What is the estimated impact of proximity to the Noyce program on
the STEM teacher workforce in high-need school districts? (5) Do high-need
school districts with higher proportions of Noyce graduates perform better on
student outcomes or experience smaller race- or poverty-based gaps than other
high-need school districts with fewer Noyce graduates? (6) What are the
demographics and qualifications of the STEM teacher candidate pool, and how do
they change during the training process? (7) Do different programs have varying
levels of success getting candidates through their programs? (8) How do local
high-need school districts perceive teachers coming from Noyce institutions? The
research team will use secondary data and collect primary data to examine these
questions. Secondary data will include several nationally representative surveys
on teachers, schools, school districts, and principals administered by the
National Center on Education Statistics. New primary data will be generated
through interviews at collaborating institutions with Noyce programs and through
the administration of an alumni survey. The research team will also work with
collaborating Noyce institutions to extract and analyze program data on the
selection and matriculation of teacher candidates. This Track 4: Noyce Research
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.