* 1950293
* REU Site: A Summer Experience for Undergraduates Integrating Research, Education, and Career Development in an Interdisciplinary Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Mikhail Barybin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2024
* USD 382,849.00

This REU site award to the University of Kansas, located in Lawrence, KS,
supports the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2020-2022. At this REU site, funded by the Division of Chemistry in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, Professors David R. Benson,
Mikhail V. Barybin, and colleagues engage students with interdisciplinary
chemistry research projects, ranging from chemical biology to energy and
nanoscience. Students also take part in a range of educational and professional
development activities, which include training in the responsible conduct of
research and panel discussions on the variety of career options available to
chemists. The program serves the broader chemical sciences community by
mentoring and training students from primarily undergraduate institutions across
the nation, who otherwise have limited opportunities for research experiences,
and by encouraging participation of women and members of traditionally
underrepresented groups in the sciences, including students with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants select projects from six
interdisciplinary research areas ranging from chemical biology, microfluidics
and mass spectrometry to materials chemistry, energy and nanoscience to lasers,
spectroscopy and molecular dynamics. Examples of projects include the design of
organometallic materials relevant to molecular- and opto-electronics, exploring
the role of catalyst structure in production of renewable fuels, and development
of separation-based sensors for understanding the origins of neurological
disorders. Students benefit from the highly collaborative environment provided
by the large KU chemical community, close interactions with faculty and graduate
student (or postdoctoral) mentors, state-of-the-art facilities, and
opportunities to communicate and disseminate their accomplishments in written
and oral forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.