* 1950512
* REU Site: Membrane Biochemistry and Bioinspired Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Arne Gericke, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2024
* USD 390,000.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Worcester
Polytechnic Institute, located in Worcester, MA, supports 10 students for 10
weeks of research and professional development during the summers 2020â€“2022.
This site, funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate, engages students in research projects related to membrane
chemistry and bioinspired synthesis. Students participate in all aspects of the
research process, from project conception, execution, and troubleshooting to
interpretation and dissemination of results. Students also take part in a career
development seminar series that teaches them how to plan, execute and
communicate research, and provides them with training in proper research conduct
and ethics. Speakers from industry introduce students to different career paths,
and the REU students visit the research and production facility of a major
pharmaceutical company. The career development program is rounded out by a
session devoted to graduate school admission and an overview of post-graduate
degree options. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants choose from
either single-REU student/single-faculty or multi-REU student/multi-faculty
projects from research groups with complementary expertise, which demonstrates
to the students the value of collaborative research. The projects are in the
general areas of medicinal chemistry, drug delivery systems, lipid metabolism
and characterization of membrane proteins. Upon acceptance into the program,
students meet virtually with their advisor team to get acquainted, discuss the
project goals, and develop a research plan. This allows the students to take
full ownership of their project, as well as to focus on laboratory research
immediately after the summer program begins. The summer research experience
culminates in an undergraduate research conference, and selected students have
the opportunity to present their research outcomes at the ACS Spring meeting.
Ultimately, this site trains a diverse group of students, recruited from two and
four-year institutions, to become well-rounded members of the chemical sciences
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.