* 1950720
* REU Site: SUNFEST - Summer Undergraduate Research in Sensor Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jan Van der Spiegel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 405,000.00

This three year renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
Program, SUNFEST: Summer Undergraduate Research in Sensor Technologies, at the
University of Pennsylvania, will offer a diverse cohort of undergraduate
students the opportunity to work on research projects involving sensor
technologies with the goal to develop new materials and devices. By working on a
meaningful research project of their own in a dynamic and supportive
environment, students will contribute to academically-based discovery that will
lead to better devices and systems for medical, robotics, communications,
environmental, energy, agricultural and surveillance applications. Each of these
projects deals with a scientifically important topic for advancing the
understanding of a specific sensor phenomenon that have "real-life"
applications. An important focus of this REU will be to extend these research
experiences to students at small, four-year colleges where research experiences
are less abundant and to engage students who come from groups traditionally
underrepresented in science and engineering, including first generation, low
income, underrepresented minority students and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
10 summer weeks, the University of Pennsylvania will host 10 undergraduate
students who will be involved in high quality, cutting-edge research projects
related to sensor technology. Research projects will include sensor phenomena,
materials, nano- and micro-fabricated sensors, sensing using quantum systems and
sensor applications in medicine, agriculture and robotics. To foster students'
development as future researchers, they will participate in weekly group
meetings and seminars in their labs. In addition, the REU offers professional
development activities for the student participants, include workshops on
writing proposals and technical reports, responsible conduct of research,
applying to graduate school, and effective oral
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.