* 1950500
* REU Site: Retaining Engineers through Research Entrepreneurship and Advanced Materials Training (RETREAT)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Okenwa Okoli, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 453,844.00

This REU Site: Retaining Engineers through Research Entrepreneurship and
Advanced Materials Training (RETREAT)renewal at Florida State University (FSU)
will integrate a research collaboration portal for participants in order to gain
fundamental insights about transformational student success pathways into joint
material science and entrepreneurial pursuits. This new direction builds upon
our established research training model based on past successes with research
education to help students understand fundamental science developments connected
with finding practical solution for industry needs. The REU program is a 10-week
summer program that provides research opportunities for 10 students to
participate each year. The primary goal of the program is to increase the number
of engineering students to continue post-baccalaureate and eventually enter into
engineering careers in industry or postgraduate training in engineering
research, and engage the students in activities that focus on bridging the gap
between engineering innovations and their market potential. This will be
achieved through organized coursework or seminars on Entrepreneurship delivered
by local experts, arranged by FSU’s Entrepreneurs-in-Residence and the Jim Moran
Institute at the FSU Business School. The High-Performance Materials Institute
(HPMI) will host the REU program through a combination of lab-based research and
seminars. Participating students will be actively engaged in cutting-edge
research under the direct supervision of dedicated graduate students, postdocs
and faculty mentors. The research component will focus on innovative
developmental work in multiscale-multifunctional materials. This hands-on
experience allows participants the opportunity to experience their STEM
classroom learning being manifested in the labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advent
of Generation IV composites, which are multiscale, multifunctional, inherently
sensing, morphing, etc. materials, has led to the need for recruiting more
versatile, innovative, quick, and independent thinking, hands-on, researchers to
maintain the U.S. technological lead. The goal is to impact students through
fundamental research endeavors that focus on innovative developmental work in
multiscale-multifunctional materials. The participating students will be matched
with mentors and research projects with a focus on the synthesis and processing
of multifunctional materials for device application. Weekly entrepreneurial
component seminars on Technology Entrepreneurship and Commercialization (TEC)
provided through the Jim Moran Institute (JMI) of Global Entrepreneurship in the
College of Business at FSU will enhance the understanding of the relevance of
research innovations to the business environment. This will culminate with the
EngiPreneur Competition, where students will present their strategies for
bringing their research to the marketplace. Students will travel to the Air
Force Research Lab (AFRL) at Eglin AFB, where they will attend seminars on the
role of engineered materials in the nation’s defense. They will also participate
in tours of several local facilities, including the NSF sponsored National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory and Tallahassee-based engineering
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.