* 1950816
* REU Site: Data Science and the Political Economy of International Security
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Benjamin Graham, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2023
* USD 313,376.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE). It has both scientific and societal benefits, and it integrates research
and education. Across the globe, the United States faces a growing set of
rapidly evolving, dauntingly complex political challenges. Economic issues sit
at the root of both great power conflicts. These challenges are unfolding in a
historically novel context. Against this backdrop, participants in this REU will
conduct research on the connections between economics and international
security, including both the economic incentives for military coercion and war
and the coercive uses of economic statecraft. Equipping future scholars to both
understand the economic dynamics that drive conflict and propose solutions is
critical for pursuing US national interest in an era of economic
interdependence. The Security and Political Economy (SPEC) Lab and the School of
International Relations at the University of Southern California (USC) will
provide ten undergraduates per year with an 8-week summer research experience
(SRE), where they will engage in graduate-level research on the political
economy of security and attend weekly workshops in research design, data
science, and professional development. The program will develop a new generation
of leaders who are diverse in their backgrounds and at the cutting edge in their
social science skillsets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interrelated research
projects we will undertake as part of the REU sit at the cutting edge of an
emerging academic subfield, the political economy of security. Our two major
data projects, the Global Military Activity Dataset and the Complex Economic
Interdependence Data provide essential new measures of coercive bargaining over
economic issues, allowing us to measure, in a fine-grained, disaggregated way,
both the economic and military interactions between states. A comprehensive
dataset of military exercises, patrols, and crisis mobilizations, allows us to
identify the types of military activity that signal costly preparation for
conflict, and to understand the process of coercive bargaining that often occurs
without shots actually being fired. Similarly, by precisely measuring the nature
of economic interdependence, we can then evaluate the conditions under which
interdependence provides both power and vulnerability in coercive bargaining
between states. Economic interdependence raises the costs of large-scale wars
but may, paradoxically, make small-scale military conflicts more common. Some of
these smaller-scale military conflicts are driven by issues related to the
distribution of natural resources. As they work on these projects, SRE students
are thus at the cutting edge of policy-relevant social science, using advanced
data science techniques to grapple with some of the most pressing questions
facing humanity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.