* 1950543
* REU Site: Mathematics REU at UConn
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Alexander Teplyaev, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 04/30/2024
* USD 404,760.00

The REU site will involve approximately 9 undergraduate students each year in
intensive 10-week research projects intended to advance knowledge in various
areas of mathematics and mathematical finance by producing publishable results,
conference talks and posters. In addition to research experience, the program
will give students practice in writing and presenting their work, teach them how
to use software for mathematics and expose them to a broad range of mathematical
topics through a weekly seminar series, including a workshop on applying to
graduate school. Students will be drawn primarily from non-PhD granting
institutions, and recruitment will emphasize under-represented groups in the
mathematical sciences, including women, minorities and persons who are deaf or
hard-of-hearing. A major goal is to contribute to the development of human
resources in mathematics and mathematically intensive areas by increasing the
likelihood that these students go on to graduate study and/or a career in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate research projects will be in several
areas, including geometric and functional analysis (functional inequalities on
the discrete Heisenberg group), stochastic processes and ergodicity (estimates
and asymptotic formulas for Lyapunov exponents of differential and difference
equations with small random perturbations), analysis on fractals and disordered
spaces (diffusion processes and differential equations on fractal spaces
including limit sets of groups), and applications of probability theory in
mathematical finance. Many of the specific projects involve investigating basic
examples that are expected to illuminate some larger part of the theory.
Participants will be working on research projects that have either direct
applications, e.g. in finance, or substantial connections to other areas of
science; for example a number of the fractals/disordered media projects are
about properties of differential equations on sets that can be used to model
physical structures like porous media and neural networks, and the stochastics
projects are closely linked to problems in mathematical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.