* 1950129
* Building Culturally Competent STEM Teacher Leaders for Rural, High-need Schools Near the U.S. Border with Mexico
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2026
* Eric Meyer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,499,558.00

This project aims to address the critical shortage and low retention of STEM
secondary teachers in U.S. schools, thus helping to address an important
national need. Additionally, the project aims to help overcome current
opportunity gaps in STEM experiences on the Arizona-Mexico border. The project
will support the collaboration of experienced, skilled STEM teachers with
scientists and science educators to develop educational field stations at
environmental reclamation sites. These field stations are expected to provide
opportunities for field trips and experiential learning. Thus, they have the
potential to ignite a STEM spark in the majority Latino border communities and
increase public knowledge about science. A local science center will collaborate
with the project to design and develop the field stations. Societal benefits of
this project include advancing student potential in a region characterized by
poverty, English language learner populations, low educational achievement
levels, and a lack of STEM opportunities outside of
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Arizona will
include strategic partnerships between the Rural Activation and Innovation
Network (NSF #1612555), Cochise County School District, Bisbee Science
Exploration and Research Center, Freeport McMoRan Industries, and Cochise County
Engineering, Natural Resources Division. Project goals are to provide
experienced, exemplary STEM teachers with opportunities to build their
leadership skills in three core areas: field-based instructional materials
design, coaching, and collaboration. A total of 14 exemplary multi-disciplinary
STEM teachers will be selected as Master Teaching Fellows for this six-year
project. The project addresses knowledge gaps in informal STEM for rural
communities and builds on the knowledge base about teacher collaboration. The
project tests the potential for improving STEM education through development and
use of teacher-designed field stations as teaching sites for STEM subjects. It
focuses on rural border areas that lack opportunities for informal STEM
learning. In addition, it gives Master Teaching Fellows the training and support
to become classroom coaches and to lead a professional learning community,
providing teachers the opportunity to design and lead teacher development
efforts in an underserved border area. Project evaluation will use a mixed-
methods approach including front-end, formative, and summative evaluation
phases. Dissemination plans include research publications and conference
presentations, a Sin Fronteras website that Master Teaching Fellows will design
and maintain, and local media coverage. This Track 3: Master Teaching
Fellowships project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.