* 1950861
* REU Site: Collaborative International Automotive and Autonomous Systems Engineering in Germany and the USA
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jan Bohn, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 512,285.00

This program is a continuation of a successful international Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Virginia Tech (VT) and Technische
Universitaet Darmstadt (TUD) Germany. The unifying theme for this REU program is
automotive and autonomous systems engineering. This topic provides an attractive
and excellent area for learning about research because of its importance to
everyday life and it often involves the broad integration of many fields,
including mechanical engineering, mechatronics, computer science, and
collaborative engineering. This program will leverage a strong, ongoing
partnership between VT and TUD that includes joint research, team-teaching
courses, BSME senior-year abroad programs, and dual-MSME degree programs, to
provide the REU students with firsthand experience demonstrating the
globalization of the engineering profession and the importance of collaborative
engineering. The program will also provide US industry and government agencies
with future employees that are internationally competitive, globally engaged,
and comfortable with and experienced at operating overseas; and contribute data
towards the development of a predictive model that best matches an individual
student with the most effective mode of global exposure, for the benefit of
future international REU programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this 10-week
summer program diverse and talented cohorts of undergraduates, from institutions
with limited or no research and international opportunities will be provided
with the opportunity to practice global engineering research at either VT or
TUD. This program will also enhance and broaden the interface of the
transatlantic faculty and student collaborations as the mentoring research teams
collaborate with their REU students engaged in joint transatlantic research
projects. In addition to their research, and to facilitate a transatlantic
cohort experience, the students participate in a weekly seminar series focusing
on best research practices, ethics, cultural differences, and globalization. At
the end of the summer, the students will present their work at a conference via
live two-way video between the two REU locations. An emphasis will be placed on
engaging the REU students and their home institution advisors, upon their return
home, to increase (1) their co-authorship of publications resulting from their
research activities, and (2) their pursuit of graduate
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.