* 1950797
* REU Site: The Keck Northeast Astronomy Consortium
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Seth Redfield, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 88,107.00

The Keck Northeast Astronomy Consortium (KNAC), eight predominantly
undergraduate institutions in the Northeast that each have a small but active
astronomy program, will host an REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates)
program in astronomy. Undergraduate students, drawn primarily from institutions
in the Northeast with small or non-existent astronomy programs, will engage in a
mentored research experience each summer with an astronomer at a KNAC
institution. These students will join a rich and diverse cohort of students who
remain at their own institution and students exchanged among consortium members.
This supportive network of mentors gives students sense of belonging within the
scientific community, and it greatly increases the likelihood that they will
chose scientific or technical careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KNAC is a regional
consortium of undergraduate-focused institutions whose mission is to promote
astronomical research for students at member institutions and at other small
Northeast institutions where exposure to astronomical research is limited.
Faculty at all member institutions will work closely with individual students
for 10 weeks each summer. During the subsequent fall semester, students and
faculty from all these institutions will participate in the joint Undergraduate
Research Symposium, with their results published in the Proceedings volume. KNAC
acts as a virtual astronomy department. Its regional focus makes it an
attractive option for students who can stay close to home, participate in the
Fall Symposium, and continue to cultivate the relationship with their mentor
well after the summer program has ended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.