* 1950542
* REU Site: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Research in the Marine Sciences for First-Year Students
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Nathaniel Grove, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2024
* USD 388,970.00

The University of North Carolina at Wilmington (UNCW) will host a Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site for three summers. Over the three-year
period, the program will engage a total of thirty first-year undergraduates in
marine science research experiences during a ten week internship. Research
mentors for this program will be drawn from UNCWâ€™s Department of Biology and
Marine Biology, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Earth
and Ocean Sciences, Department of Environmental Sciences and Department of
Physics and Physical Oceanography. Professional development will be offered by
the Center for the Support of Undergraduate Research and Fellowships (CSURF),
the Watson College of Education and a partnership with the DC Virgo K-8 Lab
School, and Experiencing Transformative Education through Applied Learning
(ETEAL). Student recruitment will engage students who intend to major in
biochemistry, biology, chemistry, environmental science, geology, marine
biology, oceanography, physics or closely related fields, including students who
are veterans and who are from community colleges and minority-serving colleges
and universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial research focus areas for the REU
will center around two interrelated areas of marine science: 1) Mariculture and
2) Water Quality and Contaminants in the Cape Fear River estuary. These topic
areas are related to a number of faculty research programs and will allow
encouragement of students to develop projects that cross at least two
disciplines. Within the Mariculture research focus, student projects can
integrate with a wide variety of ongoing studies, such as breeding of shellfish;
nutritive assessment of potential new food sources; water quality analyses and
mitigation; economics of alternative practices; physical conditions (flow,
salinity; other) that may constrain or enhance certain varieties under field
conditions; ecosystem impacts of mariculture practices; biology of species used
in mariculture, and spatial analysis of farm design. As part of the focus on
Water Quality and Contaminants in the Cape Fear River, students will have the
opportunity to participate in ongoing faculty research related to the use,
management and ecological stability of a large estuary, including projects
related to chemistry, biology, earth sciences, environmental sciences,
economics, and policy. Projects will be clustered among four areas: dynamics of
contaminants and relevant estuarine processes; impacts on fisheries,
mariculture, habitats; interface with management / policy and potential
influence of climate change; and marine biotechnology as it may relate to these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.