* 1950988
* Investigating the Origins of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Daniela Triadan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 297,098.00

The construction of monuments and ceremonial centers in the ancient past is
often assumed to indicate a society with complex social organization, with
established agriculture and a sedentary way of life, the use of ceramics, large
populations, and centralized power. While it is interesting to study these
complex societies, recent investigations suggest that some large constructions
were built earlier, during the transition to a sedentary way of life and the
initial use of ceramics. These observations lead to an important question of how
such early monumental constructions arose. That is, what social, cultural, and
environmental factors were at play in earlier societies that made large
collective work possible? In this project, the investigators will excavate
archaeological sites that immediately pre-date the emergence of a monumental
ceremonial center to examine subsistence strategies, technology, social
organization, and cultural affinities in these earlier groups. The work will
advance fundamental knowledge about human ability to adapt to a wide range of
environments. The project supports student training and mentoring from the
undergraduate through the postdoctoral level, international research and
teaching collaborations, and several public science outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will examine the transition
from the preceramic period to the ceramic period in a lowland setting where
remains of the late preceramic period are virtually absent and where burials
dating to this period are extremely rare. The teamâ€™s previous excavations
revealed four burials without any associated ceramics. Radiocarbon dating
provided dates that were earlier than the ceramic-bearing contexts known at this
site when a ceremonial complex was constructed. The excavation of more
preceramic features will provide an unprecedented opportunity to examine social
conditions leading to this remarkable societal transformation. These
investigations will provide critical information on a longstanding question
about the origins of early lowland ceramics and their users, as well as
continuity and change from preceramic technologies and material culture to those
of the ceramic period. The data will provide information on the level of maize
cultivation, which may have made drastic societal development possible.
Moreover, this study will contribute to the broader anthropological question of
human adaptation to lowland environments before the development of full-scale
agriculture, as well as the interactions among groups practicing different
subsistence strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.