* 1950179
* Preparing Transformational Computer Science Teachers for High-need Urban Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2026
* Audrey Trainor, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2026
* USD 715,373.00

This project aims to serve the national need for a greater number of teachers
licensed to teach computer science and students with disabilities. The project
proposes to prepare STEM undergraduate majors and professionals interested in a
second career to become highly qualified secondary teachers of computer science,
as well as teachers of students identified as having disabilities. The project
will provide scholarships to students in the fourth year of their undergraduate
STEM degree as well as during a one-year Master of Arts program. This program
will prepare the Scholars for dual certification in both computer science
education and special education, as they earn a Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT)
degree. This novel teacher preparation program will work with established
partnerships with New York City schools to place these new, highly qualified
teachers into high need schools and support them during their first year of
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project at New York University includes a
partnership with the New York City Public Schools. Project goals include: 1)
generating knowledge about recruiting STEM majors and professionals into
teaching computer science for all students, and particularly those students
identified as having disabilities; 2) increasing access to computer science
instruction for all secondary students in New York City; and 3) supporting and
promoting teacher induction and retention in computer science teaching. The
project is designed to prepare thirty new teachers, in two cohorts. Beyond
informational outreach, recruitment activities will also include free
extracurricular computer science workshops with public school middle school
students where STEM undergraduates and professionals will have opportunities to
engage with students and experience pedagogical strategies supported in MAT
program. The project will bring together coursework addressing general issues of
pedagogy, computer science education, and special education, as well as clinical
experiences in New York City public schools to prepare these Scholars to support
secondary learners in the diverse urban settings. Noyce Scholars will also
receive mentoring in their first year of teaching, in the form of observations
from project team members, as well as two paid professional development
workshops designed to support first year secondary teachers in computer science
and special education. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.