* 1950796
* REU Site: Data-driven Materials Design
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Erik Einarsson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/29/2024
* USD 339,711.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The objective of this REU Site is to train a diverse
group of early undergraduate students in the interdisciplinary skills necessary
to employ a data-driven approach to materials design. REU students are learning
to use advanced data analytics, such as machine learning and artificial
intelligence, to efficiently identify trends in materials properties that can be
used to predict the characteristics of undiscovered materials. This relatively
new materials informatics approach promises to enhance efficiency and
productivity, but also requires specialized training. This Site provides a
comprehensive summer training experience that includes: introductory cross-
training in data and materials science fundamentals, hands-on research training,
formal educational seminars, and workshops. The Site focuses on providing these
opportunities to students that typically do not have exposure to extensive
scientific resources. All participants are prepared for careers in materials
science in industry, academia, and national laboratories through customized
professional development and networking opportunities in addition to extensive
support and guidance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The
increasing reliance on big data to guide innovation necessitates a change in the
way that materials science students are trained. It has become essential for
students to have experience in data-driven approaches and familiarity with the
techniques that are now common to the field, yet these opportunities are very
limited for undergraduates. This Site represents an entry point into this new
approach to training, and prepares students for the emerging field of materials
informatics. Training will include an introduction to essential topics such as
material science applications, an introduction to data driven approaches, an
introduction to machine learning with Python, and laboratory skill and safety
training. All research topics are inherently interdisciplinary since the
students are paired with primary and secondary mentors that specialize in
different approaches to materials science. Scientific topics explored by the
students can be divided into four categories, each with an inherent materials
informatics component: (1) materials discovery and design; (2) high-throughput
exploration; (3) quantitative structureâ€“property relations; and (4) exploring
and linking length scales. Taken together, these topics address a societal need
for significant acceleration of new materials design and discovery, emergent
properties and processing strategies. Reducing the cost and time it takes to
discover and develop new materials and technologies can positively impact our
economy, our environment, and our future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.