* 1950170
* OPUS: CRS Synthesis to add dissolved organic matter to the trophic paradigm: the importance of water transparency in structuring pelagic ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Craig Williamson, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 198,270.00

Water of higher clarity adds economic, recreational, and other value to lake
ecosystems and the services they provide. Yet, lakes worldwide are threatened
with decreasing clarity due not only to increased nutrient inputs and subsequent
algal growth, but also due to increased dissolved organic matter inputs. Some of
the compounds produced during the decomposition of organic matter, which is
primarily dead plant material, dissolve in water and turn lake water brown. This
process is similar to how a steeping tea bag discolors a clear cup of hot water.
Increases in rainfall, which are pronounced in some areas, are increasing the
flow of dissolved organic matter into lakes from surrounding land, significantly
decreasing water clarity and quality. Dissolved organic matter strongly and
selectively absorbs ultraviolet radiation, which would otherwise disinfect
surface waters by killing harmful human and wildlife pathogens. Dissolved
organic matter also absorbs wavelengths of light that are used by
photosynthesis, which is the only source of oxygen in the deep waters of lakes.
Decreasing water clarity thus results in the degradation of water quality, a
greater risk of pathogen survival in surface waters, and depletion of the oxygen
in deeper waters, leading to “dead zones” like those in Lake Erie and the Gulf
of Mexico. Through a synthesis of data from over 400 lakes that have been
monitored over multiple decades, this project will provide new insights into how
dissolved organic matter influences long-term changes in water clarity, and the
resulting consequences for lake ecosystems. The effects of dissolved organic
matter will be integrated into the conventional paradigm for water clarity, so
that models can more accurately predict future consequences of dissolved organic
matter inputs for lake ecosystems and the services they provide. The products of
this research will be: (1) a unique, comprehensive, fully annotated, and
publicly available lake database, (2) a suite of synthesis papers that integrate
dissolved organic matter (DOM) and UV into a lake ecosystem model, (3) a broader
conceptual model for research and educational purposes, and (4) educational and
public outreach for diverse audiences, including undergraduates, lake
association members, lake managers, and policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
strong relationship between nutrients and chlorophyll and the classification of
lakes along a single axis of lake productivity has been the most central
paradigm in lake ecology for decades. However, one of the major changes in lakes
in recent decades is up to a doubling or more of DOM, leading to browning of
many inland waters in North America, Europe, and beyond. Recent increases in
precipitation extremes (drought to flood), and associated browning of lakes,
require extension of the traditional paradigm to include DOM and the optical
properties of lakes. This project will synthesize the most geographically
extensive and site intensive database in existence on ultraviolet radiation
(UV), optical properties, and associated limnological survey and experimental
data on hundreds of lakes worldwide, and a set of three core study lakes. The
synthesis will add a new dimension to the current trophic paradigm for
lakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.