* 1950831
* REU Site: Solar and Heliospheric Physics at University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Amy Winebarger, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2025
* USD 658,293.00

The Center for Space Plasma and Aeronomic Research (CSPAR) and the Department of
Space Science at the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) will partner with
mentors from the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) to run a solar and
heliospheric physics REU program. This REU site will offer a 10 week summer
experience to undergraduate students that are primarily from institutions that
do not have many opportunities for undergraduate research. The recruitment
strategy for this REU site will focus on students in their first and second year
of college, and as well as students from geographically close historically black
colleges and universities (HBCUs). Participants will start the program with an
introductory workshop to give background knowledge on solar physics and computer
programming. The students will work on an independent research project,
receiving mentoring and professional development throughout the summer
experience. The conclusion of the program will include a poster presentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU siteâ€™s objectives include increasing the
participation of women, underrepresented minorities, and students early in their
undergraduate education. Research projects will include topics such as coronal
heating, 11-year cycle, coronal mass injections and solar flares, solar wind,
particle acceleration, and coupling of solar wind-magnetosphere-ionosphere.
Professional development activities include solar physics background, computer
programing, research ethics, graduate school applications, interview tips,
resume/CV advice, GRE preparation, poster preparation and how to write and
submit and abstract to a conference. This REU site is co-funded by the Solar
terrestrial program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.