* 1950054
* Incidental learning across statistically-structured input in active tasks
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Lori Holt, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2023
* USD 824,987.00

The natural world is rich with patterns, and organisms learn these patterns
through passive exposure. This presents a powerful and flexible means of
learning about the world that does not involve explicit instruction that appears
to play an important role in spoken language learning. However, not all patterns
can be learned by passive exposure alone. This research project investigates how
learning across patterns of experience proceeds when passive exposure is
insufficient to drive learning and yet there is no explicit instruction. The
prior work that this project builds on suggests that real-world statistical
learning may capitalize on input regularities’ global temporal alignment with
behaviorally-relevant actions and events to hasten learning. Learning across
statistical regularities can be incidental, and not overtly driven by an
intention to learn, while still taking place in the context of an active task
that generates valuable predictions and rewarding outcomes. This perspective may
be transformative in how we think about human learning of statistically-
structured input in complex, naturalistic environments. Findings from this
research will inform the design of learning interventions that capitalize on
these learning principles to be useful for diverse communities of learners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will advance a new research
approach, empirical tests of mechanistic predictions, and complementary
information from behavior, electrophysiology and functional magnetic resonance
imaging to understand statistical learning under more natural circumstances
involving interplay among active behavior, multimodal input, selective
attention, and statistical input regularities. It pursues the twin hypotheses
that (1) active engagement in a rich, environment can support statistical
learning by virtue of loose temporal alignment of statistically-structured input
with behaviorally-relevant actions, objects, and events and (2) that this
incidental statistical learning drives the emergence of selective attention to
behaviorally relevant regularities, creating a virtuous cycle that promotes
later learning. The team will also conduct several outreach activities including
collecting data from non-university samples via a “data-truck” and providing
science of learning outreach to high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.