* 1950998
* SBIR Phase II:  Anti-Tumor Immune Redirectors (AIRs) for cancer treatment
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Joshua Wang, VERIMMUNE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,355,844.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a new class of oncology
therapeutics termed “Anti-tumor Immune Redirectors (AIR)”. AIRs redirect the
body’s pre-existing immune response obtained through previous childhood
vaccination or past infections to target tumor cells for cancer eradication.
Globally, cancer continues to be one of the top five leading causes of death,
resulting in a high unmet need for novel therapies and treatments. Blockade of
immune checkpoint inhibitor drugs have emerged as a potent solution with
demonstrated clinical benefits. However, such treatments are expensive and
toxic. Furthermore, many patients are ineligible, do not respond, or acquired
resistance to such drugs due to the absence of an anti-tumor response. In
contrast, our strategy tailors the patient’s tumor to become susceptible toward
pre-existing anti-pathogenic or childhood vaccine immunity. Our approach will
change or extend treatment opportunities for many cancer patients. This also
circumvents the risky and costly R&amp;D challenges in identifying and/or
producing potent immune responses against cancer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project advances the
development of a lead AIR that could redirect different viral immune memory
responses toward tumors in vitro, and in vivo with mouse tumor models. Phase II
will advance the development: (1) Advanced optimization coupled with
characterization studies will be performed on our current product and
purification methods to further define a consistent process compatible with
scaled manufacturing; (2) we will initiate more in-depth non-clinical safety and
toxicology studies to ensure the AIR solution achieves the required safety
attributes; and (3) we will perform additional in vivo studies in animal tumor
models more aligned with the initial target application. The proposed approach
potentially serves as an “off the shelf” immunotherapy based on the patient’s
individual health/vaccine history, thereby extending additional treatment
opportunities to a broader cancer patient population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.