* 1950683
* REU Site: Leveraging The Learning Sciences &amp; Technologies to Enhance Education and Learning in Secondary Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Neil Heffernan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2024
* USD 320,639.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the Worcester
Polytechnic Institute will provide a ten-week summer undergraduate research
experience in learning sciences and technologies, with a focus on understanding
achievement gaps among secondary school students. It will host three cohorts of
eight students each summer, engaging 24 unique students. The increased use of
educational technology has increased the amount of educational data available to
researchers. These data have higher external validity than short-term laboratory
studies, supporting the potential for making stronger conclusions about
effective instructional practices. These data contain knowledge that could be
analyzed to enhance understanding of how students best learn and how best to
teach them. This REU will enable young researchers to analyze this data and
contribute to understanding high-impact teaching practices, how to group
learners for instruction, and what type of feedback or remediation is most
applicable to a learner. These research activities will provide new information
about the effectiveness of both technological and traditional educational
interventions for a variety of learners in secondary school classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU undergraduates will experiment with deep learning
approaches to analyze data from secondary school classrooms that use learning
technologies. The goal will be to interpret and understand classroom activities
that lead to meaningful student learning. Undergraduate researchers will use
data collected by ASSISTments and Graspable Math. These are learning
environments for mathematics developed by researchers at Worcester Polytechnic
Institute and deployed in several schools throughout the United States.
Undergraduates will analyze data using educational data mining techniques, such
as student modeling to better estimate intervention impacts and clustering to
determine which students are most similar. In addition, they will use E-TRIALS,
a platform that simplifies running A/B experiments, to test educational
interventions such as new hints or video instruction developed by teachers. To
analyze classroom engagement, they will use ACORN, a deep-learning technology
that assesses classroom dynamics by automatically monitoring student gaze and
learner engagement. This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources, which supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. By funding REU sites, the program supports development of the next
generation of STEM professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.