* 1950025
* OPUS: CRS Predicting establishment, competitive interactions, and mortality in desert shrub populations based on spatial structure and intrinsic water-use efficiencies
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* James Ehleringer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 01/31/2023
* USD 266,873.00

Over the past four decades, changes in both temperature and precipitation within
the Mojave Desert of the western United States have impacted shrubs living in
this desert environment. Temperatures are increasingly warmer and the region is
getting progressively drier. In this study, 39 years of drought-deciduous shrub
population and physiological observations (some 265,000 data points) will be
synthesized to advance our understanding of how the combination of drought and
El Ni√±o events along with differences in shrub physiologies have shaped plant
population structure in western deserts. Such information is important for land
managers, resource specialists, and ecologists as they seek to better manage
extensive arid regions of the western United States and to understand how future
changes in climate will impact these arid land ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concepts synthesized in this study use data that has
already been collected and will link spatial patterns of plant establishment and
survival with environmental variables and intrinsic differences in the
efficiency of water use by different desert shrub species. This research aims to
understand how plant-plant and plant-environment interactions structure desert
plant populations and how changes in climate affect these patterns. The focus of
the synthesis is on observations leading to predictive constructs at three key
life-history stages when population structure is affected: establishment,
competition among adult individuals, and population decline under abrupt and
extreme droughts. This synthesis will also generate predictions about how
ecophysiological aspects of population structure will change if future climate
trends follow the wet-dry pattern of the last 39 years or if the long term wet-
dry cycles of the last century return. This synthesis will provide a framework
for understanding how variation in plant physiology among desert plants operate
at both the population and interspecific levels to affect structure of desert
plant populations and how these patterns will be affected by the environmental
variability already occurring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.