* 1950928
* REU Site: Pure and Applied Mathematics at UC Davis
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Gregory Kuperberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 04/30/2024
* USD 388,798.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program "Pure and Applied
Mathematics at UC Davis" hosted by the Department of Mathematics at UC Davis
will provide early training in mathematics research for leaders in the
mathematical sciences. The program will broadly cover the research areas of the
mathematics department, including both pure and applied mathematics. Recruitment
of women, underrepresented minorities, and students with disadvantaged
backgrounds will be emphasized. The program will accept 12 students each year,
who will work under the supervision of UC Davis mathematics faculty, and in
collaboration with postdoctoral fellows and graduate students. The research
training will include a lecture on ethics in the mathematical sciences, and
field trips to sites in the Bay Area. Students will be encouraged present their
results at mathematics conferences and local venues after the summer program.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;On a multi-year basis, the UC Davis Math REU will cover
most of the research areas of the mathematics department. These areas include
mathematical biology, probability, geometry/topology, algebra, combinatorics,
partial differential equations, applied mathematics, and quantum mathematics.
Four to six projects will be offered every year with at least two students
recruited to each project, for a total of 12 students per year. The program will
be evaluated with formative and summative assessments, and program organizers
will stay in contact with students after each summer
ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.