* 1950702
* REU Site: Climate and Atmospheric Science Research Experience in the Center for Climate and Aerosol Research at Portland State University
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrew Rice, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 456,141.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site supports a ten-week
intensive summer program for undergraduates to conduct atmospheric and climate
science research through the Portland State University (PSU) Center for Climate
and Aerosol Research (CCAR). The program will support ten undergraduate scholars
per year to work with an interdisciplinary team of faculty mentors towards the
goal of investing in a sustained and diverse atmospheric science research
community. The REU site recruits and is designed to be particularly effective
for rural Northwest and Native American students by focusing on geoscience and
incorporating elements of a practical environmental orientation, outdoor field
work, and assessment of student participants through a range of deliverables.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of the program are to: (1) train a
diverse cohort of students from universities and colleges across Oregon &amp;
Washington in atmospheric science research; recruiting efforts will focus on
students currently underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields including Native Americans and students from rural
areas with limited or no opportunities for research experience at their own
colleges and universities, and on those students for which such experience would
come with significant financial or personal burdens; (2) provide in-depth
education to participating students in atmospheric and climate science,
opportunities not typically available to undergraduates; (3) teach skills
transferable across STEM research fields (e.g., scientific inquiry, hypothesis
testing, information literacy, critical thinking data analysis, computer
programming, research instrumentation, laboratory and field research science,
oral and written communication); (4) mentor students in independent
interdisciplinary research, guided by PSU atmospheric science
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successfully addressing the four REU site goals
will promote retention in STEM disciplines while increasing the diversity of
scientific researchers. Through partnerships with our regional community
colleges and rural four-year institutions and leveraging significant
institutional resources at PSU, the REU site will recruit a strong and diverse
pool of scholars with a regional reach. Once at PSU, the program aims to further
foster a sense of belonging (identity) for rural, Native American and other
underrepresented students in STEM fields throughout the REU experience. Training
undergraduate research scientists has direct benefit to REU scholars and will
support their development as researchers in these fields as select students
pursue careers in climate and atmospheric sciences. The technical laboratory,
field and computational training they receive and the professional development
provided through the REU for all participants will be applicable to a range of
STEM disciplines regardless of their final career trajectories. Finally, this
REU site will impact and elevate research in climate and atmospheric science at
PSU as a whole and will help improve accessibility, quality, and diversity of
research experiences for undergraduates. Through presentations and a planned
publication, the REU site will share the program and its evaluation with other
geophysical undergraduate-based research programs across the United States and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.