* 1950902
* Bayesian Nonparametric Modeling and Inference Methods for Point Processes
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Athanasios Kottas, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 289,906.00

This research project will develop flexible statistical models and corresponding
inference methods for different classes of point processes. The theory of point
processes was developed to study the distribution of events that occur at random
times and/or spatial locations. This project will advance statistical
methodology for a range of problems involving data that arise from point
processes. A key objective will be to increase the scope of several classes of
point processes by developing statistical models that relax the restrictive
assumptions of state-of-the-art methods. Point process methods are important for
the field of statistics and have applications in a variety of areas, including
climatology, criminology, finance, and seismology. The new models will be
applied to important societal problems including the study of clustering
patterns for different types of crime and the analysis of earthquake
occurrences. To facilitate use of the methods by practitioners and researchers
from other fields, publicly available software will be developed for
implementing several of the statistical models. The project also will create
educational opportunities for graduate students and seek to increase the
participation of women and underrepresented groups in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop a general
model-based framework for point processes over time or space, including Poisson
processes and Hawkes processes. The modeling framework involves structured
mixture representations for point process intensities that achieve a balance
between model flexibility and computational efficiency in implementation of
statistical inference and prediction. The project will develop tractable
inference methods for spatial point processes observed over irregular domains;
for instance, city, state, or country boundaries. It also will increase the
inferential scope for marked Hawkes processes, a versatile class of stochastic
point process models that have been applied in diverse areas, including
earthquake modeling, finance, criminology, and analysis of social networks. Even
though the theory for Hawkes processes is well studied, statistical inference
methods are relatively less developed, especially under general settings that
allow for non-standard data features and for full uncertainty quantification.
The research project has a substantial analytic component with regards to
methodological development for the various point process models, as well as a
significant computational component with regards to achieving efficient model
fitting that can be scaled to large amounts of data. The practical utility of
the new methods will be investigated with several simulation studies and through
substantive applications involving analysis of earthquake and crime
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.