* 1950038
* Equipping Future STEM Teachers for Nashville Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2026
* Brandon Banes, David Lipscomb University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 02/28/2026
* USD 680,348.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality STEM
teachers. It will do so by recruiting undergraduate STEM majors into STEM
teaching careers in biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics and supporting
them as they become certified teachers. Recruiting activities seek to include
community college transfer students and feature opportunities to learn about
high-need schools through outreach activities. The project intends to help
students develop strategies to succeed as teachers in high-need schools and to
have a long-term career in teaching. To accomplish this goal, the project will
provide students with multiple supervised teaching experiences in high need
schools, as well as providing ongoing support from mentor teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at David Lipscomb University includes a
formal partnership with Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools. The project seeks
to support 24 undergraduates minoring in teacher education and majoring in
biology, chemistry, civil engineering, electrical engineering, mathematics,
mechanical engineering, or physics. The financial and other supports will enable
these Scholars to achieve certification and become highly qualified STEM
teachers in high-need schools. Project activities include informal gatherings
and outreach events, an annual week-long summer program, and a new seminar
series focused on culturally responsive teaching. These activities are intended
to support the development of a professional learning community of Scholars.
Focused tutoring will be available to Scholars to ensure adequate preparation
for licensure examinations. Evaluation of the project’s success will leverage
state teacher quality metrics as well as qualitative data such as field notes,
document analysis, and interviews regarding the use of culturally responsive
teaching practices. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.