* 1950769
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biology at the Ohio State University
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Anna Dobritsa, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 460,472.00

This REU Site award to The Ohio State University, located in Columbus, OH, will
support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2020-2022. It is anticipated that a total of 36 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an underrepresented group, will be
trained in the program. Applications from students with disabilities, including
Deaf/Hard of Hearing students, are strongly encouraged. Participation in
research will be facilitated by an extensive system of scientific interpreters
and resources currently in place at Ohio State. Students will learn how research
is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Assessment of the program will be done thru the online SALG URSSA
tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site at The Ohio State University
brings together 36 faculty mentors from across the molecular life sciences who
all share an interest in using model organisms and molecular tools to address
critical biological questions across the evolutionary spectrum. The centerpiece
of the program is the research experience, with students working on individual
projects under the supervison of an individual faculty mentor. Mentors will be
matched to best align with the student's self-identified research interests and
experience, as stated on their application prior to joining the program. Program
mentors are experts in diverse areas of biology, from Microbiology faculty
studying lipid metabolic pathways in microbes, to Molecular Genetics faculty
studying oscillatory regulation of gene expression in animal models, to
Biochemistry faculty studying mechanisms of essential RNA processing enzymes.
Program faculty have all been selected because of their demonstrated commitment
to high-quality mentoring and undergraduate research. The research experience
will be complemented with a set of supporting program activities to enhance
students' skills in quantitative reasoning, scientific communication, and
responsible conduct of research, all of which are designed to prepare the
student for a successful future career in biological research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information about the program is available by
visiting https://molgen.osu.edu/research-experience-undergraduates, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Jane Jackman at mgreu@osu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.