* 1950488
* Concurrent Multiscale Moving-Window Scheme for Shock Wave Interaction with Material Microstructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Vinamra Agrawal, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 408,164.00

Shock waves occur in a material when it is subjected to extreme pressure and
temperature changes in a very short time. This is commonly observed in
applications when a material is subjected to high speed impact. The need to
design advanced materials resistant to shock damage has driven the research into
the material's response to shock waves from the nano- and micro-meter scales to
the large application scale. This grant, co-funded by the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), supports fundamental research into the
multiscale response of the material when subjected to shock loading. It will
provide new knowledge on how shock waves interact with material features at the
micro and nano scales leading to deformation and failure at the macroscale. The
research will accelerate the design of advanced materials with superior shock
resistant properties for n aerospace, automotive, infrastructure and defense
industries. Additionally, the project will provide opportunities to educate and
train graduate and undergraduate students in the interdisciplinary areas of
materials science, computational mechanics, and applied physics and mathematics
through research in the laboratory. The PI will also engage in outreach
activities related to science and engineering to K-12 students through
university programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shock response of the material is
multiscale in nature, introducing defects such as voids and dislocations at the
microscale and cracks and plastic deformation at the macroscale. This work
develops a concurrent multiscale method, with coexisting atomistic and continuum
domains, to study shock wave propagation through a material and its interaction
with material microstructure. State of the art concurrent multiscale schemes are
unable to capture high speed dynamic processes such as shock waves and moving
atomistic regions. The framework uses a control volume based moving-window
scheme, where the atomistic domain follows a moving shock wave, to circumvent
issues with current state of the art schemes. Using this new framework, the work
will study microstructural evolution, shock induced defect generation, and the
influence of microstructural features such as grain boundaries on shock
resistance properties, e.g., spall strength. The framework will be
systematically validated against existing experimental data on shock induced
defect generation available in the literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.