* 1950295
* Building Capacity for a Preservice STEM Teacher Pipeline in Hawaii
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Pauline Chinn, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 04/30/2022
* USD 62,163.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality teachers
for high-need school districts in Hawaii. As demonstrated by data provided by
the State of Hawaii Department of Education, Hawaii has a strong need for
qualified STEM teachers. This project intends to build capacity for developing a
teaching certification program that will prepare participants to serve in
island-based, rural, high-need school districts. Specifically, it aims to
develop a new community college preservice teacher education program for STEM
professionals wishing to change careers, as well as to promote transfer of
community college STEM majors into an existing university-based preservice
teacher education program. The project also focuses on building capacity for
future recruitment and retention that will allow successful statewide alliances
to be scaled up for broader impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
University of Hawaii Maui College includes partnerships with the Hawaii State
Department of Education, the University of Hawaii at Manoa - College of
Education, the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources, and community
experts. The overall goal of the project is to create a community college
preservice teacher education program that will increase the number of K-12
teachers by serving career-changing STEM professionals and promoting transfer of
STEM undergraduates into a university-based teacher education program. These new
K-12 teachers will be prepared to serve in high-need schools in which a majority
of the students are Native Hawaiian, Filipino, or other underrepresented
minorities. The project intends to convene collaborators at two Maui Noyce
Summits to explore with major stakeholders the gaps in the Maui STEM-teacher
pipeline and to seek their assistance in preparing a broad and diverse STEM K-12
teacher pool for high-need schools. The project also seeks to establish
baselines of performance metrics that could be used to monitor the effectiveness
and efficiency of filling the STEM teaching gap areas and for scaling up
recruitment and retention of Native Hawaiians, Filipinos, and other
underrepresented minorities. The project draws from the Grown-Your-Own program’s
theory that proposes to build a pool of teacher candidates from the school
community. These teachers will be more likely to reflect the racial, ethnic, and
economic characteristics of the students, and will be more likely to stay in the
district for a longer period of time. This theory is supported by research
demonstrating that teachers often prefer to teach in geographic locations that
are similar to the places where they grew up and where they share similar
backgrounds as the students. This Capacity Building project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professional to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.