* 1950746
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel Method for Atmospheric Correction of Earth Observation Satellite Data
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,07/31/2022
* David Groeneveld, ADVANCED REMOTE SENSING, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2022
* USD 732,948.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to improve satellite-based agricultural imaging to
allow monitoring and managing of broad regions for enhanced sustainability and
food security. The proposed algorithms address noise in satellite data that is
caused by the atmosphere. The method can be used for many types of satellites,
providing advantages in efforts to reduce weight and space to control launch
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to address a
major issue in modern remote sensing, atmospherically induced noise in the data.
EOS systems look through the atmosphere that distorts spectral relationships of
reflectance (ratio of EOS-measured reflected light to the sunlight that would be
received were there no atmosphere). The variable atmosphere distorts the data
variably so must be corrected to accurately interpret highly useful measures
such as agricultural production/yield, photosynthesis, plant water use, plant
disease/insect infestations, etc., rendering EOS data unreliable unless
corrected. The technical tasks are to: (1) study European Space Agency Sentinel
2 EOS data, (2) migrate the method to NASA/USGS Landsat 8, (3) adapt the method
for calibration of the several decades-long Landsat Multispectral Scanner record
that cannot otherwise be corrected to surface reflectance, (4) develop a
calibration tool for multiple commercial EOS, and (5) develop a fully integrated
software system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.