* 1950924
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Integrating Computation and Experiment to Create Revolutionary Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 326,450.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
site is focused on training the next generation of scientists and engineers with
expertise at the intersection of materials science and data analytics. With the
goal of providing cutting-edge research to students with limited research
opportunities at their home institutions, students are actively recruited from
community colleges and primarily undergraduate institutions. Training is
occurring through formal instruction, hands-on research, site visits to data-
intensive local laboratories and businesses, and preparing and delivering public
presentations of research results. The research projects focus on developing
transformative structural and electronic materials that enable new technologies
and applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The REU site
addresses the NSF Big Idea concerning “Harnessing the Data Revolution” within
the context of structural and electronic materials. Students are gaining
experience in the generation, curation, and analysis of very large materials
science data-sets. Across the structural and electronic materials space research
projects are quite diverse, ranging from weldability of high entropy alloys to
data-driven additive manufacturing to piezoelectric and thermoelectric material
discovery. The research projects are inherently interdisciplinary, involving
pairs of faculty members from different departments and their affiliated
graduate students. Many of these projects involve strong collaborations with
national laboratory and associated user facilities or industry partners. Beyond
technical skills development, significant effort is devoted to enhancing
students’ professional skills and self-identity as a scientist. Together, these
training objectives culminate in the final week with preparing a poster and
associated presentation for a national conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.