* 1950759
* Collaborative Research: OPUS: CRS: A Synthetic View of Evolutionary Heterogeneity and the Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jeremy Brown, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 112,984.00

The advent of inexpensive genome-scale DNA sequencing has led to major changes
in the study of evolutionary history. Researchers now routinely assemble and
analyze enormous genetic datasets in an effort to robustly resolve the patterns
of evolutionary relatedness that together make up the global tree of life. While
this shift has resulted in dramatic improvements in humanity’s understanding of
evolutionary history, it brings important challenges. Chief among these is that
evolution acts in heterogeneous ways across different regions of the genome and
across the tree of life. This heterogeneity can be strong enough to frustrate
analyses and, as a result, has led to a growing number of studies that arrive at
fundamentally conflicting conclusions about evolutionary history, despite
sampling large fractions of the genome and analyzing these with the field’s best
available methods. This project will detect and quantify patterns of
evolutionary heterogeneity in a large collection of genome-scale empirical
datasets, mitigate the impacts of this heterogeneity, and develop a more
accurate understanding of evolutionary history in the
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will accomplish these goals by
integrating a series of statistical tools that they have previously developed
into a cohesive analytical strategy that can identify, explain, and resolve
conflicting results. These tools include Bayesian techniques for measuring the
fit between evolutionary models and data, as well as unbounded measures of
statistical support. By integrating these tools and deploying them across a
large collection of empirical datasets, the research team will develop a
synthetic understanding of the most important drivers of evolutionary
heterogeneity and conflicting results across the tree of life. This synthesis
will lead to better techniques for identifying and mitigating the effects of
evolutionary heterogeneity in massive datasets, enabling the field to develop a
more accurate understanding of the history of life on earth. The research
project will also provide new tools for visualizing evolutionary heterogeneity
in phylogenetic trees, train graduate student researchers in both Hawaii and
Louisiana, and develop a novel structured mentoring experience that will train a
diverse group of beginning phylogenetic investigators in statistical
phylogenomic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.