* 1950697
* REU Site: A Cyberlinked Program in Computational Biomolecular Structure &amp; Design
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Gray, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 535,443.00

This REU Site award to Johns Hopkins University, located in Baltimore, MD, will
support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020 -
2022. Research is conducted in various labs of the Rosetta Commons
(http://www.rosettacommons.org) located throughout the United States and abroad.
It is anticipated that a total of 36 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities or are from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how interdisciplinary, collaborative
research is conducted, and all will present their work at scientific
conferences. Upon completion of the REU program, students will gain an
understanding of how to investigate biological problems from a structural
perspective; experience computational molecular design; acquire a solid
foundation in research methodologies in biochemistry, biophysics, computational
biology, and molecular engineering; gain skills to collaborate with other
scientists and engineers in other laboratories globally; and gain a deeper
appreciation for the contributions that improved technology in these areas can
make to society. Assessment of the program will be done thru the SALG URSSA
tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses computational methods for
prediction of the structure of biomolecules (which underlies their behavior and
function) and the design of new biomolecules (important for materials,
nanotechnology, and biotechnology). Example research projects include “Antibody
engineering by deep learning”, “Design of protein-based small molecule
sensor/actuators”, and “Modeling and designing RNA at high resolution”. The
training program consists of a 1-week bootcamp where students learn computer
coding and structural biology, 8 weeks of research in distributed labs (across
the US and abroad), and a final week together at the annual Rosetta Conference.
During the research period, students will complete an independent research
project under the mentorship of a host lab, participate in weekly virtual
journal clubs, prepare research proposals, and prepare a poster for presentation
at the conference. All participants complete the Responsible Conduct of Research
course. More information about the program is available at
http://www.rosettacommons.org/intern, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Jeffrey J.
Gray at jgray@jhu.edu) or the program administrator (Ms. Camille Mathis at
cmathis@jhu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.