* 1950617
* REU Site: Undergraduate Astrophysics Research in Appalachia at West Virginia University
* MPS,AST
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Loren Anderson, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 01/31/2024
* USD 339,477.00

This award will support research experiences for eight undergraduate students
per year in the areas of astronomy and physics. This is a new REU site which
will serve students from the greater Appalachia area. Students will have the
opportunity to study aspects of radio astronomy and gravitational wave physics,
with access to research mentors at West Virginia University and access to the
Green Bank Observatory. Students will also receive extensive professional
development mentoring over the ten week period of the experience. This project
is jointly funded by the Division of Astronomical Sciences (AST), the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Division
of Physics (PHY).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects available to the students
include studies of the interstellar medium, supermassive black hole binaries,
fast radio bursts, pulsars, galactic accretion, and the Sun. The research in
gravitational wave astronomy is especially timely, and the institution has five
faculty members involved in their study. Students will all participate in a two-
day retreat to Green Bank Observatory for an opportunity to take original
astronomical data from the observatory. They will be mentored in professional
preparation, public speaking, professional interactions, and scientific
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.