* 1950949
* REU SITE: Research Experiences in IoT-Enabled Smart Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Nalini Venkatasubramanian, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 02/29/2024
* USD 374,750.00

This award renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at The
University of California - Irvine. The REU Site will host students from across
the nation to conduct research during the summer with faculty mentors on topics
related to the Internet of Things (IoT) for Smart Communities. The Internet of
Things is an evolving field of connectivity involving networks of physical
devices, sensors and other systems components, and software that can communicate
wirelessly over public and private networks. The IoT has enabled the
proliferation of small, inexpensive devices that can manipulate and control
smart spaces such as homes and offices as well as critical infrastructures such
as hospitals and airports. The REU students will investigate exciting
applications and explore ways in which we can reliably and safely apply and
deploy IoT systems to develop the Smart and Connected Communities of the future.
The REU Site plans to recruit a diverse cohort of undergraduate students each
summer, including students from groups traditionally under-represented in
computing. In addition to their research activities, the students will
participate in other professional development activities that will prepare them
to pursue exciting careers in computer science and engineering including leading
the technology research and development of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
REU site is led by a team of accomplished faculty mentors from the School of
Information and Computer Sciences and the School of Engineering at the
University of California-Irvine. The affiliated research laboratories provide
students with opportunities to use state-of-the-art equipment and facilities to
explore topics that are current and timely. Together, these faculty members will
provide an exciting and enriching environment which cultivates inquiry and
excitement about learning while developing the studentsâ€™ research skills and
interests. The REU students will investigate exciting areas such as distributed
systems, data management, wireless networking, artificial intelligence and
machine learning, and robotics, and applications such as healthcare, lifeline
infrastructures, and community services. The project has the potential to
contribute to the body of emerging research in computer science while preparing
students for the computing workforce of tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.