* 1950447
* OPUS: CRS: The impacts of changing phenology on species, ecological interactions, and conservation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Richard Primack, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 04/30/2023
* USD 277,526.00

Environmental change is altering the timing of seasonal events, such as when
plants flower or leaf in the spring or when leaf colors change or birds migrate
in the fall. These changes are altering relationships between species—such as
between plants and pollinators, and between birds and insects that they eat—and
are influencing techniques conservation managers use to protect species. This
project will synthesize insights from 17 years of research on plant and animal
responses to environmental change, and an additional 30 years of research on
plant population and community ecology by the Primack Lab at Boston University.
The synthesis will address key questions in ecology and conservation, such as
how different species, locations, and seasonal events are responding to changes
in climate and how these changes might affect methods that conservation managers
use to protect natural resources. The synthesis work will include observations
of plant flowering and leafing and bird migrations made by Henry David Thoreau
in the 1850s in Concord, Massachusetts and flowering and other seasonal events
at dozens of sites in Japan and South Korea, across eight botanical gardens on
three continents, and at two US national parks. The researchers will communicate
the results of this project widely through scientific and public presentations,
media interviews, and interactions with conservation managers. The researchers
will also engage high school teachers and citizen scientists in activities
related to this research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will result in four
synthesis papers that will explore and describe: (1) variation in plant
phenological responses to environmental change and potential disruptions in
ecological relationships; (2) the role of botanical gardens in advancing
environmental change research; (3) best practices for standardizing, evaluating,
and analyzing phenological resources to understand ecological responses to
environmental change; and (4) techniques and hypotheses for incorporating plant
responses to environmental change into conservation and protected area
management. The project will also make key data sets and metadata associated
with this project publicly available in long-term, searchable data archives.
These data sets—which cover long periods of time, dozens of species, and
numerous field sites—will allow other researchers to carry out further analyses
exploring species responses to environmental change and will provide a resource
for initiatives aimed at teaching data-driven ecology and statistics to high
school students and undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.