* 1950681
* REU Site: Research Experience for Community College Students (RECCS) in the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Anne Gold, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 556,294.00

The Research Experience for Community College Students (RECCS) in the
Geosciences will engage ten Colorado community college students per year through
participation in authentic research in the geosciences with emphasis on locally
relevant topics. Community college students tend to be diverse in terms of race,
ethnicity, and income level, and often include rural, first-generation college
or veteran-status students. Studies show that research experiences help students
improve their understanding of the scientific process, their ability to read
scientific literature critically and their ability to integrate theory and
practice. These students are more likely than others to pursue future research
experiences or enroll in graduate school programs. Student recruitment for RECC
will focus on engaging and supporting diverse cohorts of students, including
students from rural Colorado. RECCS participants will be mentored through a
nine-week research project overseen by preeminent scientists and will receive
professional development training and scientific communication training over the
course of the summer. It is expected that the research experience will guide
students toward science degrees at four-year institutions. Rigorous program
evaluation will provide data to measure the effects of engaging these students
in research experiences and subsequent student interest in pursuing STEM-focused
four-year college or graduate school degrees and scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This summer research program will engage a diverse
cadre of community college students, especially those from rural Colorado, in
the sciences. Students can conduct independent research projects in a wide
variety of research topics, including topics such as: wildfire impacts on
hydrology and water quality, soil microbes, nitrogen deposition in the Colorado
front range, landscape evolution, modeling of fisheries data, satellite
monitoring of air pollution, urban magnetic anomalies and geothermal field
dynamics. The RECCS research environment is designed to provide several layers
of mentoring by scientists, RECCS alums as near-peer mentors, professional
development trainers and RECCS staff, as well as peer-group interaction, to
instill a sense of belonging within the student cohorts. This structure will
ensure that participants receive the support they need to succeed in their
projects and to gain confidence in their scientific ability. The involvement of
scientists from Colorado University Boulder and local Federal Laboratories,
including NOAA and USGS laboratories, will provide students with access to
cross-disciplinary and cross-agency expertise and foster connections and
collaborations between those research groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.