* 1950558
* REU Site: RE@CSU -- Rehabilitation Engineering at Cleveland State University
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Ann Reinthal, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 450,021.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program, Rehabilitation
Engineering at Cleveland State University (RE@CSU), offers an immersive
experience in rehabilitation research that will help motivate and prepare a
diverse group of students to pursue careers in rehabilitation engineering and
assistive technology. The number of people with disabilities will increase in
the United States in the coming decades due to an aging population and advances
in medicine that extend the lives of people with chronic diseases (e.g.,
diabetes) and victims of traumatic accidents (e.g., car crashes). Despite the
national need for rehabilitation technology, opportunities to enter the field of
rehabilitation engineering are limited for many students and there is a critical
need to increase and diversify the population of students equipped to pursue
careers in rehabilitation engineering and assistive technology. Therefore the
overall objectives of this project are to: 1) Immerse a diverse group of
undergraduate engineering and computer science students in the challenges of
developing technology to restore daily function to people who have limited
ability to move their arms and legs. 2) Motivate students to pursue future
opportunities in rehabilitation and assistive technology. 3) Empower students to
succeed in careers in rehabilitation and assistive technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period, the RE@CSU program will engage
undergraduates students in a 10-week intensive, original and creative hands-on
summer research and professional development/training experience centered around
integrated learning communities that surround REU students with their peers,
their mentors, medical professionals, and people with disabilities. The
project's outcomes will be a diverse group of students motivated and prepared to
pursue careers in rehabilitation and assistive technology and a structured
program in immersing students in rehabilitation research that can be
disseminated across the country. This program has a special emphasis on
participation of students with disabilities and scholarship focused on
understanding best practices in facilitating
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.