* 1950586
* REU Site: SURFO-Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* David Smith, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2024
* USD 272,403.00

The University of Rhode Island (URI) Graduate School of Oceanography (GSO) will
operate the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Oceanography (SURFO)
program during the summers of 2020 and 2021. Each summer, twelve undergraduates
will participate in authentic Oceanography research through a 10-week research
experience designed for science, math and engineering students. A SURFO's
research may include but is not limited to laboratory work, field work, data
analysis, instrumentation development, and dynamical modeling. SURFO students
develop an individual research topic under the mentorship of a URI faculty
member or Marine Research Scientist and carry out a program of research from
proposal stage, to its conduct and analysis, and concluding with the
dissemination of their results in an oral presentation and a written document in
either journal manuscript or NSF Graduate Fellowship Proposal format. SURFO
participants are provided a monetary stipend, summer housing, and travel between
their home and GSO. Additionally, SURFOs participate in professional development
activities to prepare them for graduate school research in Oceanography and the
sciences in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SURFO program focuses on
quantitative aspects of oceanography (e.g., physical oceanography, geophysical
fluid dynamics, marine geophysics, population genetics and biodiversity,
biogeochemical cycling, quantitative ecology), which closely parallel the
strengths of the institution. The primary undergraduate population targeted by
the program includes students from various disciplines, but with strong
backgrounds in mathematics, physics, biology, chemistry, geology, computer
science, and engineering. Students from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering (minority and first-generation college) and students with limited
exposure to oceanographic research at their home institutions are highly
sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.