* 1950443
* REU Site: Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences - Undergraduate Research Experience in the Gulf of Maine and the World Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* David Fields, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/29/2024
* USD 605,544.00

The Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences located in East Boothbay ME, will host
a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site for three summers
(2020-2022). The program, called “Undergraduate Research Experience in the Gulf
of Maine and the World Oceans”, will bring twelve undergraduates to Bigelow each
summer for ten weeks. The goals of this REU program are i) to provide
undergraduate students from the USA with mentoring and access to high quality,
hands on research opportunities in Oceanography and the opportunity to
understand its interdisciplinary nature, ii) improve the capability and
confidence of students to learn independently, iii) increase the participation
of underrepresented and first generation students in marine science careers and
iv) help to prepare undergraduates for their professional careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will have an opportunity to work with Bigelow
scientists, who have expertise in topics such as chemical and biological
oceanography, modeling, satellite-oceanography, genomics, organismal and
population biology, fisheries and air-sea gas exchange, and who approach
biological oceanography as an inter-disciplinary science. Bigelow’s REU program
combines group learning and guided individual research to help students address
societal issues concerning the oceans. As a group, students participate in a
sampling cruise on the local estuary, and attend weekly meetings to learn the
fundamentals of the scientific process, such as how to form testable hypotheses,
critically evaluate data, and present information in a scientific manner to
peers and to the public. Students attend an ethics in science discussion, a lab
safety course with risk assessment training and a concept mapping workshop
during the early stages of their project. Students will participate in public
outreach through attendance at Bigelow’s weekly Café Scientifique talks (for the
general public), participation in the Lab’s Open House and frequent public lab
tours. Individual learning experiences includes mentor-guided independent
research, experimentation and/or fieldwork, and compiling and evaluating data in
a wide arena of oceanographic topics. As part of their projects, students may
have the opportunity to scuba dive, sample directly from the Bigelow’s Pier or
participate in research cruises. Following the program, many students have the
opportunity to present their research at international meetings or publish
results from their REU experience. Funding provided supports student stipends,
housing and travel and some administrative costs. The program will provide a
total of thirty-six students with research experience and professional
development and will contribute to the development of the next generation of
U.S. ocean scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.