* 1950871
* Renewal: From the Intertidal to the Deep Ocean: Monterey Bay REU
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Corey Garza, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2024
* USD 825,167.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at the California State
University, Monterey Bay (CSUMB) campus will bring twenty undergraduates to
CSUMB each summer for three years. This program includes a partnership with five
other organizations, including the Naval Postgraduate School, Hopkins Marine
Station of Stanford University, Moss Landing Marine Laboratory, Monterey Bay
Aquarium Research Institute, and Elkhorn Slough National Estuarine Research
Reserve, which are all within a short distance of CSUMB. Students will live at
CSUMB, but they will conduct research and be mentored by CSUMB faculty and
researchers at partner organizations. Research themes include Oceanography,
Marine Biology and Ecology, Ocean Engineering, and Marine Geology, with a wide
range of topics in each of these themes. Students receive a stipend, housing and
travel expenses. Professional development activities include workshops on
scientific ethics and Responsible Conduct in Research (RCR), Geographical
Information Systems (GIS), graduate school admissions and fellowships, and
scientific communication. Many students will be able to present their research
results at a conference or a professional meeting following the program. This
program will provide unique research and professional development opportunities
to a diverse group of sixty students and thus supports the national goal of
creating a well-trained scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students who
participate in the this program have the opportunity to work with researchers at
a variety of marine science research institutions. Potential research topics
include, but are not limited to: Trace Metal Analysis; Internal Wave Dynamics;
Ocean Analysis and Prediction; Ocean Modeling; Nearshore Processes; Coastal
Circulation; Marine Microbiology; Fish Ecology; Population Genetics; Invasion
Ecology; Biomechanics; Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs); Autonomous Underwater
Vehicles (AUVs); Artificial Intelligence; Coastal Erosion; Seafloor Mapping, and
Biogeochemical Analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.