* 1950333
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the chemical and physical variability of smoke using plume spatial gradients: analysis and parameterization for air quality and climate models
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Matthew Alvarado, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 228,663.00

This project includes an evaluation of observational data from three recent
atmospheric chemistry field campaigns to measure pollutants in the plumes of
wildfires. The observational data will used to develop and assess a new
parameterization for modeling the variability in the pollutant aging processes
across wildfire plumes. The new parameterization is expected to improve the
predictive capability of air quality and climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent observations suggest that gradients across a
smoke plume include differences in photochemistry, aerosol composition, and
aerosol size, likely driven by differences in dilution and UV radiation in
different parts of the plume. By studying the differences between the plume
edge/core and top/bottom, the investigators expect to provide a better
understanding of the variability in aging between different plumes. The System
for Atmospheric Modelling (SAM) - Aerosol Simulation Program (ASP) model,
developed by Pierce and Alvarado with prior support from NSF, will be used to
advance the understanding of pollution- and climate-relevant smoke aging
processes. The data that will be used for this project includes: (1) the NSF-
funded Western wildfire Experiment for Cloud chemistry, Aerosol absorption, and
Nitrogen (WE-CAN) campaign held in July-September 2018; (2) the DOE-supported
Biomass Burning Observation Project (BBOP) conducted during June-October 2013;
and (3) the Fire Influence on Regional to Global Environments and Air Quality
(FIREX-AQ) campaign, a joint NASA/NOAA venture, that occurred in the summer of
2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.