* 1950600
* REU Site: Trustable Embedded Systems Security Research
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Bing Wang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 01/31/2024
* USD 401,140.00

This funding renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site focused
on embedded systems security research at the University of Connecticut. The vast
number of embedded devices and their wide-spread usage in all aspects of our
daily life and work has made their security vulnerabilities much more dangerous
and costly than traditional software vulnerabilities. Students will participate
in research projects that are timely and in an area of national priority.
Specific activities include collaborative projects in the Electrical and
Computer Engineering Department and the Computer Science and Engineering
Department, including research in practical quantum communication, network
routing and communication security, secure mobile computing, secure voting
systems, neuromorphic systems security, embedded hardware authentication, secure
processor architecture, and provable secure embedded systems. A series of
seminars will equip students with knowledge specific to the various research
projects as well as general skills required in graduate school. In addition, the
undergraduate students will have the opportunity to participate in a
professional conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies with the strong research team and the focus on computer systems
security, an area of national need and of interest to students. The students
will participate in research initiatives that investigate hardware and software
design principles, computer architecture, verifiable computing and other aspects
of trustable computing systems. The objectives of the REU Site project are to
introduce trustable computing systems research work to undergraduate students in
the early stages of their academic careers and spark their interests; to prepare
students for graduate school to create next generation of computer systems
security researchers; to attract students from underrepresented groups to become
researchers and computing professionals; and to attract students from
institutions where they may not have the opportunity to participate in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.