* 1950589
* REU Site: Research Experience in Utah for Sustainable Materials Engineering (ReUSE)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Taylor Sparks, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/29/2024
* USD 372,852.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This new Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site has the goal of training metallurgy and materials science and
engineering undergraduates in sustainable engineering. This is accomplished
through education in sustainability fundamentals followed by deeply embedded
learning experiences alongside faculty mentors in Materials Science &amp;
Engineering. Students are exposed to sustainability research in the areas of
energy, resources, and water taking advantage of the unique geography in Utah.
The participants are selected to maximize diversity with an emphasis on Latino,
Pacific Islander, and refugee students since these match the high minority
populations present in Salt Lake County. A high fraction of participants are
contributing to scholarly products such as manuscripts or conference abstracts
and presentations. Independent evaluation is being used to monitor continuously
and improve effectiveness of this Site. Best practices, lessons learned, and
positive outcomes are shared with the broader engineering education community
through publications and presentations at the American Society for Engineering
Education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Each participant spends the
summer embedded in a research group working with one of 10 participating faculty
mentors. Projects involve the development of alternative materials, techniques,
and processing routes to achieve more sustainable engineering outcomes in three
key subareas: water, energy, and resources. The energy emphasis is placed on
replacing critical, toxic, or expensive elements with more sustainable
alternatives in order to enable renewable or low-carbon energy technologies. For
water, the emphasis is on providing access to clean water through desalination,
water purification, and modeling of potential toxins in water and soil. In terms
of resources, the emphasis is made on recycling and reducing landfill mass by
developing biodegradable packaging and capturing rare metals via recycling of
e-waste. In addition to research activities, the participants are also involved
in weekly scientific and career-development seminars. All participants present
their scientific findings at a symposium at the end of each
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.