* 1950458
* REU Site: Water sustainability in the urban environment: Improving the sustainable use of water through interdisciplinary research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Philip van Beynen, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 422,380.00

The purpose of this Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site is to
train students in STEM research projects focused on the sustainable use of water
in urban environments. With a growing population, particularly in urban areas,
there is increasing demand on water resources. Consequently, it is critical to
better understand how this finite resource can be used in a sustainable manner.
The REU student participants will investigate how the human interaction with the
hydrological environment impacts the sustainability of urban water resources.
The interdisciplinary nature of this project illustrates the diversity of
science in investigating the various aspects of this environmental issue,
including emerging contaminants, urban forest, water reuse, and resilience of
water infrastructure. Throughout this process the REU students, with the help of
their mentors and coursework, will develop skills for hypotheses generation,
design and conduct experiments, as well as analyzing, synthesizing, and
communicating their data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this REU Site is to
investigate the human-hydrological interface for urban environments with the aim
of improving best management practices leading to more sustainable use of urban
waters. To achieve this goal, the REU Site will take an interdisciplinary
approach. Several research projects based in physical hydrology and biology will
investigate the presence, fate and seasonal flux of contaminants into sinkhole
lakes and well waters. Researchers in urban hydrology will examine how urban
forests and tree canopy reduce stormwater runoff pollution of waterways. An
environmental chemistry project will measure levels, chemical profiles, and
potential sources of flame retardants in wastewater. Two environmental
engineering projects will investigate novel methods of improving drinking water
treatment. Finally, the best management practices of improving water provision
resiliency will be the focus of the anthropology project. By the end of the REU
the students will be able to present and communicate their research results at
regional/national conferences with the intent of future publication in academic
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.