* 1950927
* REU Site: Robots in the Real World
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* William Smart, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2023
* USD 405,000.00

Robotics is an extremely multi-disciplinary field that incorporates ideas from
mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, computer science, and beyond.
Roboticists must consider aspects of systems from mechanical design to planning
to understanding the needs of people who interact with robots; as such, the
broad range of skills needed to be a roboticist makes it both a challenging and
enriching field for many undergraduates. Despite this appeal, certain obstacles
often interfere with undergraduate participation in robotics research, including
lack of robotics infrastructure at home institutions and pipeline challenges for
groups of students who are underrepresented in engineering. This Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site renewal project particularly aims to
address the above diversity and inclusion topics and improve program evaluation
while preserving past successful aspects of the
Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students at this REU Site will work on
active research projects, contributing to new findings in a wide range of
robotics research areas, from modeling robots to understanding human psychology
as it applies to interactions with robots. The summer project work will fall
under the domains of Oregon State University robotics faculty and affiliates,
and all projects will focus on robotics research contributions that involve
physical robots deployed in real-world settings. These projects involve
autonomous robots to explore extreme ocean environments, telepresence robots,
and next generation social robots. The REU student experience will involve
formulating and pursuing robotics research questions under the supervision of
leading faculty in one of the highest-ranked graduate robotics programs in the
country. Historically, approximately 20 program participants have co-authored
peer-reviewed academic papers that advanced the state of knowledge in the field
based on their summer research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.