* 1950775
* OPUS: MCS - What Remains? Quantifying the First Steps of Soil Organic Carbon Formation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Carol Adair, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 273,380.00

The processes by which carbon-rich plant detritus (dead leaves, roots, stems,
and limbs) is incorporated into soil are not well understood. For nearly a
century, most of the carbon in soils was thought to consist of plant-based
compounds resistant to decomposition by microbial organisms (the recalcitrant
soil carbon hypothesis). More recent research indicates that microbes can
decompose virtually all plant-derived compounds, and that soil carbon consists
largely of microorganisms and compounds they produce. If complete decomposition
of plant detritus is found to be a widespread phenomenon, it would upend the
paradigm of recalcitrant soil carbon, and necessitate changes in global models
of carbon flux. Because microbes produce compounds distinct from those in plant
detritus, the fraction of soil carbon that is microbially-derived can be
inferred from the chemical fingerprint they leave in the soil. This project will
use a state-of-the-art analytical chemistry method to characterize the extent of
this microbial fingerprint on archived samples from a 10-year decomposition
experiment (form the tropics to the tundra). The resulting data will be used to
determine if plant detritus generates a significant pool of undecomposable
carbon in the soil, or if essentially all plant detritus is transformed into
microbial biomass. This refined understanding will augment the current
conceptual framework for soil carbon formation, and will enable the process of
soil carbon formation to be more accurately represented in models. This project
will also develop a quantitative teaching unit on soil carbon formation and
litter decomposition modeling, which will be open access and available to the
broader educational community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of an
accurate conceptual model is hindered by methods and data that fail to
accurately quantify changes in litter chemistry during decomposition. This
project will address this gap by quantifying how litter chemistry changes over
time, across climates, and with position (above- vs. belowground), using solid-
sate 13C-NMR to characterize archived samples from one of the most spatially
extensive long-term decomposition experiments in the world (Long-term Intersite
Decomposition Team, LIDET). Specifically, this project will address three
questions with the goal of creating a new conceptual model of litter
decomposition: (1) As litter decomposes, is remaining mass microbially-derived
or undecomposable litter? (2) Are there quantitative differences in how litter
decomposition varies with position, or among climates, that lead to more
efficient C stabilization in soils? (3) Over time, do different types of litter
converge on a similar composition due to the formation of similar microbial
compounds? The answers to these questions will transform how litter
decomposition is represented conceptually, and in predictive models. The current
LIDET dataset is a benchmark for Earth System Models, and this project will
augment it with valuable information on how litter chemical composition changes
across space and time during decomposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.