* 1950058
* OPUS:CRS: Synthesis of decadal changes in controls, trajectories, &amp; tipping points in vegetation cover, spatial structure, &amp; marsh platform elevation in Great Sippewissett
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Ivan Valiela, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 413,426.00

Salt marshes are common features of coastal environments. They provide
fundamental services, such as maintaining water quality, stabilizing shorelines,
and providing choice habitats for important fisheries. Across the world, salt
marshes are under threat from the long-term effects of human activities. These
include increased nutrient loading, accelerating sea level rise, and increased
temperature and precipitation. These changes may be reaching tipping points
beyond which these services may cease. This project uses a 49-year dataset on
salt marsh responses to nitrogen addition and other external drivers to increase
understanding of salt marsh structure and function. Knowledge about the response
of salt marshes to such changes is necessary for better management of these
critical ecosystems. Results from this research will lead to substantial
contributions to basic questions about ecology of salt marshes and will be
useful to stakeholders responsible for wetland management. The full database
generated from this research will be made freely available to any future users
through DataONE (Data Observation Network for Earth).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project proposes a synthesis of a rich database derived from long-term research
in the Great Sippewissett Marsh, a representative New England salt marshes in
Cape Cod, MA. The core database includes a) a high-definition (10x10 cm) record
of a mosaic of vegetation, and b) a high-definition (±1-3 mm) spatial
distribution of micro-elevations, both measured within replicated experimental
10-m radius plots established 49 years ago. These plots have been subject to
chronic treatments, including four different levels of nutrient inputs,
comparable to ranges of eutrophication found in the worlds’ estuaries. The
enrichments continued while conditions changed substantially: this work
therefore will assess how salt marshes exposed to a wide range of eutrophication
will respond to interactive and parallel changes in sea level rise,
temperatures, and precipitation. Synthesis of this one-of-a-kind database will
allow definition of interactive effects of major driving variables, advance
understanding of salt marsh responses and decadal trajectories under changing
conditions, and develop theoretical understanding of external vs internal
controls, stable states, tipping points, and variability of decadal vegetation
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.