* 1950915
* SBIR Phase II:  Lignin-Based Formulations for Efficient and Sustainable Control of Plant Pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Anka Veleva, BENANOVA Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2023
* USD 800,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on
addressing environmental challenges associated with extensive use of synthetic
agrochemicals by developing novel sustainable nanoformulations for efficient
management of bacterial and fungal pathogens. The broader impacts of this
research and development effort are important on several levels; the sustainable
agricultural treatments developed in this project could help protect natural
resources, enhance security of the national food supply by reducing crop losses,
and improve public health. While the initial focus is on efficient delivery of
anti-microbial and anti-fungal crop protection chemicals, this platform can be
applied for actives and biologicals with other functionalities. Thus, in
addition to agricultural crop protection products, the environmentally benign
nanoparticle delivery system developed in the project may find future
applications in many products targeted to the consumer market, construction,
personal care and healthcare.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project
will advance the development of a novel platform where engineered nanoparticles
made from sustainable materials will replace harmful and persistent synthetic
chemical agents used presently. The research objective is to utilize the widely
available bio-renewable resource lignin as a natural non-persistent bio-
degradable delivery system for agricultural actives. Colloidal particles made of
technical lignin will be fabricated in large amounts by non-solvent
precipitation in a continuous, green, low-cost method and then functionalized
for stability and improved targeted attachment to the plant foliage. A multi-
disciplinary approach is proposed to characterize thoroughly the new
formulations and correlate their material characteristics and agronomic
performance. This new knowledge will make possible to develop physico-chemical
means of enhancing their field efficacy. In addition, research will focus on
safety evaluation via human health risk assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.