* 1950340
* Digging Deeper with Data: Promoting Data Literacy for Future K-12 STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Deborah Nolan, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2025
* USD 969,192.00

This project aims to serve the national need for teaching and learning data
literacy in teacher education. Data literacy is important for foundational STEM
learning, civic engagement, and democratic decision-making. Moreover, Common
Core Math Standards and the Next Generation Science Standards prioritize
teaching data-rich inquiry. The proposed project will redesign teacher training
courses to help future teachers learn how to develop students’ disciplinary
thinking and ability to communicate with data. The project will focus on
building a community of teacher graduates who are committed to teaching socially
relevant STEM data literacy in high-need schools in urban and rural school
districts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of California,
Berkeley, includes partnerships with: the University of California, Merced;
Oakland Unified School District; Berkeley Unified School District; West Contra
Costa Unified School District; Merced City School District; Lawrence Hall of
Science; Exploratorium; California Academy of Science; Chabot Space &amp;
Science Center; Kids Discovery Station Merced; and Mission Science Workshop.
Project goals are to provide scholarships to 65 pre-service teachers (upper-
division undergraduates and STEM post-baccalaureates) over five years, and offer
paid summer internships at informal-education institutions and classroom-
intensive externships for 90 lower-division STEM undergraduates. The project
will also guide teacher leadership development of ten in-service teachers, and
perform a longitudinal study with a focus on teacher diversity and retention.
The rise of publicly available data, the many new forms of data, and purposes
for which data are collected and analyzed, create a markedly new context for
STEM teachers. Although this proliferation of data offers new opportunities, it
also poses new challenges in developing culturally relevant, scientifically
sound pedagogies. This project will design novel curricula and professional
development for pre-service teachers that focus on data science, to support them
in developing the capacity to innovate their students’ use of data to address a
range of STEM content and complex questions. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.