* 1950305
* REU Site: Materials for Society
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Rick Ubic, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2024
* USD 425,754.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Materials science is the enabling technology behind
everything from modern electronics to fashion, safe and recyclable packaging,
faster and fuel-efficient vehicles, novel energy generation and storage,
aerospace propulsion systems, affordable housing, medical engineering, sensors,
nanotechnology, and micromachines. One of the most exciting directions in
science and policy-making is sustainability, with its emphasis on energy
conservation, storage, and renewable production. The objective of this Research
Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) Site is to provide an authentic, intensive
research-team experience while exploring activities within the theme “materials
for society.” Students are better prepared for employment as tomorrow’s STEM-
engaged workforce via training in a variety of materials-related fields by
highly engaged faculty mentors using state-of-the-art production,
characterization, and testing equipment valued by industry and graduate schools.
Inclusion of mentors from various disciplines enables students to develop skills
needed to excel in both academic and industrial research environments, where
interdisciplinary teams are standard. The Site enjoys a high level of
participation from underrepresented groups, especially women and Hispanic
students, and helps all participants develop as professionals. Students
ultimately present their results at the annual summer research conference. The
Site incorporates a Research Experience for Teachers (RET) component as well,
aiding the integration of research with education and multiplying the benefit to
both students and teachers. A web resource including teacher-developed lesson
plans is maintained as a resource for students, teachers, and faculty
everywhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The objective of this 9-week
REU Site is to provide undergraduates and teachers an intensive research-team
experience with state-of-the-art facilities while exploring activities within
the theme “materials for society.” The projects used to deliver this experience
are highly interdisciplinary, allowing students to be exposed to the forefront
of science and engineering. The activities can be generally categorized into one
(or more) of four broad categories: energy generation (e.g., solar cells,
magnetic shape-memory alloys, thermoelectrics), energy storage (e.g., sodium-ion
batteries, building systems), energy conservation (e.g., carbon
nanoelectronics), or other societal challenges associated with materials
processing-modeling-characterization (e.g., materials genome initiative).
Participants have their own individualized projects but are also integrated
within a campus-wide interdisciplinary summer research community, training them
to both communicate effectively across disciplines and more clearly understand
the concepts central to their own work. Students also participate in a number of
supplemental workshops on lab safety, library resources, intellectual property,
ethics, and communication; and they ultimately present their results at the
annual Idaho Conference on Undergraduate Research (ICUR). A comprehensive
assessment program is used to gauge the learning and growth of participants as
well as their confidence, satisfaction with the REU experience, and the factors
which influence their perceptions of the lab environment and research generally.
Of particular interest is the development and benefits of the relationships that
participants form during their summer research experiences. Toward that end, a
social network analysis (SNA) approach is used to explore and characterize the
relationships and relational networks that participants form over the course of
their research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.