* 1950471
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Scale Modeling and Numerical Methods for Charge Transport in Ion Channels
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Wei Cai, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 159,999.00

Systems in biology are inherited, with all the information being in genes that
are sequences of nucleotides in DNA. These genes produce proteins. Molecular and
cell biologists have identified and analyzed these proteins in great detail:
structural biologists now know the position of individual atoms of more than a
hundred thousand proteins. Site-directed mutagenesis is done in thousands of
laboratories every day to change biological function. A central challenge in
biology is to understand how the atoms control biological function when
biological structures are some 10 million times larger than atoms and move at a
ten thousand billionth of their speed. Ion channels, the subject of this
research, are good examples of such systems. They facilitate the transport of
ions through cell membranes and control many biological processes, including
cell-cell communication, signaling, muscle contraction etc. During ion
transport, electrostatic interactions and ion correlation and size effects are
all important factors to understand the channel selectivity, conductance, and
other critical behaviors. Ion channels play critical roles in almost all
biological systems including heart and nerves. About 13% of known drugs have
their primary therapeutic actions targeted at ion channels. The methods
developed in this project will advance the field of ion channel research, which
will have an impact on research on enzyme catalysis, protein engineering,
rational drug design, drug delivery, and new diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the PIs will develop
multiscale mathematical theories and numerical methods to study the multi-
physics problems related to the ion channel dynamics involving a disparity of
scales. The tasks to be focused on include a) developing a reaction field based
hybrid solvation model for electrostatic interactions, and multi-step
accelerated dynamics integration methods for all-atom MD simulations of ion
channels, accounting for layered membrane and solvent environments; b)
developing new improved PNP continuum models and new numerical methods to
address crowded ions effects and relative drags between ion species in ion
channels; c) pursuing mathematical analysis and physical understanding of the
new PNP models; d) simulations based on the multi-scale electrostatic solvation
MD and the PNP models. Educational efforts at high school, undergraduate, and
graduate level will be an integrated part of this project, and research results
from this project will be incorporated into the applied/computational
mathematics curriculum at the two participating
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.