* 1950817
* REU Site: Analyze This: Analytical Chemistry Applied to Interdisciplinary Research
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Greg Michalski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This REU site award to Purdue University, located West Lafayette, IN, supports
the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. At this
REU site, funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate, students participate in chemical science research projects
specializing in analytical chemistry. While the research focus is on analytical
chemistry, project topics range from environmental chemistry to cancer research,
chemical data science to analytical instrumentation. Alongside research,
students take part in a robust professional development program that covers
topics like chemical health and safety, ethics in the sciences, scientific
writing and presentation, resume building, and graduate school preparation.
Students also learn about "The Business of Chemistry" through a series of
informal discussion with faculty who have used their chemical innovations to
form start-up companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytical chemical analysis
remains one of the most desired skills in the chemical industries, so this site
provides students a hands-on opportunity to develop these skills in a variety of
different contexts. Some of these projects include instrumentation development;
the integration of molecular modeling, experiment, and machine learning for the
development of chemical probes; studying the biogeochemistry of nitrogen cycling
in environmental systems; and DNA assembly into pre-designed nanostructures. The
students are engaged in a variety of professional development seminars and
workshops, with unique series on technology transfer from the lab to start-up
companies. This site is committed to broadening participation in chemistry, and
while it is open to all, it also recruits underrepresented minority students
from minority serving institutions. Ultimately, participants gain an
understanding of what is required to succeed in a career in chemistry through
individual research, teamwork, and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.