* 1950172
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Earth System Science at Colorado State University
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Melissa Burt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 03/31/2025
* USD 675,000.00

Fifty undergraduate students (10 per year for five years) will be recruited to
participate in a 10-week summer residential research experience in Atmospheric
Science Department at Colorado State University. The vision is that graduate
students in Earth System Science will reflect the diversity of life experiences
and demographic characteristics of the US population. The intended impact of
this REU-site is to recruit a talented and diverse pool of undergraduate
students into graduate study in Earth System Science through the following
objectives: (1) to provide a diverse cohort of undergraduate students the
opportunity for discovery-based exploration of Earth System Science; (2) to give
interns a feel of the graduate school experience; (3) to provide training in
effective communication for cross-disciplinary studies, including those that
apply data science methods to the Earth Sciences; and (4) to introduce students
to the concept of implicit bias, its effects, and counter-measures to promote a
more vibrant and productive scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU
participants will experience the full research process: choosing a topic;
developing a research idea; conducting a literature review; building and using
computer skills for research and presentation; leading their own research
project (with guidance); learning and applying a variety of research methods to
conduct quality research; learning about additional research methods through
peer presentations, scientific lectures, and workshops; and presenting their
research in written and oral formats to both the CSU Atmospheric Science
community and to the broader scientific community. By the conclusion of the
summer research program participants will be well-prepared to conduct scientific
research and have a deeper understanding of the graduate school experience.
Through the REU Site, students will establish a network of peers and mentors who
will play an important role in the development of future Earth system
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.