* 1950030
* Searching for Connections between Teacher Program Applicant Information and Selection, and STEM Teacher Retention and Effectiveness to Inform Teacher Recruitment and Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Dan Goldhaber, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,270,888.00

This project aims to serve the national need for high-quality science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) teachers. To do so, it will look for
connections between information from potential teacher candidates, such as test
scores and STEM grades; their admittance to and enrollment in STEM teacher
education programs; and their later retention and effectiveness as STEM
teachers. There is intense interest in improving the quality of the U.S. STEM
teacher workforce. However, surprisingly little is known about whether
information in applications to teacher education programs predict or do not
predict STEM teacher retention and effectiveness. This study is designed to
generate empirical evidence about admissions into teacher education programs,
the crucial first step to influencing the quality of the nation’s STEM teacher
workforce. The specific research questions to be investigated include: 1. Are
specific types of applicant information predictive of STEM teacher retention? 2.
Is applicant information predictive of STEM teacher effectiveness? 3. Is
applicant information differentially predictive of retention along the
effectiveness distribution? 4. Is applicant information differentially
predictive of retention and effectiveness in high-need educational agencies?
Answers to these questions may reveal connections between applicant information
and teacher outcomes. Such information could inform decisions about recruitment
and admissions into STEM teacher education programs. As a result, the project
has the potential to improve the nation’s overall strategy for ensuring a high-
quality STEM teacher workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaboration between the Center for Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education
Research at the American Institutes for Research, Washington State’s Education
Research and Data Center and five Washington State universities that prepare
STEM teachers (Central Washington University, Pacific Lutheran University,
University of Washington, Washington State University, and Western Washington
University). This research study is made possible by statewide data about
students and teachers in Washington that include: 1) data from all high-need
educational agencies in the state; 2) college transcript data about STEM teacher
candidates enrolled in public colleges and universities in the state; and 3)
data about admissions processes and admissions from the five collaborating
Universities. These sources of quantitative data will be combined to permit
regression-based analyses of the attributes of college applicants that are
correlated with STEM teacher effectiveness and retention. The project will also
collect qualitative data from faculty at collaborating universities to better
understand what faculty in STEM teacher education programs value in prospective
teacher candidates and whether what they value is related to admission and
enrollment in the participating universities. The project is informed by
economical and socio-cultural theories. The economical theoretical basis places
teacher education program operations within a public labor market in which
applicant information is filtered by decision makers’ backgrounds, experiences,
and social contexts. Given the breadth of potential relevance of this work,
project results will be disseminated not only through academic journals, but
also through national and state conferences, project websites, and a project
conference with stakeholders from around the state. This Track 4: Noyce Research
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.