* 1950015
* REU Site: Mathematics at Virginia Commonwealth University
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Dewey Taylor, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 260,709.00

The “Mathematics at VCU” Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site is
an eight-week research experience for undergraduate students hosted by the
Virginia Commonwealth University. The objectives of this REU Site are to promote
early engagement of undergraduate students in research, to involve students in
meritorious research programs, to prepare them for the challenges of
increasingly complex and information-driven scientific analyses in mathematics,
and to inspire them to pursue graduate education. We aim to increase the number
and diversity of well-prepared U.S. students who successfully pursue careers in
mathematics. Special priority will be given to recruiting applicants who are
from institutions that serve underrepresented minorities, who are women, and who
are students with limited research opportunities in their home institutions.
Students at the early stages of their careers (prior to their sophomore or
junior year) will be involved in substantial numbers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
REU will provide hands-on research opportunities in several disciplines,
including graph theory, mathematical biology, fluid dynamics, analysis, and
differential geometry. Projects will involve a computational component and
simulations as well as theoretical analysis. Students will be trained on
research skills including those used in literature review, understanding ethical
issues, using computer software such as LaTeX and Matlab, and oral and written
communication of research. We will also hold workshops on undergraduate
research, implicit bias, and increasing involvement of women and minorities to
facilitate professional development of faculty mentors. Students will work in
groups and will stay in touch with their mentors even during the following
academic year. The teams will be encouraged to submit manuscripts to
professional journals and to present their work at conferences throughout the
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.