* 1950770
* OPUS-CRS: Integration of Phylogenomic and Metabolic Analyses to Understand the Biodiversity of Deeply Rooted Microbial Lineages
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* William Inskeep, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 04/30/2024
* USD 286,030.00

Microorganisms (single-cell organisms) currently thriving in hot springs of
Yellowstone National Park (YNP) are thought to be similar to some of the
earliest forms of life on Earth. This project's investigators have previously
collected a large amount of data including the gene sequences from numerous
different microbial communities at YNP. In this project they will analyze and
store genetic information from microorganisms (both archaea and bacteria) that
prefer high temperature environments (thermophiles). Many of these organisms
have only recently been discovered and their placement in the Tree of Life is
not yet clear. This work is important because it will establish genetic
relationships among different thermophiles that can be used to infer which of
these lineages may have given rise to more complex (multicellular) organisms. In
addition, the energic capabilities of these organisms, that do not require
sunlight, can provide clues to how some of the first life forms may have used
energy from chemical compounds such as sulfide, hydrogen and/or methane. The
work will also result in an exhibit within YNP, focused on microbe-mineral
interactions in a highly visible hot spring channel containing iron oxide
terraces, which will be seen by as many as 0.5 million tourists
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This synthesis project will utilize data on
genomics and metabolic activity of deeply rooted thermophiles to understand
their phylogenetic position and metabolic importance in the Tree of Life. The
work will curate genomes of numerous deeply rooted thermophilic archaea and
bacteria from high temperature habitats in Yellowstone National Park. The data
will be used to construct detailed phylogenetic analyses, which are important
for understanding the evolution of the currently recognized three domains of
life (Archaea, Bacteria, Eukarya). Genomic and transcriptomic data from
microbial communities will be used to investigate novel metabolisms that form
critical links with geochemical cycles. These links were likely important in the
origin of chemosynthetic life forms. The project will integrate phylogenomics,
ecophysiology, and geochemistry to understand the evolutionary history and
metabolic capabilities of deeply rooted thermophilic microorganisms.
Specifically, the synthesis will focus on the role of specific environmental
parameters (e.g., oxygen versus sulfide) on the distribution and diversity of
thermophilic microorganisms, as well as the distribution of specific proteins
necessary for microbial growth under different geochemical circumstances.
Curation and analysis of nearly 80 pan-genomes of under-represented and deeply
rooted archaea and bacteria has a high probability of transforming our basic
understanding of microbial lineages and metabolisms thought to have been
important in early life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.