* 1950139
* Preparing and Supporting Bilingual STEM Teachers in Puerto Rico
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Juan Lopez-Garriga, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 09/30/2025
* USD 958,680.00

This project aims to serve the local and national needs for more STEM teachers
who are fluent in Spanish and English, and who are well-qualified to teach in
high need schools. Successful strategies for recruiting highly qualified STEM
majors to become teachers is key to addressing the national STEM teacher
shortage in high-need school districts. To help in this recruitment, this
project will provide undergraduate STEM majors up to two years of scholarship
support as they complete their baccalaureate STEM degrees and obtain teacher
certification. Scholarship recipients will complete 30 credits in the Teacher
Preparation Program to obtain certification. Prior to their placement in high
need schools, the Scholars will participate in STEM teaching experiences, as
well as classroom action research to study the effectiveness of curricular
materials developed for K-12 STEM outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at the University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez includes a partnership with
the Mayagüez School Region. Project goals include preparing approximately 39
STEM teachers over the five-year period of the award and placing these new
teachers in high need schools or school districts. The University's more than
4000 upper-level undergraduate STEM majors are potential applicants. Knowledge
generation will focus on determining the impacts of financial support, early
pre-clinical teaching experiences, and classroom research on successful
preparation of highly qualified STEM majors to become teachers. Rather than
adding coursework, the project will provide pre-clinical teaching experiences
through campus-based K-12 outreach efforts, including Global Learning and
Observation to Benefit the Environment (GLOBAL) and Science on Wheels. The
Scholars will also connect to campus research projects focused on studying the
effectiveness of curricular materials that were developed by different campus
outreach efforts. These research experiences will be integrated into the STEM
Methodology and Teaching Practice courses, rather than as a separate
requirement. Participation in undergraduate research is known to improve the
chances of STEM degree completion at Minority Serving Institutions. This project
will expand knowledge by providing information about how undergraduate
experiences in education research affect the persistence and success of
undergraduates who intend to pursue STEM teaching careers. Finally, the project
will form a network of STEM and teacher preparation personnel that will
encourage and support new and continuing STEM teachers. This Track 1 project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.