* 1950855
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Convergence to Advance the Biotechnological and Bioscience Workforce
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Ryan Summers, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 428,647.00

The University of Alabama-Tuscaloosa (UA) REU in Biotechnology will train ten
undergraduate students per year over three years to carry out interdisciplinary
research in biotechnology-related areas. Biotechnology is a rapidly growing
industrial sector throughout the United States, with applications in health,
energy, and defense. However, there are very few academic programs dedicated
solely to teaching undergraduate students biotechnology techniques. In this REU
site, an interdisciplinary team of faculty members in biochemistry, biology, and
biological engineering has been assembled to mentor students, with a focus on
applications and instrumentation commonly found in the biotechnology field.
Participating students will gain additional experience through several planned
activities, including invited speakers and field trips. These activities will
help to build a diverse cohort of students and provide them with the skills
necessary to succeed in the biotechnology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a new 10-week interdisciplinary REU site at UA with a focus
on biotechnology and bioscience research. This REU program will provide students
with training in biotechnology-related research areas while helping them develop
the skills necessary to excel in the biotechnology workforce. The students will
first participate in a biochemistry and instrumentation bootcamp to develop a
fundamental understanding of the biotechnology tools and techniques that will
benefit them throughout their time in the program. The project will place a
heavy emphasis on teaching students many common biotechnology methods and
research techniques, which will enable them to succeed in graduate school or the
industrial sector. Several opportunities to present their research, both in
reports and oral presentations, are designed to improve written and verbal
communication skills and enable the students to communicate to peers and the
general public. The project will place a strong focus on recruiting students
from HBCUs, Hispanic-serving community colleges, and organizations that are
traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. All of these activities will
enable this REU to achieve its goal of training the next generation of leaders,
researchers, and educators in biotechnology-related
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Engineering Education and Centers and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.