* 1950234
* Scalable Isolation of Therapeutic Bio-nanoparticles Using Microhydrocyclones
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Don DeVoe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 376,979.00

This grant supports research on a manufacturing technique for the scalable
production of drugs based on biological nanoparticles, promoting the progress of
science, advancing national prosperity and improving human health. The research
involves fabricating a new class of miniature devices called microhydrocyclones
using a three-dimensional printing process. Three-dimensional printing or
additive manufacturing is used to create three-dimensional structures with
exceptionally high resolution, resulting in features one thousand times smaller
than the diameter of a human hair. Microhydrocyclones are microfluidic devices
that permit the rapid isolation or separation of biological nanoparticles called
exosomes. Exosomes have emerged as highly promising vehicles for targeted drug
delivery in personalized medicine. But existing processing methods are too slow
to support effective and high throughput drug development. This project is a
fundamental study in the manufacture of high-performance microhydrocyclone
devices and their application in high throughput exosome separation and
collection. The research bridges the fields of manufacturing, microsystems
technology and bioengineering. The results of this effort have broad impacts
beyond drug development where rapid nanoparticle separations are needed,
including the chemical, energy, and biomedical industries, which benefits the
U.S. economy. The project expands participation of underrepresented groups and
women and introduces K-12 students to research for a positive impact on
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exosomes are cell-secreted bio-
nanoparticles. Exosomes offer enormous potential for targeted nanotherapeutic
delivery, but improved isolation techniques are needed to provide the required
processing throughput for drug development. This research studies a novel
microhydrocyclone technology, which is capable of increasing the throughput of
exosome separations by orders of magnitude over existing methods. The
microhydrocyclone design is guided by computational fluid dynamics (CFD)
modeling. The team develops and validates an analytical scaling model of the
miniature hydrocyclone separation process. It leverages nanoscale laser direct
writing to integrate functional microhydrocyclone devices within thermoplastic
microfluidic substrates. A multi-element bandpass concentrator design is
developed for size-selective exosome collection. To reduce risk, several
features are added to the device such as coating with silica to make it leak-
free. The performance of the technology for continuous-flow isolation of
exosomes from cell culture supernatant is assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.