* 1950288
* Preparing Mathematics Teacher-Leaders for Rural Schools in Minnesota and North Dakota
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Susan Larson, Concordia College at Moorhead
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,107,980.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective mathematics
education in high-need schools. It will do so by preparing mathematics teacher-
leaders who will teach in rural school districts in Minnesota and North Dakota.
The projectâ€™s overall goal is to produce teacher-leaders who will increase the
quality of mathematics education in their individual classrooms and in their
schools. The future teacher-leaders will be recruited with attention to
including individuals from families with incomes below the poverty line. These
Noyce scholars will earn degrees in both mathematics and secondary education.
While they are in college, they will participate in teaching and administration
internships in Moorhead Area Public Schools. After graduation, they will be
hired as teachers in high-need middle and high schools. During the first two
years of their teaching career, the new teachers will receive mentoring and
other supports to help them flourish in a high-need school environment. The
expectation is that the coursework, internships, and other experiences provided
by the project will prepare the Noyce Scholars to be leaders locally, as well as
in the field of mathematics education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
Concordia College at Moorhead includes a partnership with Moorhead Area Public
Schools. Project goals include: producing 16 highly-qualified mathematics
teacher-leaders to work in high-need schools; incorporating longitudinal case
study research; increasing understanding of high-impact preservice internships,
field experiences, and school district-college partnerships; and improving
knowledge about strategies that increase recruitment and retention of teachers
in high-need environments, especially those in rural and low-income areas. The
results of the project have the potential to inform policies that can improve
the quality of K-12 education in the United States. This Track 1: Scholarships
and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.