* 1950636
* OPUS: CRS Conceptual and Analytical Synthesis of Ecomorphological insights into diversification and adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Donald Miles, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 209,451.00

One of the hallmarks of biological diversity is the unparalleled variation in
form among species across taxonomic groups. Insights into the origin of new
species and adaptation in the wild are often based on the characterization of
morphological traits that enhance feeding, use of novel habitats, evading
predators, or attracting mates. A core goal of this project is to determine how
morphological traits are related to ecological function and exploitation of
habitats. The research is based on the key concept of the form-function complex,
which describes how morphology influences performance, ecology, and fitness.
Thus, demonstrating the adaptive significance of a trait requires showing how it
affects survival or reproduction. A second goal of this project is to
demonstrate the role of morphology in predicting species habitat occupancy and
community organization. Furthermore, the work will investigate how morphological
traits drive diversification patterns as well as evaluate the adaptive basis of
morphology by comparing disparity between clades that differ in species
number.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project synthesizes ecomorphological
approaches used in micro- and macroevolutionary analyses and makes available a
large database to stimulate future research. The core data are derived from the
PI's work on the covariation between morphology (900+ species) and physiological
performance (300+ species) in ecological and evolutionary contexts using lizards
as a model system. The published and unpublished data amassed over the past 30+
years will provide the largest synthetic analysis of ecomorphology across an
extensive phylogenetic sample of species and provides the opportunity to test
hypotheses regarding variation in trait diversification, whether morphological
disparity promotes functional disparity, convergent evolution in form-function
complexes and the roles of morphology and physiological traits in promoting
adaptive radiations. Based on these data the analyses will 1) result in a
comprehensive analysis of morphological diversification among major lizard
clades, 2) test hypotheses pertaining to the influence of ecological traits
(habitat, diet) in influencing phylogenetic diversification, morphological
diversification, and functional diversification 3) estimate interspecific
performance gradients using a phylogenetically informed analyses, 4) describe
temporal and spatial variability of the performance gradient, and 5) determine
the link between morphology, performance, and fitness using a long-term
database. The results of the synthetic analysis of ecomorphological data will
include the submission of a monograph. Concomitantly, the data associated with
the synthesis will be made available as a phenotypic database to increase the
accessibility to other researchers interested in
ecomorphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.