* 1950794
* REU Site: SocioMobility
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Eva Kassens-Noor, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,954.00

Autonomous vehicles (AVs) offer the potential for significant improvements in
the mobility, safety, accessibility, and sustainability of transportation
systems. As the automotive industry continues rapid advances in the technical
domain, there are a myriad of associated social consequences that will result
from large-scale deployment. However, these consequences are not well
understood, and there is an imminent need to train students in sociomobility --
an area of research at the intersection of engineering and the social sciences.
This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at Michigan State
University will train future thought leaders for careers that are focused on the
development of innovative, multidisciplinary solutions that jointly address both
the technical and societal aspects of AVs. The program will: (1) examine social,
political, legal, and economic concerns that may affect the widespread adoption
of AVs; (2) assess issues related to social equity and the accessibility of AVs
to groups with limited mobility alternatives, including adolescent, elderly,
low-income, and disabled individuals; and (3) study the implications of AVs on
public health, urban planning, workforce development, and the environment. The
site will provide research experiences leading to technological advances with
potential for near-immediate adoption by public agencies and private industry,
while the scientific findings will help to shape emerging policies and programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to engage 30
undergraduate students in a rigorous program that provides exposure to a diverse
range of educational and research opportunities under the sociomobility theme.
Student cohorts will be recruited with emphases on technical and social
diversity, and the program will leverage existing campus resources as part of a
robust initiative. The 10-week program will allow participants to play an active
and meaningful role in a series of multi-disciplinary projects under the
direction of faculty from various departments and programs. These projects will
be developed collaboratively with a diverse range of public and private industry
stakeholders while supplementing ongoing campus-wide mobility research efforts.
The students will gain immersive, hands-on experience in addressing
sociomobility issues, furthering our understanding of both the technological
capabilities and societal implications of new mobility solutions that are
introduced in complex social systems. Participants will work in pairs as part of
a tiered mentoring structure that includes direct interaction with faculty and
graduate students who have complementary expertise from engineering and social
sciences. Over the course of the program, students will also participate in a
series of short technical courses, professional development workshops, and a
lunch and learn seminar series. At the conclusion of the program, students will
have the opportunity to present their results in a student symposium and a
professional conference setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.