* 1950448
* REU Site: Promoting Leadership in Advanced-Research-Computing for INterdisciplinary Sectors (PLAINS)
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jung-Han Kimn, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2024
* USD 400,731.00

Our nation's workforce demands graduates who are computationally proficient, can
readily apply fundamental research to new challenges, and have both technical
and interpersonal skills. The ability to understand and apply high fidelity
modeling and simulations is becoming increasingly important in a wide variety of
STEM disciplines, including engineering, biology, medicine, and digital
agriculture. The PLAINS REU Site will engage STEM undergraduates in
collaborative group projects that use High Performance Computing, Big Data, and
computationally-intensive models as a central organizing theme. The students
represent multiple STEM disciplines that employ similar simulation techniques
but have significantly different applications. They will gain a competitive edge
in the STEM workforce by combining a broad perspective on the theory and
application of computing with training in research integrity and the development
of professional skills, such as technical communication and leadership. Through
experience, training, and mentoring, participants will emerge from this program
with the skills, aptitude, and desire to pursue further study and careers in
STEM. This project serves the national interest and advances NSF's mission to
promote the progress of science by engaging undergraduate students in state-of-
the art research in engineering applications and computation, and promotes the
nation's health, prosperity, and welfare by strengthening the STEM workforce and
increasing the participation of underrepresented groups and nontraditional
students. This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership
with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this REU Site are to
enhance students' abilities to: 1) conduct innovative and meaningful research
using high performance computing (HPC) and other computing tools and resources,
2) work in a collaborative research environment, 3) conduct research with
integrity and social responsibility, 4) succeed in a professional career, and 5)
pursue graduate STEM programs and/or research opportunities post-graduation.
Program directors will recruit ten students per year from a diverse pool of
first- and second-year STEM majors from traditionally under-represented
populations (small rural colleges, community colleges, tribal colleges, and non-
traditional students). Each student will work closely with graduate assistant
and faculty mentors every day, and with industry mentors several times per week.
Participants will learn how high fidelity models can be used to represent
physical phenomena, how the models are implemented within a large computing
environment, and how the simulation results are analyzed, interpreted, and used
to gain insight for theoretical and applied problems. Students will gain
valuable experience with simulation tools in the context of engineering
analysis, state-of-the-art research tools in computation, statistical analysis
based on real datasets and simulations, and advanced numerical methods including
parallel algorithms in HPC. Tangible outcomes will include student-authored
journal articles, conference proceedings, and technical presentations. The REU
Site's success will be assessed by an external evaluator through formative and
summative evaluations; student reflections, interviews, and enrollment in STEM
graduate programs; and the CISE REU Toolkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.