* 1950840
* REU Site: Sensing and Assembly Based on Non-covalent Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Song Guo, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2024
* USD 352,875.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to The University
of Southern Mississippi, located in Hattiesburg, MS, supports the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. In this program,
supported by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), undergraduate participants pursue research projects in chemistry and
biochemistry. Participants also take part in a professional development and
ethics training program, with a focus on lab safety, oral communication,
scientific writing, and preparation for graduate school or industrial careers.
Through independent research projects, workshops, and panel discussions, the
participants are prepared for advanced degrees and/or industrial careers in
STEM. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The students undertake individual projects
encompassing all fields of chemistry and biochemistry with a common theme of
utilizing non-covalent interactions. These projects include assembly of
macromolecules and proteins, ultra-sensitive and quantitative detection, and
asymmetric synthesis of bioactive molecules and their applications in
biochemistry. To increase diversity in the STEM pipeline, this site recruits
underrepresented student groups, women, and first-generation college students
from historically black colleges and universities, women's universities, and
community colleges in the state of Mississippi. This program provides intensive
research and professional training to undergraduate students that do not have
access to formal scientific research labs, increasing their retention in STEM
career fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.