* 1950218
* Preparing STEM and Computer Science Educators for Teaching in Rural High-Need Schools in Vermont
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Regina Toolin, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2025
* USD 713,300.00

This project aims to serve the national need for high-quality STEM teachers in
high-need school districts by preparing post-baccalaureate STEM majors to become
certified teachers. A key element of the program is support for computer science
preservice teachers as they complete the Masters in Teaching program, earn
licensure in computer science, and remain in the teaching profession over time.
To help Noyce Scholars persist in the teaching profession, the program will
provide ongoing support during the Scholars' early years as teachers through an
online mentoring program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of
Vermont and State Agricultural College includes partnerships with Montpelier
Roxbury Public School District, Mount Abraham Unified School District, Franklin
Northwest Supervisory Union, Union 32 School District, and Addison Northwest
School District. The project will be accomplished through collaborative work
among STEM and Education Programs in the College of Education and Social
Services, the College of Arts and Sciences, and the College of Engineering and
Mathematical Sciences. Project goals include awarding 30 stipends over a five-
year period to STEM post-baccalaureate students in the disciplines of
mathematics, biology, chemistry, Earth/geosciences, environmental science,
physics, engineering, and computer science. The program includes a longitudinal
study that will examine the potential impact of the program on Noyce Scholars,
their students, and STEM and education faculty at the University. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.