* 1950507
* REU Site: Biomedical Engineering in Simulations, Imaging, and Modeling  (BME-SIM)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Nicholas Murray, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 413,186.00

The Biomedical Engineering in Simulations, Imaging, and Modeling (BME-SIM)
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at East Carolina University
provides authentic research experiences to 30 targeted underrepresented and
underserved students -- including women, underrepresented minority students, and
students whose home institution offers limited research opportunities. Exposing
these students to innovative research will raise awareness of graduate school;
thereby, increasing application rates and ultimately the STEM graduate school
pipeline. Broadening participation by increasing the diversity of STEM
professionals promotes the progress of science. Complementary to the research
experience, the BME-SIM program addresses the social dimensions of engineering;
thus, promoting a more inclusive environment and increased sense of belonging.
This is accomplished through both the program's innovative leadership
development program and promotion of positive mentoring relationships. The REU
program goals will be accomplished through a multidisciplinary approach using
simulations, imaging, and modeling as a common thread. The power of modeling to
span scales and blend different disciplines places this approach at the
forefront for understanding biological mechanisms, system dynamics, and
ultimately improving health. To support growth in this field, students must be
adept in computational modeling; an area which is rarely addressed in
undergraduate curricula. Thus, the BME-SIM program fills this workforce gap
while advancing knowledge of modeling physiological systems and training the
next generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the BME-SIM REU
is to provide authentic research experiences to 30 students, especially
underrepresented and underserved populations, increasing awareness of and
application to graduate school. At the end of the program students should
achieve the following five outcomes: 1) improved understanding of the research
process; 2) increased awareness of graduate school; 3) reinforcement of STEM
career path; 4) greater identification as engineer/scientist; and 5) increased
leadership capacities. The project will engage participants for longer than the
10-week summer research experience by both collaborating with home institution
mentors and reconnecting at the Biomedical Engineering Society annual meeting.
To ensure a diverse applicant pool, student recruitment will begin at partner
institutions which include historically black institutions, an institution
serving a large Native American population, and statewide connections with
community colleges. The BME-SIM educational goals are accomplished through a
multidisciplinary approach using simulations, imaging, and modeling as a common
thread. There are several central concepts to developing models, such as
boundary or initial conditions, and validation. Developing an understanding of
these unifying themes enables students to better appreciate modeling in a
broader context. Computational modeling offers several advantages over other
approaches: 1) generate and test new theories; 2) estimate difficult to measure
variables; 3) incorporate subject-specific parameters, generally derived from
non-invasive imaging techniques; and 4) inform experimental designs limiting the
use of animals and humans. Each REU project advances knowledge on the
development, implementation, or accuracy of its respective model or companion
imaging technique. The power of modeling to span scales and blend different
disciplines places this approach at the forefront for understanding biological
mechanisms, system dynamics, and ultimately improving
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.