* 1950123
* REU Site: Marine Renewable Energy
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Jeanette Wyneken, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 410,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Florida Atlantic
University (FAU) will tackle science and engineering challenges associated with
producing electrical power from marine renewable energy resources. It builds
upon a previously funded REU Site and will immerse three cohorts of
undergraduate scholars in exciting research experiences that tackle diverse and
impactful projects. Most projects will focus on ocean current based electricity
production, with others focusing on tidal power or marine microbial fuel cells.
Ocean currents represent an untapped energy source with a technically feasible
electrical power production potential of 19 GW in the U.S. and time averaged
energy densities reaching 3.3 kW/m2, several times greater than the most energy
dense U.S. wind resource. While some prototype and experimental ocean current
turbine (OCT) testing has been performed, several technical hurtles related to
1) resource assessment, 2) system design and operation and 3) environmental
impacts must be addressed before commercial utility-scale power can be captured
for the U.S. electrical grid in a safe, economical and environmentally conscious
manner. Student projects are designed to address these three barriers to help
enable economically viable renewable power production, and undergraduate
scholars will be guided through their projects by experienced mentors. Student
research experiences will be enhanced through a comprehensive series of
professional development activities. Recruitment and selection procedures will
ensure this program engages a diverse demographic which includes women, under-
represented minorities and veterans, to ensure future professionals in the
marine renewable energy industry bring a wide spectrum of perspectives and
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FAUâ€™s REU Site will work closely with its U.S.
Department of Energy-designated Southeast National Marine Renewable Energy
Center (SNMREC). Projects will engage students in science and engineering topics
to achieve a balanced understanding of three key focus areas: resource
assessment, system design and reliability, and environmental impacts. REU
Scholars will be integrated into existing research groups, will be personally
advised by FAU Faculty members and senior researchers, and will access state-of-
the-art facilities and platforms for their projects. Ocean current resource
assessment science will be advanced by 1) improving oceanic flow modeling
techniques, 2) developing novel autonomous underwater vehicle measurement
techniques, and 3) advancing open ocean turbulence measurement capabilities.
Projects related to system design and operation will focus on increasing energy
extraction and reducing equipment failures by 1) advancing ocean current turbine
flight control theory, 2) developing and experimentally evaluating applied ocean
current turbine flight controllers, 3) looking to biology for innovative tidal
power production solutions, 4) evolving marine renewable energy turbine health
monitoring solutions, 5) advancing shark skin inspired biofouling solutions, and
6) creating benthic microbial fuel cells for remote sensing applications.
Projects designed to understand and minimize potential environmental impacts
include: 1) advancing passive acoustic animal detection through the advancement
of expandable hydrophone arrays, 2) assessing animal strike risks through sea
turtle swimming/migration studies, and 3) quantifying the impact of
ElectroMagnetic Fields (EMF) emitted by ocean current equipment on
elasmobranchs. Each year ten of these twelve projects will be conducted by REU
Scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.