* 1950353
* REU Site: Environmental Biology for Pacific Islanders
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Kiana Frank, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 378,651.00

This REU Site award to University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa, located in Honolulu, HI,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2020- 2022. Field work for student research projects will occur in the watershed
of Heeia, O‘ahu. Recruitment in this program focuses on native Hawaiians and
Pacific Islanders from Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Sāmoa,
Palau, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of the Marshall
Islands. It is anticipated that most students will be Pacific Islanders from
community colleges and teaching universities across these island groups.
Students will learn to conduct biological research that confronts challenges
facing Pacific Island communities and return this knowledge to their home
islands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this REU Site program is
to develop a cohort of culturally-connected Native Hawaiians and Pacific
Islanders who are well-trained in the conduct of scientific research, their
engagement of indigenous communities throughout the scientific process, and in
disciplines of greatest importance to their islands and their future, including
ecology, environmental biology, and conservation science. Faculty mentors for
this REU Site are spread across several schools and institutes at the University
of Hawai‘i at Mānoa, including the Center of Microbiome Analysis through Island
Knowledge and Investigation, Center of Microbial Oceanography: Research and
Education, Hawai‘i Institute of Marine Biology, the Economic Research
Organization, the School of Life Sciences, and the Departments of Natural
Resource and Environmental Management and Tropical Plants and Soil Sciences.
Student projects will focus on using systems biology research to solve issues
identified by the community within the watershed of He‘eia in O‘ahu, including
work on fishery science, sustainable agriculture systems, ecological
restoration, invasive species science and management, and disease ecology.
Student participants will engage community members, stakeholders, and landowners
as they conduct cutting-edge research in He‘eia. They will be trained in
research ethics and responsible conduct, lab safety procedures, scientific
writing and publication, and graduate school application procedures. Assessment
of the program will be done thru the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. This award
is jointly supported by the Division of Ocean Sciences (OCE) in the Directorate
for Geosciences (GEO) and the Division for Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in
the Directorate for Biosciences (BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.