* 1950350
* REU Site: Biological Adaptations to Stress - Molecular, Cellular, Ecological
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jay Brewster, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 362,570.00

This REU Site award to Pepperdine University, located in Malibu, CA, will
support the training of 8 students for 11 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022.
Over three years of the award, the program will train a total of 24 students,
recruited primarily from schools with limited research opportunities and from
underrepresented populations. The program focuses on biological adaptations to
stress, and includes projects in cell biology, plant biology, mathematical
modeling of biological systems, ecology, and microbiology. Through direct
mentoring by faculty, students develop their own independent project questions
emerging from a review of the current research literature. Students will engage
in authentic and relevant research, with a goal to contribute scholarly findings
to the research literature. All REU students will have access to state-of-the-
art research infrastructure on the Pepperdine campus. Program success will be
assessed using a common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs (SALG
URSSA), as well as specific tools developed within the Pepperdine program. Upon
completion of the program, many students will present their research findings at
local and national conferences. Students will be tracked after the program in
order to determine their career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pepperdine REU
program focuses on the biological adaptation to stress. Projects vary by
discipline, but include ecological/genetic studies in the Santa Monica Mountains
and Pacific Ocean adjacent to the Pepperdine campus, cellular and biochemical
studies of the consequences of environmental toxins, mathematical modeling of
biological systems, and the impact of environmental stress upon soil microbial
diversity. The program specific aims are to: 1) enhance the maturation of
undergraduate students as young scientists; 2) engage students in full-time,
authentic biological research and the effective communication of research
findings; 3) introduce students to bioinformatics and mathematical modeling; 4)
train students to engage non-scientists and the public through service and clear
communication; and 5) provide research opportunities for students from
underrepresented groups and from schools that lack research opportunities. For
more information about the program, students can visit the website
(https://seaver.pepperdine.edu/surb/) where they can apply online. In addition,
students can contact the PI (Dr. Jay Brewster at
jay.brewster@pepperdine.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.