* 1950192
* REU Site: Summer Academy in Sustainable Manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 398,210.00

The objective of this renewal Summer Academy in Sustainable Manufacturing REU is
to expose undergraduate students to the forefront of sustainable manufacturing
research at Wayne State University in Detroit, MI, a historical hub of United
States manufacturing. The Summer Academy in Sustainable Manufacturing serves a
national priority area in advanced manufacturing and sustainability, and offers
multi-disciplinary sustainable manufacturing undergraduate research projects.
Participants research challenging manufacturing sustainability problems,
strengthen communication and networking skills, and are prepared to pursue
graduate degrees. Site projects cross-cut materials science, product design,
process design, manufacturing systems, and sustainable engineering, and
integrate the fundamental approaches of sustainable manufacturing into these
areas. The site’s recruitment plan is aimed at attracting a diverse set of
students interested in undergraduate research, particularly from
underrepresented minority groups, in order to create a vibrant sustainable
manufacturing research community. The site’s training model, which provides a
dynamic environment for student research and broad communication with a diverse
faculty team and industrial practitioners, aims to set an example for other
sustainability and sustainable manufacturing communities in the nation.
Participants develop self-learning, engineering research, and technical
communication skills under the supervision of faculty mentors from the Wayne
State Industrial and Systems Engineering, Chemical Engineering and Materials
Science, Mechanical Engineering, and Electrical and Computer Engineering
Departments, in addition to participating in community building activities that
include visits to the Detroit Institute of Arts and Charles H. Wright African
American History Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site research and training
activities prepare participants to be the next generation of sustainable
manufacturing engineers and researchers, a field that is continuously growing in
relevance and necessity to industry and society, yet severely lacking in
expertise. Target participants for the Summer Academy are underrepresented
minority students who traditionally have little access to undergraduate research
opportunities or may not have otherwise considered graduate studies a feasible
career pathway. The REU Site fosters long-term contributions to sustainable
manufacturing knowledge from continuing mentor/mentee relationships and
undergraduate research project outcomes in eco-friendly batteries, sustainable
nano-manufacturing, remanufacturing via additive manufacturing, biofuels
production systems, and life-cycle cyber-learning, to list a few. During the 10
week summer program, participants of the Summer Academy in Sustainable
Manufacturing participate in five research seminars covering critical areas of
sustainable manufacturing research, four skill development seminars that prepare
participants for research and graduate programs, three site visits to local
manufacturing companies (Ford Rouge Factory, BASF polyurethane manufacturing
plant, and Lightweight Innovations for Tomorrow, LIFT, institute), and three
industry guest lectures that focus on sustainability in large scale
manufacturing. Concurrently, participants work in faculty mentor laboratories on
next generation sustainable manufacturing research challenges to advance the
knowledge of sustainability in manufacturing and experience academic research
first-hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.