* 1950330
* REU Site: Engineering Education Research on Undergraduate Engineering Students' Problem Solving Capacity
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Oenardi Lawanto, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 09/30/2023
* USD 360,516.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Utah State University
will provide a ten-week summer undergraduate research experience in engineering
education research. It will host three cohorts of nine students each summer,
engaging 27 unique students. Undergraduate research has been observed to
increase students’ understanding, confidence, awareness, and interest in STEM
subjects. It also enhances intellectual skills, such as inquiry and analysis,
reading and understanding primary literature, communication, and teamwork. This
REU site will involve students in emerging STEM education research projects that
focus on developing engineering students’ problem-solving capacity and that
address critical aspects of problem solving, including design in engineering.
Through this work, students will learn to become active scientific contributors
on collaborative research projects that can lead to publishable discoveries and
positive societal outcomes. This REU also leverages opportunities to develop
students’ leadership and managerial skills as they take leading roles in various
aspects of the research. The REU team will focus recruiting efforts on STEM
undergraduates who might not otherwise have the opportunity for undergraduate
research. By the end of the summer experience, it is expected that each REU
student will have developed a foundational understanding of educational research
processes. Additionally, they are expected to also have gained a toolbox of
social and leadership skills that better prepares them to succeed in their
future careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 10-week REU site includes four
integrated components: (1) REU research projects; (2) workshops; (3)
dissemination of research findings and program results; and (4) off-campus group
social and network-building activities. Preparatory work delivered to
participants online prior to arriving on campus will allow students to develop
an educational research foundation that will increase their research
productivity on site. Over a three-year project period, 27 undergraduate
students from across the nation will actively participate in an REU Site program
working with graduate student and faculty mentors. This program is designed to
offer opportunities for each REU participant to engage in authentic and funded
research tasks, both individually and collaboratively, as well as an opportunity
to gain experience in managing project deliverables. This REU has the potential
to open a conduit to attract new graduate students and STEM professionals into
educational research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.