* 1950061
* Improving Pathways for STEM Teacher Certification
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Edwin Ladd, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2022
* USD 74,646.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing high-quality science
and mathematics teachers. Given the significant shortage of teachers with
appropriate training or credentials, there is a strong demand nationwide for
high quality STEM teachers. Declining enrollments in teacher education programs,
both locally and nationwide, exacerbate this problem. In this Noyce Capacity
Building project, a team of STEM and Education faculty members will collect data
and develop a plan to increase the number of STEM majors who explore teaching as
a career, who decide to pursue STEM teaching, and who complete the requirements
for teacher licensure in science and mathematics. Anticipated outcomes of this
project include streamlined curricular pathways, proactive recruiting and
mentoring strategies, and development of an engaged teacher training community
of students and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Bucknell
University includes partnerships with regional schools in rural, central
Pennsylvania, including the Warrior Run, Milton, and Mifflinburg School
Districts. There are three project goals: 1) Creating and coordinating
streamlined curricular pathways for both STEM and education majors, including
development of summer courses, to allow students to begin pursuing licensure in
biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics, as late as the spring of their
sophomore year; 2) Advertising the program to first- and second-year STEM
students while providing integrated mentoring and academic advising; 3)
Developing a supportive community for STEM teacher education, with specific
focus on faculty collaboration and partnering with area school districts. The
intellectual merit of the proposed work includes its analysis of the barriers,
both structural and perceived, that might be keeping students from considering
teaching as a profession. Broader impacts of the proposed work include
programmatic revisions that have the potential to increase the pipeline of
highly qualified STEM teachers and benefit local teachers and students in rural,
high-need districts. Evaluation strategies and preliminary data will be
collected as part of this capacity building effort, with outcomes presented both
on campus and at regional and national conferences. This Capacity Building
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.