* 1950583
* REU Site: Iowa State University Mathematics REU
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Steve Butler, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 484,398.00

The Department of Mathematics at Iowa State University (ISU) will host a
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) three times over five years. The
goals of the ISU Math REU are to provide a supportive environment where students
can discover the excitement of mathematical research, to increase the number of
US citizens including women and minorities receiving Ph.D.s in the mathematical
sciences, and to produce high quality research suitable for publication in
reputable journals. The REUs will conclude with presentations given by the
participants. Many of the research teams submit papers for publication and most
REU participants present their work at conferences. Participants will be
provided a stipend, accommodation in student housing, and some travel and meal
funding. Additional educational, community building, and social activities will
be provided, both as part of this project and as part of the larger all-ISU REU
summer program. Women and minorities are particularly encouraged to apply to
this REU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year the REU runs, approximately 15 students
will be selected to spend eight weeks working on research projects in teams
consisting of 3-5 student participants together with graduate student and
faculty mentors. The projects are in a variety of mathematical areas,
representing the diverse research interests of the ISU Mathematics Department
including the following: graph theory and combinatorics, numerical analysis,
algebra, analysis, data science, and probability. The offered topics will vary
each year based on faculty availability. Previous projects are described in more
detail on the REU website https://reu.math.iastate.edu. This REU is research
focused, with the first week (approximately) being spent covering background
information by the mentors and then transitions to where students spend their
time conducting research in dedicated spaces receiving daily feedback from their
mentors. Each week one or two hours are set aside for professional development,
including issues such as preparing for graduate school, equity, working with
collaborators, using LaTeX, and how to give professional presentations. This
provides students with an experience of mathematical research and the skills
needed to thrive in a demanding academic environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.