* 1950036
* Preparing Effective STEM Teachers by Advancing the Cultural and Computational Engagement of STEM Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Jaspal Subhlok, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,004,098.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality STEM
teachers for high-need school districts, with an emphasis on computer science
teachers. Through a partnership with the College of Technology and the
Departments of Computer Science and Physics, the University's STEM teacher
preparation program will create a pipeline for preparing secondary STEM
teachers. The project aims to provide an inquiry-based computer science
education course in which pre-service teachers will learn computational tools,
as well as how to integrate them into the STEM courses they will teach in the
future. The project will recruit STEM majors to pursue teaching careers and
provide the future teachers with financial and other supports. These Noyce
Scholars will have access to a Teacher Interest Group to help build community
among the Scholars. This interest group will also provide support and
opportunities to participate in community events that incorporate culturally
responsive approaches in a diverse community context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at the University of Houston includes partnerships with local
independent school districts including Aldine, Alief, Alvin, Cy-Fair, Fort Bend,
Houston, Katy, Pasadena, and Spring Branch. Over a five-year duration, it aims
to produce 30 highly qualified STEM teachers to teach in high-need school
districts in Greater Houston and the nation. The program will use a unique
culturally responsive process to recruit undergraduates in computer science,
physics, and technology. The technology major is ABET accredited; Mechanical
Engineering Technology majors will be targeted along with physics and computer
science majors. These STEM majors will be prepared to become secondary STEM
teachers who will have the potential to prepare a diverse STEM workforce and
address technical and computational issues facing society. Moreover, teacher
education courses will be infused with culturally responsive pedagogy to prepare
teachers to help their students make direct connections between STEM careers and
addressing local and national issues. Researchers will evaluate the impact of
including a culturally responsive emphasis in Noyce Scholar selection and
training on the production, teaching, and persistence of STEM educators. In
addition, they will examine how a course and curriculum developed for all STEM
majors as a computer science pedagogy course might encourage and positively
influence the career paths of undergraduates, especially underserved students of
color. Knowledge gained from this project will be disseminated through
presentations, demonstrations, and journal publications. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.