* 1950877
* REU Site: Stakeholder Informed Modeling of Innovations in the Food, Energy, and Water (FEW) Nexus
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jan Boll, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 307,399.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site hosted by Washington
State University (WSU) will provide undergraduate students the opportunity to
tackle large-scale, changing, food, energy, and water (FEW) issues. Demand for
food, energy, and water resources has been growing with increasing human
populations and expanding global economies. Management and coordination of FEW
resources is challenging due to tight, complex interconnections that link their
availability and uses to one another and is complicated by climate variability
and global change. Sustainable management of the integrated FEW system will
require balancing a complex set of technological and institutional solutions for
managing trade-offs and resolving conflicts within the system. During this nine-
week summer REU, students will be provided with a deep understanding of complex
system behavior and computational proficiency to evaluate innovations in the FEW
nexus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site will focus on food, energy, and water
(FEW) management in the Columbia River Basin (CRB), where water is needed to
produce hydropower, support large-scale irrigated agriculture, and provide
adequate habitat for endangered fish. Students will partner with researchers and
data and modeling mentors in an active NSF ColumbiaFEW project to conceptualize,
model, and assess how technological and policy innovations impact the FEW
system. Over the course of a summer, students will work with faculty, graduate
students, and mentors to learn complex systems thinking and systems dynamics
simulation skills, engage with FEW stakeholders to learn about real-world FEW
issues and management needs, build computational competency by working with
project datasets and models, engage in professional development opportunities
provided by this program and the WSU Office of Undergraduate Research, and
practice communicating their science to their peers, other scientists, and FEW
stakeholders. Their summer will culminate in presentations to their cohort
members and to the wider WSU summer undergraduate research program. Through
immersive workshops, stakeholder engagement, and multi-level mentoring system,
students will gain transferrable skills for efficiently analyzing and
synthesizing data and training in interpreting and engaging in broad,
integrative analyses of complex systems and communicating
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.