* 1950027
* Non-Isothermal Viscoplasticity in Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Ahmed-Amine Benzerga, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2024
* USD 488,001.00

Metals tend to creep or deform permanently under constant mechanical stress at
elevated temperatures leading to failure. Based on data obtained from material
testing at elevated but constant temperatures, it has been generally assumed
that the higher the operating temperatures the shorter the lifetime of metallic
applications. This award supports fundamental research to understand how varying
temperature with time towards higher values could enhance creep performance of
metals. This new knowledge will address the need to increase operating
temperatures in key industrial sectors, such as aerospace and electricity
generation, to improve efficiency and reduce environmental impact, without
compromising safety. Insights from this project will ultimately be used by
metallurgists to design materials that are better suited for higher thermo-
mechanical loading. This award also supports an attractive educational platform
for a diverse group of high school, undergraduate and graduate students,
including female and minority students, through exposure to STEM topics and
participation in laboratory research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying
hypothesis of this project is that the lattice misfit between phases in Nickel-
based superalloys under certain non-isothermal loadings plays an essential role
in enhancing creep performance at elevated temperatures. The project, therefore,
rests on the transformative paradigm that “hotter can be longer” depending on
how the coherency stresses evolve. To test this hypothesis, the lattice misfit
evolution will be tracked in new temperature/stress regimes by in situ X-ray
diffraction under synchrotron radiation. In situ results will be used to
correlate, at the macroscale, the non-isothermal mechanical responses.
Furthermore, discrete dislocation dynamics simulations will be carried out to
gain further insight into dislocation/precipitate interactions depending on the
microstructural state and lattice misfit. These simulations will help identify
and quantify competing mechanisms, e.g., climb/glide and self-
interaction/precipitate hardening effects, which will qualitatively help explain
experimental results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.