* 1950290
* Supporting Teacher Scholars through Education and Professional Development in Place-Based Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2026
* Janice Nerger, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2026
* USD 732,201.00

This project aims to serve the national need for high-quality science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) teachers. Specifically, this project is
designed to increase the number of highly effective STEM teachers in high-need
K-12 school districts in Colorado. At least 80% of school districts in Colorado
serve rural communities and have trouble recruiting and retaining STEM teachers.
To address this need, the project will recruit undergraduate STEM students,
provide them with scholarships, professional development, mentoring, and other
supports as they pursue their STEM degrees, become certified teachers, and begin
their teaching careers. The project includes a central goal of providing these
Noyce Scholars, as well as in-service teachers, with professional development
focused on Place-Based Education. Lessons based on Place-based Education
principles include a goal of promoting civic engagement, and are locally
relevant, practical, and transdisciplinary. The project intends that
professional development in Place-based Education will help in-service and new
STEM teachers design lessons that engage their students in meaningful inquiry
activities, and also help the new teachers become more familiar with and rooted
in their new school community. An additional feature of the project is its focus
on recruitment of new STEM teachers by supporting potential candidates in
discipline-specific educational coursework. The anticipated outcome of this
project is to prepare 32 highly qualified STEM teachers for high-need Colorado
school districts. These new teachers will help to fill critical shortages of
these teachers in rural areas of Colorado. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
Colorado State University includes partnerships with Poudre, Thomas, and Morgan
County School Districts in Colorado. The project will prepare and support 32
undergraduate STEM majors (in four cohorts) to become STEM teachers. The
targeted majors include mathematics, biology, chemistry, and physics. Project
goals include: (1) recruiting new prospective STEM teachers by hiring
undergraduates to be STEM Assistants in local K-12 schools; (2) building
capacity for prospective and current STEM teachers to develop robust, standards-
based curricula that integrates locally-relevant place-based issues; and (3)
improving the quality and retention of novice STEM teachers in high-need K-12
schools. The project intends to develop a pipeline for recruiting new STEM
teachers, as well as to create an interdisciplinary community of pre- and in-
service teachers dedicated to locally relevant STEM teaching in high-need
schools, especially those in rural school districts. The broader impact of this
project will be demonstrated by developing and testing a model for universities
to develop strong teacher education programs across STEM disciplines. The
project evaluation plan is designed to provide insights into the effectiveness
of project strategies to identify the effective ones for replication in other
settings. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.