* 1950639
* REU Site: Integration of Biology and Materials in Chemical Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Stephanie Velegol, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 403,561.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site in Chemical Engineering at
Pennsylvania State wUniversity ill provide a talented and diverse group of
undergraduate students an opportunity to perform research focused on biology and
materials. Research integrating the life sciences and materials will lead to
advancements in sensors, water purification, energy production, food production,
drug design and purification, and tissue engineering. The integrative program
will bridge knowledge from multiple disciplines, including the arts and
technology, within the broader research experience with the goal of preparing
students to be more effective communicators, collaborators, critical thinkers,
and engineers. During the ten-week program, weekly career development activities
will complement hands-on research experiences to introduce students to skills
for performing scientific research and to techniques that enable cutting edge
research in biomolecular materials. Surveys and exit interviews will be used to
monitor the success of the program in collaboration with engineering education
experts at Penn State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site focuses on the
Integration of Biology and Materials and is hosted by the Chemical Engineering
Department at Penn State University. Undergraduate students, selected from
institutions across the country, will engage in a ten-week research experience
focused on the development, characterization, and application of biomolecular
materials. Research activities that integrate materials and the life sciences
will develop novel materials and processes to meet national needs in healthcare,
energy and the environment, sustainability, and homeland security. Students from
institutions where research opportunities are limited will be recruited to the
program to create diverse communities during each REU session. Career
development activities will integrate arts and technology within the program and
will focus on improving the communication and collaboration skills of the REU
students and on introducing participants to pilot-scale research facilities. At
the completion of the program, students will present their research findings at
an undergraduate research symposium at Penn State. Program assessment will be
performed in collaboration with the Leonhard Center for Enhancement of
Engineering Education and will analyze the effect of the research experience on
student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department
of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.