* 1950370
* REU Site: Undergraduate Mathematical Science Research at James Madison University
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Brant Jones, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 259,177.00

This award supports an REU program at James Madison University that will host
eight undergraduates for eight-week terms over three consecutive summers. The
program will recruit and select students from groups that are traditionally
underrepresented in mathematics, as well as from institutions less likely to
have resources available to support research activity. The program seeks to
recruit "high potential / low opportunity" students who have not participated in
student research before to develop an interest in pursuing graduate education
and careers in the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
supports two cohorts consisting of a group of four students together with a pair
of faculty who have complementary research programs. Our faculty are well
proportioned between mathematics, applied mathematics, and statistics. We
leverage this breadth to produce REU problems that lie on the intersection of
two domains of knowledge, in which both faculty members are likely to be able to
make significant contributions. Over the course of the summer, each group will
progress from teaching/learning new topics in mathematics or statistics, to
developing questions and conjectures, to proving results as part of an authentic
research experience. Since faculty have distinct but related research interests,
they are able to model supportive scientific collaboration for the students and
discuss technical topics from different points of view. The program provides
professional development and outreach activities for students, and produces
original research that is disseminated in peer-reviewed journal articles as well
as talks at national, regional, and local professional
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.