* 1950161
* I-Corps: Tethered Heterogeneous Unmanned Aerial and Ground System for Autonomous Targeted Distribution of Fluid Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Liang Sun, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on the
development of an intelligent robotic platform that offers secured, persistent,
reliable, and autonomous solutions to time-consuming, complicated, and costly
tasks of spraying fluid onto targeted areas, such as precision agriculture,
private and public safety, utility inspection, search and rescue,
telecommunication, traffic monitoring, news gathering, and defense. The
technology provides a way to autonomously apply fluid (i.e., air or liquid) onto
a specified large space or to pinpoint adaptively the areas that need to be
targeted specifically. The technology offers 1) long-duration operation time and
fast data processing using the uninterrupted power and data transmission
provided by the tether in conjunction with the hose, 2) the intelligent
coordination among physically-connected components (i.e., the aerial robot,
hose, and ground subsystem), and 3) the machine learning/AI-based autonomous
sensing, decision-making, data analytics, self-localization, navigation, and
control capabilities. In addition, this platform provides a safety solution to
the failure of control and power systems of the aerial robot.

This I-Corps project will be an autonomous aerial robotic system towing a
flexible hose connected to a mobile ground subsystem to provide autonomous,
persistent, robust, and precision hosing capabilities. This system is uniquely
designed and developed by applying rigid-body-dynamics theory, fluid-dynamics
theory, control/estimation theory, machine-learning/artificial-intelligent
(ML/AI) technologies, and rigorous design, fabrication, and testing processes.
The success of this technology will advance the knowledge and understanding in
fluid-dynamics, modeling, decision making, and control of towed-hose/tethered
drone systems. The development of the self-localization and autonomous control
algorithms are based on the sophisticated system dynamics that has not been well
explored before. In addition, the pressure of fluid flowing through the hose and
its effects on the dynamics of the holistic system have not been investigated,
nor the data-driven ML/AI-based guidance, coordination, and control techniques
for such systems. In previous studies and development via theoretical inference,
software simulations, and lab experimental tests, this technology has shown its
promising capabilities of self-localization and self-stabilization/control using
only onboard commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) sensors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.