* 1950963
* Collaborative Research: Influence of phosphorus deficiency on enigmatic biological methane production in oxic freshwater lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* John Dore, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/29/2024
* USD 232,974.00

Atmospheric levels of methane have risen 150% since the Industrial Revolution,
and continue to increase. Although energy sector and agricultural sources are
major contributors, natural microbiological sources account for roughly half of
total global methane emissions. Microbial methane production has long been
assumed to be an anoxic process, carried out only under conditions of extremely
low to zero oxygen. Recent research has demonstrated the potential for microbial
methane production to occur in oxygenated upper waters of lakes and oceans
through a previously unappreciated metabolic pathway present in microorganisms.
Under conditions of phosphorus deficiency, certain bacteria can utilize
otherwise unreactive organic molecules known as methylphosphonates to meet their
phosphorus requirements, releasing methane in the process. The extent to which
this mechanism supports the out-gassing of methane from lakes to the atmosphere
is unknown, as are the consequences of changing environmental conditions upon
it. This project will address this knowledge gap by investigating the
distributions, rates of and controls on aerobic methane production in Flathead
Lake and 18 other Montana lakes of varying phosphorus deficiency status. Because
atmospheric deposition of pollutant nitrogen and deliberate measures to curtail
phosphorus inputs to lakes can both lead to phosphorus deficiency, it is crucial
that we know whether these factors may have the unexpected consequence of
enhancing methane emissions. This research will also directly support the
education, field and laboratory experiences of graduate and undergraduate
students and will provide training to local high school teachers from Native
American (Kootenai and Salish) tribal lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will evaluate temporal and spatial variability in microbially-mediated, oxic
methane production across lakes with varying phosphorus availability in western
Montana. It is guided by the overarching hypothesis: diffusive effluxes of
methane from oxic freshwater lakes are directly influenced by the nature and
severity of ecosystem nutrient (nitrogen, phosphorus) deficiencies. A
combination of observational and experimental approaches employing chemical,
stable isotopic, metagenomic and PCR-based gene analyses will be used to
examine: 1) time and space variability in the concentration, stable isotope
composition, and net production of methane in freshwater lakes in Montana,
focusing on Flathead Lake; 2) The extent to which microbial methylphosphonate
degradation results in net production of methane in these lakes; 3) The
functional diversity, abundances, and transcriptional activities of
microorganisms involved in both phosphonate and methane cycling; and 4) How the
stoichiometry (specifically nitrogen:phosphorus ratios) of aquatic nutrient
(inorganic and total) pools influences oxic methane production and expression of
methane cycling functional genes. The study will provide a systematic evaluation
of microbial methane sources and the potential contribution of methylphosphonate
degradation as a source of methane in oxic freshwater lakes. Results from this
project will provide new insights and advance current understanding of coupled
interactions between carbon and phosphorus cycling in freshwater lake
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.