* 1950629
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Satellite and Ground-Based Remote Sensing at NOAA-CREST: Expanded Opportunities2
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Reginald Blake, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 01/31/2023
* USD 367,152.00

This project seeks to continue to provide undergraduate students (community
college and four-year students) an opportunity to conduct full-time,
collaborative satellite and ground-based remote sensing research with faculty
mentors from within NOAA-CREST’s Center for Earth System Sciences and Remote
Sensing Technologies and its Center for Remote Sensing and Earth System
Sciences. This previously funded REU site now has a newly tested community
college component. Ten (10) STEM students (five from community colleges and five
from four-year institutions) will be recruited from the City University of New
York’s (CUNY) 23 campus-wide institutions. For fifteen weeks, these students
will become part of a community of research scholars who are actively engaged in
state-of-the-art remote sensing research and applications. They will participate
in research group meetings, seminars, oral and poster presentations at local,
regional, and national conferences, and one team of them will participate in
citizen science by engaging a local, environmentally active, but scientifically
underserved community in basic, state-of-the-art, neighborhood-scale, multi-
platformed, urban heat island studies in the Bedford-Stuyvesant community of
Brooklyn, New York. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities combine year-long
(Summer, Fall, Winter, and Spring) research experiences with
multidimensional/layered mentoring, academic support systems, and a robust
learning community that produce holistic and engaging stimuli for the scientific
and academic growth and development of the student participants. Moreover, the
activities will allow the undergraduate researchers to hone their acquired
skills and knowledge by being research mentors to high school students in the
New York City public school system and to members of the local community. The
REU site has six objectives: 1.) To engage a diverse cohort of undergraduates in
collaborative, state-of-the-art satellite and ground-based remote sensing
research through mentorship by experts in the field, 2.) To create and sustain a
community and a pipeline of scholars among whom academic excellence in STEM is
achieved and the pursuit of baccalaureate degrees, advanced degrees, and STEM
careers is encouraged, 3.) To provide students with the tools, the confidence,
and the maturity necessary to succeed in a research-rich environment and to
develop their communication (oral and written) and presentation skills, 4.) To
create opportunities for students to meaningfully engage in citizen science by
partnering with and sharing their urban heat island research results with
community residents for whom such results are critically vital, 5.) To train
students in the ethical and responsible conduct of research as well as the
ethical implications of scientific and technological applications in society and
to provide opportunities for students to be peer ambassadors who promote
undergraduate research, 6) To broaden the impacts of the REU opportunity by
including students on other funding in the cohort and professional development
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.