* 1950244
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry at the University of Cincinnati
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Anna Gudmundsdottir, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2024
* USD 364,000.00

This REU site award to the University of Cincinnati, located in Cincinnati, OH,
supports a total of 28 students for 10 weeks during the summers from 2020-2022.
This program, supported by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate, engages students in research projects spanning
the field of chemistry. Students work on these projects, which are carefully
designed for the 10-week timeline, under the guidance of faculty mentors.
Alongside the hands-on research projects, students attend seminars and workshops
to learn about current real-life scientific challenges such as “Data Science for
Big Data in Chemistry” and “Sustainable Chemistry.” Students also take part in
professional development activities, giving them the opportunity to develop as
young professionals and researchers. Taken together, these activities prepare
students to enter the STEM workforce as informed, knowledgeable professionals
with a strong understanding of the challenges and opportunities before
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students engage in research projects spanning the
field of chemistry, from solid-state photochemistry, to computational
biochemistry, to biocompatible polymers, to electrocatalysis. The projects are
designed for the 10-week timeline such that each student may advance scientific
knowledge, including through refereed publications and a presentation at a
suitable scientific meeting. Professional and skill development activities
include workshops on reading scientific journals, creating individual
professional development plans, and data science in chemistry. While this site
is open to all, a focus on minority recruiting and the involvement of a faculty
member from an HBCU (Historically Black Colleges and Universities) expands and
strengthens diversity in the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.