* 1950112
* Educating Mathematics and Science Teachers Who Can Prepare High School Students for 21st Century College and Career Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Deidre Sessoms, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 941,908.00

This project aims to serve the national need for high school mathematics and
science teachers who have the teaching skills needed to prepare students for
both STEM careers and for college. To educate these teachers, the project will
recruit undergraduate STEM majors into the teaching profession and support them
through scholarships, stipends, and support from a network of prior Noyce
scholars and in-service teachers. The undergraduates will pursue both a
baccalaureate STEM degree and teaching certification. An innovative component of
this project is its attention to educating teachers who can integrate
mathematics and science instruction with learning experiences that prepare
secondary students for both careers and college. Thus, the Noyce Scholars will
also be able to earn a Career Pathways Certificate. The project has the
potential to increase the diversity of mathematics and science teachers in the
Sacramento region. It can also provide insights into how to effectively recruit,
retain, and prepare qualified and diverse STEM teachers to successfully support
students in high-need secondary school districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at California State University, Sacramento includes partnerships with
Elk Grove Unified School District, Sacramento City Unified School District, and
San Juan Unified School District. Project goals include: 1) producing thirty-
three new secondary STEM teachers over five years; 2) targeting recruitment of
undergraduate majors across all STEM disciplines, with emphasis on students from
underrepresented minorities; 3) financially supporting participants in the final
year of their undergraduate program and post-baccalaureate teaching credential
program; and 4) providing training and support of Scholars, including during
their first years in the profession by leveraging local resources and programs.
Outcomes will be evaluated based on the Scholars’ perceived impact of the
program and on their teaching performance as measured by a high-stakes
performance assessment that is required for certification. This project will
provide knowledge about how Scholars’ participation in a community of educators,
including former Noyce Scholars, Noyce Master Teaching Fellows, and mentor
teachers, may contribute to the development and retention of new STEM teachers
serving in high-needs Career Pathway schools. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.