* 1950131
* Building the Capacity to Address the Urban STEM Teacher Shortage in Massachusetts
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Shari Weaver, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 12/31/2021
* USD 75,000.00

This project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to increase
the number of high-quality secondary school STEM teachers in urban, high-need
schools. The project will explore factors that promote the decision of STEM
majors at Worcester Polytechnic Institute to become teachers. It will identify
these factors through surveys, interviews, and focus groups. The project also
aims to understand mechanisms to diversify the pool of potential Noyce Scholars.
The project also plans to build strong partnerships with local, high-need
schools that will supervise, mentor, and hire Noyce Scholars who complete the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Worcester Polytechnic Institute
includes a partnership with the Worcester Public School district. The goals of
this Capacity Building Noyce project are to establish research-informed plans
for a successful Noyce Track 1 program that will support undergraduate STEM
majors to become certified teachers. The project plans include development of a
Teacher Preparation Program at Worcester Polytechnic Institute that better
serves both the needs of teacher candidates and the needs of secondary schools
that could hire these graduates. The intention is that local, high-need
secondary schools will place students into early field work and practicums,
which can help to solidify their intention to pursue a teaching career. Another
goal is to better understand the value proposition of the teacher preparation
program. Research will be conducted using human-centered design tools to develop
insight and evidence so that more STEM secondary teachers trained at Worcester
Polytechnic Institute are teaching in urban, high-need schools. Answers to two
research questions are needed to understand how to build capacity and reduce
barriers limiting the number of STEM majors becoming teachers: Do teacher
candidates have unmet needs and what are the barriers preventing them from
becoming secondary STEM teachers? How do local secondary schools, teachers, and
hiring managers assess the teacher candidates and graduates, and what
specifically is required for their high-need schools? This Capacity Building
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.