* 1950310
* Building Capacity to Develop a Program for Future STEM Teachers within a Framework of Justice, Community, and Leadership
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Vidya Chandrasekaran, Saint Mary's College of California
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2022
* USD 74,970.00

This project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to prepare
high-quality STEM teachers. To do so, it seeks to develop a teacher preparation
program aligned with the College’s Justice, Community, and Leadership Program.
The project will collect data needed to develop a program that addresses
persistent national and regional challenges in STEM teacher education. It will
examine high STEM teacher turnover in schools that serve populations with high
levels of poverty. Data about representation of people of color and women in
STEM teaching will be examined. In addition, the project will explore cultural
relevance and social/environmental justice connections in the STEM curriculum.
The College will develop curricular programming with the aim of preparing STEM
teachers from diverse backgrounds who persist as teachers in urban, high-need
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at St. Mary’s College includes
internal partnerships with the Kalmanovitz School of Education, School of
Science, and School of Liberal Arts, and a partnership with the Mount Diablo
Unified School District, a high-need local educational agency. The long-term
goal of the project is to design an evidence-based, equity- and social justice-
relevant undergraduate STEM teacher preparation program that combines robust
STEM disciplinary training, secondary teacher education, and justice, community,
and leadership studies to prepare students to teach in high-need, urban public
schools. This project intends to build the capacity for individuals earning a
degree in a STEM discipline to simultaneously earn teacher certification. This
project may contribute to the STEM education field by generating new knowledge
about the convergence of STEM disciplines, secondary pedagogy, and social
justice-oriented teacher education. This Capacity Building project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.