* 1950196
* Creating Infrastructure for Computer Science Education in Rural North Louisiana
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Dawn Basinger, Louisiana Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 06/30/2025
* USD 740,749.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing a greater number of
high-quality teachers trained in computational thinking and computer science
principles. To sustain and grow our economy, the United States must remain
highly competitive in technology and cybersecurity areas. To do so, U. S.
students must be educated in computer science principles and computational
thinking. This project aims to address this need by increasing the number of
STEM-certified teachers who are highly trained in computer science and related
areas. It will do so by providing scholarships, training, and internships to
future teachers, as well as by supporting new teachers. Students majoring or
minoring in Computer Science/Cyber Engineering will obtain a minor in secondary
education and teaching certification, with an additional computer science
certification. Other STEM majors could complete a new online Computer Science
Education Certificate that will be developed by the project. This certificate
would prepare them to infuse computational thinking into related STEM classes
and extracurricular activities such as robotics clubs. Thus, the project will
contribute to increasing the number of teachers who will help to prepare a
computationally knowledgeable population, as well as the skilled computer
science workforce and technology leaders of tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at Louisiana Tech University includes partnerships with the National
Integrated Cyber Education Research Center and six high-need school districts
(Bienville Parish, Caddo Parish, Lincoln Parish, Ouachita Parish, Richland
Parish, and Winn Parish). The project’s five-year goals include recruiting,
preparing, and retaining 20 STEM teachers who are highly trained in computer
science principles and who will teach in high-need north Louisiana high schools.
The theoretical basis for the project is that, to enable more students to be
exposed to computer science principles and computational thinking, more teachers
must be trained in these areas. The undergraduate teacher candidates recruited
for this scholarship program will include computer science and cyber engineering
majors, computer science minors, and any other STEM majors interested in
computer science. The project includes a focus on increasing participation of
underrepresented groups and will support both undergraduates and in-service
teachers. Through evaluation of program elements, resulting number of graduates,
and effectiveness of graduates, this project will add to the knowledge base
about effective computer science education. Results will be disseminated through
newsletters, scholarly journals, conference presentations, press releases, blog
posts, and social media. The project’s broader impacts include reaching
thousands of Louisiana high school students and improving the infrastructure of
computer science education and development of STEM teachers, especially in
states with extreme shortages in computer science-trained STEM teachers. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.