* 1950573
* REU Site: Integrated Design of Materials (IDM) in New York City (IDMinNYC)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Donna McGregor, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/29/2024
* USD 404,925.00

This Site is jointly funded by the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research
in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. The Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in Materials Science offers a unique
opportunity for undergraduate (UG) students from across the nation to visit New
York City and engage in a 10-week research program at a consortium of campuses
at the City University of New York (CUNY), namely Lehman College, City College
and the CUNY Advanced Science Research Center. The main objectives of the
program are to 1) Introduce UG students to interdisciplinary, cutting-edge
research methodologies in materials science, 2) Provide meaningful research
experiences that integrate cutting-edge research with career planning and 21st
century “soft skills”, 3) Create an environment where students become part of a
broader community of scientists to cultivate a sense of achievement and
excitement, 4) Increase the awareness of career opportunities in science and
engineering, and 5) Develop a culture of effective faculty mentorship.
Participating faculty attend an annual mentors workshop centered on a
collaborative mentoring model and focus on recruiting students from
underrepresented groups. The activities help students grow as independent
scientists and expand their interests to include careers in materials research
where they will be employed in industry, academia or the private
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. The REU site centers on the
development of novel materials with chemical and biological applications in
academic and industrial settings including electronics, energy, drug delivery
and sensor technology. Projects are in one of two main areas: 1) The design of
hard materials; two-dimensional doped semiconductors for opto- electronic
devices, hybrid II-VI and III-V multiple quantum well/quantum dots for high-
performance solar cells, CdSe ultra-small clusters for efficient energy storage
and mobile Janus particles for applications as self-propelling particles. 2) The
study of soft materials that self-assemble; quantum liquids for applications as
environmental solutions, peptides that form proton transfer membranes for fuel
cell applications, peptidic nanofibers for medical applications, sol-gels as
anticorrosion materials and nanopatterning of organic hybrid materials for
applications in both nanotechnology and medicine. Student participants obtain
technical training, conduct independent research on an interdisciplinary project
with two faculty mentors, write weekly research reports, engage in weekly
meetings that alternate between research presentations and “soft-skill”
workshops, present their research findings at a research symposium with students
from City College and Columbia University and participate in outreach activities
with the local Bronx middle and high schools to promote scientific awareness in
the community and address the national need for development and understanding of
advanced materials to further technology, energy and health
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.