* 1950237
* REU Site: Population, community and ecosystem dynamics in the northern Chihuahuan Desert
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Scott Collins, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2023
* USD 330,151.00

This REU Site award to the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, will
support the training of 9 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022.
It is anticipated that 27 students primarily from underrepresented groups and
from schools with limited research opportunities will be trained in the program.
Students will learn how to conduct independent research under the guidance of a
faculty mentor, and most students will present the results of their research at
regional and national conferences. Student career paths are tracked by social
media such as the Sevilleta REU Facebook page and via email to determine their
continued interest in their academic field of study and the lasting influences
of this research experience. Assessment of the program will be done through the
online SALG URSSA tool. The overarching goal of the Sevilleta REU program is to
provide a quality research experience as a mechanism to increase participation
among underrepresented groups in field based science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
REU Site program focuses on aridland ecology â€“ including population, community
and ecosystem level research - in a dryland environment. The program occurs at
the UNM Field Station (http://sevfs.unm.edu/) in the Sevilleta National Wildlife
Refuge, located about 80 km south of Albuquerque, NM. The UNM Department of
Biology, US Fish and Wildlife Service and US Forest Service together have around
25 scientists in various career stages participating as research mentors in the
program. Students may pursue independent research in a wide range of potential
topics in population, community and ecosystem ecology (including soils and
microbial ecology), in aquatic and terrestrial habitats, with a specific focus
on ecology and conservation biology. The site also includes a number of long-
term rainfall manipulation experiments that provide an ideal template for summer
research projects. In addition to their research project, students will
participate in an aridland ecology boot camp plus weekly seminars, a journal
club, and workshops on the responsible conduct of research, professional and
public communication skills, career opportunities, data carpentry workshop for
ecology, and the graduate school application process. Students will also have
opportunities to visit natural and cultural areas in the region. REU students
have access to a rich array of forest, grassland, shrubland, riparian and
aquatic habitats. Comfortable housing and outstanding laboratory facilities are
provided at the UNM Field Research Station located in the Refuge as well as on
the UNM Main Campus. The program's multi-phase recruitment effort consists of
wide distribution of recruiting materials via digital media, well-known student
job posting sites, as well as recruiting visits to local minority serving
institutions. Students are selected by the PI and Program Coordinator based on
academic record and coursework, letter of application, past research experience,
career goals, letters of recommendation, phone interviews, and potential for
conducting independent research in an aridland environment. More information is
available by visiting https://sevilletareu.wordpress.com/ and by contacting the
Recruiting Coordinator (Ms Stephanie Baker at srbaker@unm.edu) or the PI (Dr.
Scott L. Collins at scollins@unm.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.