* 1950159
* Developing an Interdisciplinary Urban Environmental Science Curriculum as a Recruitment Mechanism for Future STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Joseph Stabile, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2022
* USD 119,416.00

This project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to prepare
highly effective, certified STEM educators for high-need school districts. To
achieve this goal, the project will lay the foundation for improving recruitment
of undergraduates into STEM teaching careers. An innovative component of the
project is its plan to engage students in ecological studies specific to inner-
city neighborhoods. This urban environmental science component is expected to
provide a “living laboratory” that can help students see the relevance of
science to their daily lives. It will also provide an innovative way to learn
STEM concepts, to expose students in entry level STEM classes to potential
careers in STEM teaching, and to inspire future teachers. The outcomes of this
capacity building project will lay the foundation for a future Noyce Teacher
Scholarships and Stipends (Track 1) proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
at Iona College includes partnerships with Westchester Community College and the
high-need New Rochelle School District. The project’s long-term goal is to
increase the number of highly qualified STEM teachers in high-need school
districts in New York. The specific aims are to: evaluate factors that impede
student enrollment in STEM education; develop a recruitment pipeline with high-
need school districts and local two-year colleges; enhance partnerships with
local schools for future student teacher placements; and develop an urban
environmental science module that will be integrated into introductory chemistry
and biology courses. The urban environmental science module is intended to be an
interdisciplinary approach for teaching STEM topics in a way that is relevant
and interesting to students. Thus, the module may be implemented or adapted by
other institutions to achieve similar goals. This Capacity Building project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.