* 1950182
* High-Performance and CMOS-Compatible Electrochemical Random Access Memory For Neuromorphic Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Qing Cao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2023
* USD 420,000.00

Artificial intelligence has made phenomenal progress in recent years. It is
having a remarkable social impact with emerging applications such as face
recognition and self-driving cars. However, such improvement comes with the cost
of aggressively increased depth and size of the deep neural network models
utilized, which leads to exponentially increasing computational load. This poses
significant challenges for hardware implementations in terms of computation,
memory, and communication resources. The objective of this project is to develop
the next-generation neuro-inspired deep-learning hardware, which has potential
to perform the data-intensive computation required by the artificial-
intelligence algorithms with thousands times higher energy efficiency, compared
to what is possible using current silicon complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor technology. The educational goal is to sustain STEM workforce
pipeline development by exploiting the outreach opportunities and knowledge
generated in the proposed project. Efforts will be to establish hands-on module
for K-6 students to learn the difference between computer-based expert system
and the human/machine learning process, as well as the working principles of
artificial synapses for neuromorphic computing, with the purpose of introducing
engineering to them. At the undergraduate level, PI proposes to incorporate
case-analysis in engineering class, by capitalizing on PI’s industrial
experiences. The target will be to help students develop the capability of using
engineering judgement in decision-making regarding realistic technology
development problems, which will have direct connection to what they learn in
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this objective, new types of high-
performance and silicon complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor compatible
electrochemical random access memories will be designed, fabricated,
characterized, and optimized. These devices can serve as multi-level artificial
synapses with near-symmetric weight update in response to pulsed input to
dramatically accelerate the online training and the inference of deep neural
networks. More specifically, two novel device prototypes will be explored in
parallel during the grant term: one operates based on the resistance switch in a
functional oxide channel modulated by the gate-controlled reversible insertion
of protons from oxides with high ionic conductivity; the other is based on the
resistance switch in multilayered two-dimensional semiconductors modulated by
the gate-controlled intercalation of copper ions from fast ion-transporting
metal-chalcogenide glass. A symmetric gate-channel stack will be adopted to
minimize the drift of the device open-circuit potential during operation. The
scientific goal of this project is to elucidate the correlation between the
intercalant types, properties of the corresponding solid-state electrolytes and
the intercalatable channels, device dimensions, and the electrochemical random
access memory performance, using a combination of experiment and physics-driven
device modeling. The technological goal is to move electrochemical random access
memory from initial proof-of-concept demonstrations to a practical technology.
Material innovations will firstly be applied on all the components across the
device gate-channel stack to drastically enhance their performance, especially
the device speed, retention, and endurance. Individual memory cells with sub-100
nm dimensions and 3 by 3 pseudo-crossbar arrays will then be demonstrated. These
efforts will help us assess the technological promise of electrochemical random
access memory, especially their ultimately achievable speed and their
scalability into both nanoscale devices and large-scale integrated
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.