* 1950557
* REU Site:  Research Experience for Undergraduates in Advanced Material Sciences
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Stephen Foulger, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 319,668.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) in
Advanced Material Sciences (1) engages historically underrepresented groups
(URGs) in research activities in five thematic areas, and (2) develops students’
talents and interests to fields outside their usual “window” of careers to
increase enrollment and success in science and engineering fields. REU students
leave knowing how to: conduct research; prepare peer-reviewed manuscripts and
academic posters; and apply for graduate school. To recruit, retain, and engage
URGS, the REU Site relies on three factors: (1) outreach and recruitment through
nonprofit organizations that provide academic guidance and mentoring for
underrepresented college students, (2) daily and ongoing mentoring and guidance
of the REU students through mentors who have undergone cultural competence
training, and (3) existing programs at Clemson University to engage in the
professional development of URGs in and out of the laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The REU in Advanced Material Sciences
engages historically URGs in research activities in five interconnected thematic
areas: (1) Optical Fiber for Photonics Applications, (2) Polymers for Medical
Sciences; (3) Magnetic Materials for Biomedical Applications, (4) Data Science
in Computationally-Driven Materials Design, and (5) Advanced Materials in Human
Health. The research projects increase the understanding in the field about
property-function relationships needed to guide design of optical fibers,
polymers, and magnetic nanoparticles for targeted applications and will
contribute to NSF's Big Ideas on Growing Convergence Research and Harnessing the
Data Revolution. Additionally, the REU Site develops students’ talents and
interests in science and engineering to increase enrollment and success in
students’ respective fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.