* 1950503
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research for Undergraduates in the Plant Sciences: Genomes,Phenomes and Landscapes
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Jose Gonzalez Hernandez, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 339,272.00

This REU Site award to South Dakota State University, located in Brookings, SD,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2020-2022. It is anticipated that 30 students over 3 years will be trained, with
most students coming from schools with limited research opportunities (e.g.
community colleges, smaller baccalaureate colleges) and/or from under-
represented groups (African Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives,
Latinos). In order to address the agricultural challenges of the 21st century,
it is crucial to train the next generation of scientists in the plant sciences
with the required interdisciplinary skills to address these challenges. The
students will work on research projects with experienced faculty mentors from
the Biology and Microbiology Department, the Agronomy, Horticulture and Plant
Science Department, and the Natural Resource Management Department, and will be
integrated into a multidisciplinary research environment. The students will
engage in a wide range of research topics ranging from crop breeding, functional
plant genomics and phenomics, next generation sequencing and bioinformatics,
plant biotic interactions (beneficial and pathogenic), soil science, and plant
ecology. A `genomics jamboree´ will train students in next generation
sequencing, genome assembly, gene annotation, and bioinformatics, and will allow
the students to work actively in teams.

In addition to pursuing their independent research projects, the students will
participate in a boot camp that will provide them with the essential background
to develop and design the experiments for their internship project, and in
workshops and discussions about the ethical conduct of research, successful
graduate program applications, and entrepreneurial and industry career
opportunities after graduation. To apply for the program, the students must
submit: a completed application form, academic transcripts, a cover letter with
research interests and long-term career goals, and two letters of
recommendation. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG
URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine
their career paths. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://www.sdstate.edu/reu-plants, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Heike Bücking
at heike.bucking@sdstate.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Jose Gonzalez Hernandez at
jose.gonzalez@sdstate.edu).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.