* 1950766
* REU Site: Geographic, Socio-economic, and Cultural Factors Shaping Crop Diversity and Livelihood Outcomes
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Travis Reynolds, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 01/31/2024
* USD 475,468.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits in addition to integrating research and education. Relationships
between on-farm crop diversity and food and income security have long been of
interest to scholars and development practitioners. The REU Site at the
University of Vermont (UVM) provides eight U.S. students from diverse
backgrounds an opportunity to conduct interdisciplinary research on crop
diversity and livelihoods among smallholder farmers. Under the eight-week REU,
students spend four weeks on the UVM campus in Burlington, Vermont where they
train in spatial analysis, survey analysis using existing large farm and
household datasets, qualitative research methods, and written and oral
communication. They then conduct original research on on-farm crop diversity,
regional crop diversity, nutrition, and rural livelihoods. Students thus have
the chance to contribute to multi-dimensional research while developing
theoretical and methodological skills, and engaging in cross-cultural
partnerships. Building on the model of a previous REU Site, this program
provides participants with a unique cultural and educational experience, while
offering the chance to conduct original research in a supportive REU setting.
Recruitment is open to any NSF eligible undergraduate students, though the
program is designed to promote participation by low-income students, first
generation college students, and students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site contributes to active scholarly
debates around how production of diverse crops relates to food and income
security. Working with mentors from UVM, the National Socio-Environmental
Synthesis Center (SESYNC), Pennsylvania State University, Sterling College, and
the international research center Bioversity International, REU participants
actively engage in the design and implementation of research on crop diversity
and livelihoods across geographic scales including: (i) Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) analyses using public and commercial datasets; (ii) statistical
analyses using large, nationally representative household surveys (e.g., DHS,
LSMS-ISA); and (iii) field-based surveys and interviews, working with local
partners to verify findings from secondary data and further explore how crop and
food choices relate to geographic, economic and cultural factors. We also
provide innovative methods linking newly available geospatial datasets and large
household survey datasets, and testing patterns that emerge from secondary
analyses via primary data collection with local partners. Results are
disseminated widely through meetings of community partners, a customized
website, co-authored student publications in economics, rural sociology and
interdisciplinary journals, and student participation in professional
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.