* 1950549
* REU Site: University of North Carolina at Greensboro in Complex Data Analysis using Statistical and Machine Learning Tools
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Sat Gupta, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 324,000.00

In this age of big data, technological innovations allow the collection of
massive amounts of data at low cost. Sizes of hundreds of gigabytes, terabytes,
and even petabytes are no longer uncommon. Appropriate handling and analysis of
such data is vital training for the future generation of graduates. With this
goal in mind, the proposed REU program aims to provide 10-week sophisticated
training in “Complex Data Analysis using Statistical and Machine Learning Tools”
to eight (8) highly motivated nationally selected undergraduates from
Mathematical Sciences during summers of 2020-2022. The faculty mentors bring a
rich and diverse experience to this training program. PI Gupta, Co-PI Gao,
Senior Personnel Richter and Stufken are statisticians; Senior Personnel Mohanty
is a Computer Science faculty specializing in machine learning tools; and Senior
Personnel Sun is a statistical geneticist in the Department of Mathematics and
Statistics. The training program will motivate the student participants,
particularly those from under-represented minorities, to go on to graduate
programs in mathematical sciences and become better trained professionals
capable of handling societal data analytics needs. As part of broader
professional training, students will undertake trips to major research centers
in North Carolina such as SAS, SAMSI (Statistical and Applied Mathematical
Sciences Institute), and the Joint School of Nano Science and Nano Engineering.
We expect that the research completed as part of this training will be of very
high quality and will lead to journal articles and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Complexity in data can come in
a variety of ways. High dimensionality of the data is one such complexity where
the number of variables can be relatively large as compared to the data size.
Data contamination is another type of complexity. Students will learn the art of
simultaneous handling of dimensionality-reduction and outlier detection as part
of one of the projects. Noise-added data (to create confidentiality in data
before public release) is another type of complexity. It is becoming common for
researchers to have access only to scrambled data, and not the real data. In one
of the projects, we will talk about why and how data are scrambled and de-
scrambled using randomized response models, retaining aggregate level properties
and ensuring anonymity to respondents. The machine learning component of the REU
program will focus on leveraging the capabilities of sophisticated tools such as
Unsupervised and Supervised Machine Learning, and Deep Learning for
identification of social media posts related to disease symptoms, and for
prediction of temporal trends in disease propagation. Violation of model
assumptions is another source of complexity that necessitates the use of
nonparametric techniques such as the resampling methods. In many matched-pairs
design situations, a mixture of complete and incomplete pairs of data are
available. Rather than ignoring data from incomplete pairs, we will train
students in methods designed for analyzing such data. In another project,
students will be trained in the subdata selection techniques which are very
helpful in dealing with data of enormous size. This project will address
questions of the type (1) what size should the subdata have to ensure a reliable
analysis; and (2) for a given size, how should the subdata be selected? The
overarching goal in all of these projects will be to train students in
recognizing various complexities in data and finding the right techniques to
handle such data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.