* 1950329
* Preparing Highly Effective Mathematics Teacher Leaders in East San Jose by Focusing on Mathematical Sense-making, Growth Mindset, and Equity
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2026
* Edward Schaefer, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2026
* USD 2,999,933.00

This project aims to serve the regional and the national need to prepare and
retain a greater number of high-quality mathematics teachers. It focuses
specifically on the development of highly effective mathematics teacher leaders
for high-need school districts. The project aims to expand mathematics teaching
and learning opportunities, particularly for traditionally underrepresented
students. To do so, it will simultaneously address three issues: improve
students’ mathematical sense-making; advance students’ growth mindset, e.g., a
conviction that that they can learn mathematics; and improve teachers’ skills in
mathematics instruction to incorporate research-based practices for engaging
English language learners. The project intends to advance teacher education by
providing innovative models of teacher professional development, emphasizing
teaching for equity, growth mindset, and cultural awareness. In addition, it
intends to provide teachers with support that can be sustained within districts
beyond the scope of the project and develop teacher leadership skills so that
they can help improve mathematics education in an entire school
district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Santa Clara University includes
partnerships with San Jose's Eastside Union High School District and the Silicon
Valley Education Foundation. The project’s six-year goals include preparing and
retaining 20 high-quality professional mathematics educators who have the needed
skills and commitment to teach in high-need local education agencies in East San
Jose, California, and surrounding communities. These mathematics educators will
be recruited from mathematics and mathematics-related fields (e.g.,
engineering). The candidates who do not already possess a master’s degree will
be supported in their first year in earning one through the University’s Master
of Arts in Teaching plus Teaching Credential program. The project will support
the retention of these talented individuals in mathematics teaching through
graduate teacher preparation studies that include field/clinical experiences and
pedagogical content knowledge preparation, as well as a four-year in-service
professional and leadership development sequence. This project will conduct
research to determine which professional development activities most effectively
build teachers’ capacity to promote growth mindset in their students. The
project utilizes an “in-the-moment” coaching approach that is modeled after
Lampert and colleagues’ (2013, 2010) rehearsal work supporting pre-service
teachers’ enactment of ambitious mathematics instruction. The project is poised
to improve student mathematics achievement in high-need schools, as well as
increase opportunities for mathematics education and STEM careers for students
from under-served communities. This Track 2: Teaching Fellowships project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.