* 1950302
* OPUS: MCS: Mechanisms and evolution of premating reproductive isolation along a speciation continuum
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jeanne Robertson, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 472,173.00

A central question in evolutionary biology is how and why a trillion forms of
life, both living and extinct, have emerged. Speciation—the formation of new
species— can proceed when two groups of organisms no longer recognize each other
as mates due to differences in relevant traits such as behavior (e.g., songs) or
appearance (e.g., coloration). This research quantifies the behavioral and
neural mechanisms that mediate female mate recognition and preference to
understand how speciation proceeds. Researchers will measure female response to
males from differentiated populations of the same species (pre-speciation stage)
and to males of two closely related species (post-speciation stage), thus
spanning a continuum of species-level differentiation. Researchers will first
conduct behavioral studies to identify the strength and role of relevant traits
in courtship and mating success at each stage. Next, female response will be
linked to activation patterns in the regions of the brain associated with
visual, acoustic and courtship processing. Examination of neural de-activation
patterns in the courtship region of the brain along the speciation continuum
addresses a gap in knowledge of whether speciation proceeds gradually or
abruptly. This research builds upon 17 years of genetic and behavioral studies
of the Neotropical red-eyed treefrog, Agalychnis callidryas, to understand the
mechanisms and processes of early-stage speciation. It supports diverse students
to experience science in the field and in the lab, and creates active-learning
content for ~120 students in an enrichment program at the K5 grade level (82%
underserved minority, 60% Free/Reduced Lunch). Finally, this research fosters
international collaboration between U.S. and Costa Rican research
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research provides new and
exciting insights into the evolution of signal divergence, female recognition
and neural activity patterns, and the consequences of these factors for
premating reproductive isolation and speciation. This research has two specific
aims. Aim 1 examines female response to divergent cues through both female
preference assays and neural activation patterns to test whether incremental
increases in trait divergence result in a continuous or all-or-none neural
response. Aim 2 tests how mismatched cues alter neural activity response
patterns, addressing whether mismatched cues weaken/break courtship response.
Neural response will be measured using immunohistochemistry and microscopy.
Combined, these two aims identify how the trait(s) that are important for
stimulating courtship behavior modulate neural activity function, and thus
provide mechanistic insight into how premating reproductive isolation evolves.
Computational modeling will explore the dynamic relationship among signal
differentiation and female response (behavior and neural activity) using
simulated data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.