* 1950509
* REU Site: Cellular Bioengineering: From Biomaterials to Stem Cells
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Maribel Vazquez, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 428,840.00

The REU Site: Cellular Bioengineering: From Biomaterials to Stem Cells at
Rutgers University-New Brunswick provides unique opportunities to a diverse
population of undergraduate students to perform cutting-edge, cross-disciplinary
research in the field of Cellular Bioengineering and develop a deeper
understanding of graduate level research to accelerate their development as
research scientists and engineers. The program includes strategic and impactful
formal programming, active mentoring, collaboration, and careful monitoring of
the student experience. The site includes a Cellular Bioengineering Boot Camp
which introduces Scholars to laboratory and imaging skills that accelerate their
integration into their research labs. Exciting research projects that rely
heavily on interdisciplinary collaboration introduce the Scholars to a broad
array of topics grounded in Cellular Bioengineering. A focus on Innovation and
Entrepreneurship parallels the NSF I-Corps initiative for translational research
to capitalize on the potential for new technology that emanates from the
research. An optional day-long clinical immersion allows the students to engage
with clinicians for hands-on experience with current devices and technology.
Additionally, this site includes a focus on health disparities to enhance the
impact of the comprehensive diversity of the cohorts by increasing our Scholars’
awareness of the disparate impact of biomedical research and eventual treatments
on different US communities, including many to which the Scholars belong. Weekly
seminars and discussion groups allow tracking and monitoring of the Scholars’
experiences while concurrently developing communication skills, career goals,
and other professional skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site: Cellular
Bioengineering: From Biomaterials to Stem Cells at Rutgers University-New
Brunswick provides opportunities to perform cutting-edge, cross-disciplinary
research in the field of Cellular Bioengineering to a diverse population of
undergraduates. The REU site focuses on recruiting students who traditionally do
not have these research opportunities, including under-represented minorities,
women, students who are in the first generation in their family to attend
college, and students who attend small schools that do not have extensive
research enterprises. The REU site provides these students with an immersive,
10-week research experience. Student research project areas include engineering
cell therapies, drug delivery, regenerative medicine, cellular imaging, and
systems biology. In these areas, students apply engineering principles and
problem-solving skills to promote the progress of science to understand basic
elements of how cells communicate with one another to perform biological and
physiological functions, and to advance national health through design and
development approaches to restore these functions in cases of injury and
disease. In parallel to these efforts, students participate in weekly
professional development seminars and workshops that build on and complement the
research activities. These activities promote a deep understanding of the
research projects to emphasize that research is much more than what a student
does in the laboratory, but also what the big picture problem is that the
student is trying to solve, why it is important to solve that problem, and how
the research is aimed at solving that problem in a new and innovative way.
Students work to communicate their research in writing through preparation of
mock fellowships and personal statements and orally through posters and
presentations. The REU program provides financial support for the students to
deliver these presentations at national meetings. To broaden the students’
appreciation and perspectives for the importance of research, they complete
exercises in Innovation &amp; Entrepreneurship and in Health Disparities. The
exercises in Innovation &amp; Entrepreneurship enable students to understand how
their summer research in cellular bioengineering can be translated to new
products and technology and how to identify needs an opportunities that can be
addressed by new research and technology and culminate with a mock business
pitch. The exercises in Health Disparities aim to inspire students to recognize
the disparate impact of biomedical research and eventual treatments on different
US communities, including many to which our summer students belong. All of these
exercises are designed for students to consider different audiences and
stakeholders when communicating their research, which significantly enhances
their understanding of the work and stimulates them to identify new
opportunities and challenges for future research and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.