* 1950933
* REU Site: UC Davis Chemistry Research Experience for Undergraduates in Energy and Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Annaliese Franz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2024
* USD 364,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of California-Davis, located in Davis, CA, supports the training of 28 total
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. This program, supported
by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, engages students with research projects at the interface of energy,
materials science and biotechnology. Participants also take part in interactive
development workshops to improve scientific communication skills, provide career
guidance, and bolster capacity to perform science in a professional setting.
This site offers additional multi-level mentoring and resources to accommodate
blind and vision-impaired students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students engage in
unique research projects in energy-related, fundamental and applied chemistry
with expert chemistry researchers. Examples of research projects include
synthesis of molecular and heterogenous catalysts; fabrication of artificial
photosynthesis devices from inexpensive nanomaterials; protein engineering and
synthetic biology for biofuel production; and computational modeling and
simulations for enzyme and catalyst design. Graduate school and professional
development programs include seminars on the search for suitable graduate
programs and identifying keys for success in graduate school and beyond. The
site is committed to broadening participation in STEM by promoting participation
of first-generation, underrepresented minority, blind and vision impaired, and
female undergraduate students from local community colleges, primarily
undergraduate institutions, and minority-serving institutions such as the
University of Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.