* 1950814
* REU Site: Data Science and Crime Analytics
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Michael Turner, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 313,025.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE) Sciences
Directorate. This program integrates research and education and has both
scientific and societal benefits. The program targets undergraduate students
from diverse backgrounds, particularly those from groups where research
opportunities are limited and/or participation in research is underrepresented
such as women and minority students. The Crime Analytics REU is a ten-week
summer program designed to help students develop research skills and technical
abilities in the multidisciplinary fields of data science and analytics, and to
prepare them for graduate study or employment in a data-saturated economy
following graduation. Specifically, the program seeks to: 1) aggressively
recruit a diverse subset of undergraduate students to actively participate in
innovative research projects that apply analytic tools to make decisions about
crime; (2) expose students to foundational analytic methods early in their
educational careers in hopes of encouraging their involvement in data science
and an analytics-based field of study; (3) expose and engage students to
research opportunities that demand communication and cooperation across experts
in traditional disciplinary boundaries; (4) enhance students’ educational
experiences by exposing them to workshops, seminars, and social activities that
enrich their professional development and inspire them to pursue graduate
school; (5) foster shared interdisciplinary communication skills by offering
opportunities to disseminate research findings via an annual undergraduate
research symposium, annual professional conferences, and peer-reviewed journal
outlets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Crime Analytics-REU site will operate by
housing selected students on campus, and provide them with a stipend in exchange
for their work on faculty-led research projects. The program is modeled around a
team-based pedagogical concept in which students will be selected and assigned
to interdisciplinary research teams that will use cutting-edge data technologies
to explore problems related to crime and criminal justice. Students will be
exposed to data science skills that include working with large data sets, data
mining and manipulation, machine learning, crime mapping, quantitative modeling,
and data visualization. Students will also be taken to visit leaders in the data
industry, such as SAS, Google, Apple, and the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police
Department’s Crime Analysis lab. The research projects will culminate with the
preparation and submission of a research manuscript for publication in an
academic journal, and a public presentation of their research. Students will
also participate in social and cultural enrichment activities as well as
workshops designed to prepare them for graduate school and or professional
employment in the data analytics field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.