* 1950502
* REU Site: Georgetown University REU for Materials Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Amy Liu, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 363,070.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This REU Site provides undergraduates from diverse
backgrounds and a broad spectrum of institutions an opportunity to engage in
important and challenging research in the fundamental science of materials,
while developing technical and professional skills necessary for a successful
career in science. In addition, students are exposed to the role of science,
particularly materials research, in public policy, and are meeting with science
policy practitioners in the Nation's Capital. Recruitment efforts focus on
students from schools with limited research programs, as well as members of
underrepresented groups. The engagement in focused research projects,
exploration of the broader role of science and scientists in society, and
development of lasting relationships with faculty mentors positively influences
student perceptions of careers in science and helps increase the pool of future
materials researchers. In addition, students who participate in this Site are
uniquely qualified to understand and communicate the importance of materials
science in technological progress and in addressing societal challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Each year, nine undergraduates from
diverse backgrounds and a broad spectrum of institutions are recruited for a
10-week summer research experience in materials physics at Georgetown
University. Students engage in experimental, computational, and theoretical
research projects in nanoscale physics, soft matter, device physics, active
matter, biophysics, and cold-atom systems. Students also participate in a
variety of professional development activities. Taking advantage of Georgetown's
location in the Nation's Capital, students are exposed to the role of science,
particularly materials research, in public policy. These activities build on
Georgetown's existing programs designed to engage undergraduate science majors
directly with the government on issues of national importance and help build an
understanding of the connection between scientific research and the world
outside of the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.