* 1950400
* REU Site: CNS: Sensing and Smart Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Jason Hallstrom, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 01/31/2024
* USD 379,808.00

This award renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
Florida Atlantic University. Faculty in the Institute for Sensing and Embedded
Network Systems Engineering will host cohorts of undergraduate students for
summer research in the area of sensing and smart systems. Smart systems
represent an emerging class of computing systems that provide real-time
awareness of conditions, trends, and patterns to support improved decision-
making and automated control. Smart systems offer a significant application
potential that makes their design and application appealing to undergraduate
researchers. The recruitment and selection procedures will ensure that the
program engages a diverse demographic, including a significant number of women
and members of underrepresented minorities. Many of the participants will be
recruited from institutions where there are limited research opportunities for
undergraduates. In addition to conducting research the students will participate
in other professional development activities such as industry field trips,
professional seminars, speakers and career guidance, and graduate school
preparation. An external evaluator will measure the success of the site and the
impact on the students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site is led by faculty
mentors from the Institute for Sensing and Embedded Network Systems Engineering
(I-Sense). The faculty of the I-Sense Institute have significant research
expertise and offer state-of-the-art facilities that should provide a compelling
research experience to undergraduates. The undergraduates will be woven into
existing research groups and projects that are working on current and emerging
applications that have real-world connections. The research will focus on three
main areas of application expertise including infrastructure systems, marine and
environment, and health and behavior. The projects span diverse contexts of
exploration and application, unified in their focus on sensing and smart
systems. The exploration space presents myriad challenges at the confluence of
sensing, computing, signal processing, artificial intelligence, and cyber-
physical control. The site focus and associated research projects present an
outstanding opportunity for catalyzing interdisciplinary exploration and
discovery that will excite students and demonstrate scientific discovery and
exploration at a high level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.