* 1950520
* REU Site: Exploration of marine biology on the Oregon coast (EMBOC)
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Richard Emlet, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2024
* USD 405,223.00

The University of Oregon’s Oregon Institute of Marine Biology (OIMB), located in
Charleston OR, will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
during the summers of 2020-2022. The program will support the participation of
ten undergraduates in research projects during a nine-week summer internship
each summer, involving a total of thirty students. Objectives of this REU site
are to teach undergraduates how to conduct research into biological processes
and to ensure they are aware of career pathways for marine scientists. The
program offers research opportunities to students from 2-year colleges using a
tiered learning model with pairs of students – one from a 4-year (4YC) and one
from a 2-year college (2YC) - working with mentors to conduct research. Student
participants are recruited via a national search and are provided with a
stipend, housing and travel funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research topics focus
on biological interactions of marine organisms and their environment, or on
aspects of development and reproduction of marine invertebrates. Interns will
conduct research projects on cellular dynamics, development, ecology and
evolution of larval and juvenile marine organisms, impacts of climate change on
foraging ecology of dungeness crabs, evaluating long term changes in eelgrass
communities, and molecular biodiversity. Activities will include field trips to
intertidal sites, the University of Oregon main campus in Eugene, and various
coastal habitats. Professional development sessions will provide training in
resume writing, interviewing, preparing posters, giving presentations, using R
for graphs and statistics, use of professional social media, and the importance
of networking and broader impacts of research. Following a workshop on outreach
to broader audiences, interns will serve as scientific experts at OIMB's
Charleston Marine Life Center, a public aquarium and museum. Interns will be
encouraged to present their posters at undergraduate research symposia at their
home institutions and at an appropriate annual professional
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.