* 1950298
* Building Capacity to Close the Loop: From High School STEM Student to High School STEM Teacher
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Laurette Foster, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2022
* USD 75,000.00

This project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to recruit,
prepare, and support certified STEM teachers, with attention to increasing the
number of certified minority STEM teachers. This problem is important given the
existing shortage of qualified minority STEM teachers, the changing demographics
of the K-12 student population, and the positive impacts of teachersâ€™ with
similar demographics as the students they teach. The project intends to create a
pathway to close the loop from high school STEM students to high school STEM
teachers, by preparing STEM teachers who will teach in the same or a similar
high school from which they graduated. It also includes plans for collecting
baseline data to determine need, interest, and capacity for recruiting STEM
majors to become STEM teachers. The expected outcomes of the project are: (1) a
plan to recruit students from partnering Early College High Schools; (2) a model
for preparing these students via learning communities; and (3) a plan for a
comprehensive program to support this students as they return to teach in their
high schools. It is expected this work will establish a replicable model within
the partnering high-need educational agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
at Prairie View A&amp;M University, a Historically Black University, includes
partnerships with Aldine Independent School District, Houston Independent School
District, Royal Independent School District, and Sheldon Independent School
District. Project goals include: (1) developing evidence-based, innovative
strategies to recruit, prepare, and support candidates from high-need local
educational agencies with existing Early College High Schools to increase the
diversity of the pool of STEM teachers in Texas; and (2) advancing knowledge and
understanding of models and strategies for recruiting, preparing, and supporting
new STEM teachers in high-need educational agencies through learning communities
at a historically black university. The project has the potential to benefit
society by establishing the necessary infrastructure for implementing a future
Noyce Track 1 proposal to encourage the full participation of underrepresented
minority groups in STEM. This Capacity Building project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.