* 1950074
* REU Site: Coastal Research in Environmental Science and Technology (CREST) at UMass Boston
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Helen Poynton, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2024
* USD 395,652.00

The University of Massachusetts Boston, School for the Environment will host a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site. The program is called the
"Coastal Research in Environmental Science and Technology (CREST)" REU program
and will bring eight undergraduates to Boston each summer for a ten-week
internship. The award provides support for three years of the CREST REU Program
(2020-2022).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CREST provides students with coastal
environmental research experiences in a transdisciplinary program that cuts
across the ecological, environmental, and social sciences. Coastal ecosystems
are considered to disproportionately produce more services to humans than any
other ecosystems, however, they suffer greatly from “wicked problems.”
Anthropogenic pressures are driving habitat loss or conversion (e.g. coastal
development, fisheries, civil engineering), habitat degradation (e.g.
eutrophication, pollution, climate change and sea level rise), and
overexploitation of coastal resources (e.g. direct takes exceeding sustainable
levels). How coastal systems respond is poorly understood and data from natural
science and social science research is needed for integration into the decision-
making process. The research experiences available to CREST interns include high
need areas to address these “wicked” problems including the fields of chemistry,
geology and earth science, ecology and molecular ecology, and social,
behavioral, economics, and sustainability science. Environmental professionals
representing diversity in training and perspective are needed and CREST seeks to
fill the need for these highly qualified professionals by introducing younger
students to transdisciplinary research, thereby lowering the inertia of crossing
disciplinary boundaries and increasing the comfort of students in working in
diverse settings.Program goals include training scholars in transdisciplinary
research approaches in oceanography while fostering their interest in coastal
issues and research and building their confidence in science aptitude and
communication. To support the transdisciplinary training, CREST includes a day
long orientation program; a seminar series; professional development workshops
(scientific communications, responsible conduct of research, applying to
graduate school, etc.); and activities designed to integrate students into the
University community. The CREST program provides unique transdisciplinary
training in the coastal environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.