* 1950260
* Investigating Effective STEM Teaching Through a Culturally Responsive Lens
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Elizabeth Edmondson, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 999,931.00

This project aims to serve the national need to understand the effectiveness of
STEM teachers at high-need schools. Specifically, the project will analyze how
culturally responsive science teaching is conducted in high-need school settings
and how teacher preparation programs affect the real-world implementation of
culturally responsive teaching practices. This study has the potential to
increase understanding of how particular components of teacher preparation can
promote teacher effectiveness in high-need schools. Thus, the results could be
used to advance the goal of providing all students with qualified and effective
STEM teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the American Museum of
Natural History includes partnerships with the State University of New York
College at Cortland and Virginia Commonwealth University. All three partners
have received Noyce funding. The project will use case studies to examine the
ways in which culturally responsive pedagogy is incorporated into the respective
Noyce programs and manifests itself in the teaching practices of program
graduates. The project will construct two sets of case studies, the first of
which will depict specific components of each partner’s Noyce program. The
second set of case studies will detail the teaching practices of each Noyce
programs’ graduates. The case studies will draw on the perspectives of multiple
stakeholders (e.g., program graduates; their students, administrators, program
faculty, and leadership; and school-based mentor teachers), and the project will
conduct analyses across each set of studies. Due to the partners' diverse
geographical locations, the study will attend to culturally responsive science
teaching in high-need settings in both rural and urban areas. Throughout the
project, two Noyce Scholar graduates from each partner institution will join the
Research Team as co-researchers and contribute to all research efforts and case
study development. Thus, teachers and teacher educators will work
collaboratively to develop a cohesive understanding of how culturally responsive
science teaching can be practiced in different classroom contexts, along with
the role that program experiences may play in the development of Noyce
graduates’ effectiveness. The major outcomes of this study will be rich
descriptive case studies and analyses of Noyce graduates’ teaching practices in
the light of culturally responsive science teaching as it relates to teacher
effectiveness, along with characterizations of how these practices are
reflective (or not) of graduates’ preparation experiences. Findings will be
shared with the Noyce community as part of the project’s dissemination efforts
to support Noyce programs as they develop plans for enhancing teacher
effectiveness in high-need schools. These findings are designed to deepen the
understanding of effective practice, including what it can look like and what
preparation programs can do to support their teachers in learning how to
implement it in flexible and context-dependent ways. Furthermore, findings from
this study will be made available to researchers across the field, enabling them
to draw from complex and nuanced understandings of teachers' practice and
connections to teacher preparation, filling a current need in the field.
Building on these findings will strengthen studies to further illuminate the
connections among teacher effectiveness, persistence, and retention in high-need
settings. This Track 4: Noyce Research project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.