* 1950008
* Transfer to Teaching: Accelerated STEM Teacher Preparation from Community College to Credential
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Rossella Santagata, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 723,220.00

This project aims to serve the national need for growing and diversifying the
STEM teaching workforce. Specifically, this project will work with local
community colleges to promote the entry and success of community college
students in CalTeach, the University’s STEM teaching credential program. Within
two years after transfer, the community college students will earn a Bachelor of
Science degree and single subject teaching credential in mathematics or science.
Supporting these students as Noyce Scholars will accelerate the pathway from
community college to credentialed STEM teaching. The project will offer cross-
enrollment opportunities in lower division CalTeach courses for community
college students. It will also provide Noyce scholarships to transfer students
in the CalTeach Program and support incoming transfer students through a week-
long Summer STEM Research Institute for Future
Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of California-
Irvine is a collaboration between the Schools of Biological Sciences, Physical
Sciences, and Education, working in partnership with four local community
colleges: Cerritos, Santa Ana, Mt. San Antonio, and Santiago Canyon. The Santa
Ana Unified School District and the Unity Middle College High School and other
area districts also serve as partner districts. Despite its diverse population,
Southern California has some of the most inequitable and segregated school
districts in the nation. The project’s main goals are to enable transfer
students to graduate with a Bachelor of Science degree and teaching credential
in four years and to prepare and deploy K-12 teachers who reflect and understand
the communities in which they teach. This program will support at least 24 pre-
service teachers over five years. It has the potential to improve equity and
access in Southern California’s school districts, to increase interest of
students in STEM students, and place more highly effective teachers into in
high-need schools. The project’s broader impacts include scholarships and an
accelerated program to support undergraduate transfer students' pursuit of a
teaching credential. In addition, it will place highly trained student teachers
in high-need districts and increase the number of high-quality, credentialed
teachers from underrepresented backgrounds. Project evaluation by external
evaluators will determine whether the project meets its goals and whether the
program can serve as a model for other institutions. This Track 1: Scholarships
and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.