* 1950690
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Problem Solving in Human Dominated Wetland Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Anna Christina Tyler, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 404,436.00

This new REU Site emphasizes engaging underrepresented groups, women, and
deaf/hard of hearing students in interdisciplinary earth systems research that
builds collaboration and communication skills for solving complex environmental
problems. We will use wetland restoration as a lens through which 10 students
per summer can get hands-on experience with the interaction between science and
society that shapes ecosystem functions and services. Wetlands are more valuable
per unit area than all other ecosystems because of the numerous ecosystem
services they provide. Student research will provide recommendations for
realistic management options that recognize the inherent limitations of
ecosystem restoration within an urban landscape. A core component of this
program is training undergraduates in science communication and then
disseminating environmental research in a number of settings, including youth
programs, community events and to citizen scientists. This both expands public
awareness of wetland ecosystem services and improves student confidence in their
conceptual knowledge and awareness of diversity challenges in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freshwater wetlands are valued for services that
include carbon sequestration, nutrient removal and habitat provisioning, but are
also significant sources of greenhouse gases. As landscapes rapidly urbanize
these ecosystems are increasingly beset by complex environmental forces (land-
use change, pollution, species invasion, climate change, etc…) that need to be
addressed with interdisciplinary approaches that consider sociological
interactions and landscape heterogeneity. Research projects in this new REU Site
will expand understanding of created and natural urban wetlands, with students
actively engaged in research clusters that include the following approaches: (i)
biogeochemistry and ecology, (ii) sociological feedbacks, and (iii) geospatial
patterns and scaling. Interdisciplinary teams will be assembled that address
questions that include: (1) the relationships between extrinsic and intrinsic
drivers and ecosystem structure and function, (2) the role of ‘top-down’ vs.
‘bottom-up’ control of ecosystem function and restoration success in constructed
wetlands, and (3) the utility and limits of assessing and scaling ecosystem
structure and function in small, heterogenous wetlands. The program will also
include workshops that target key areas of professional development and expose
students to interdisciplinary environmental science tools. Participants will
disseminate their research to scientists and non-scientists through a series of
communication and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.