* 1950082
* REU Site: Hardware, Embedded Software, and Analytics for Environment Quality Monitoring
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Majeed Hayat, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 376,717.00

There has never been a higher urgency for addressing environmental problems,
many caused by human activity and emerging climate change. Thus, the main theme
of this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site project is the
development of a holistic approach for water and air quality monitoring.
Participating faculty from three different departments, Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Civil Construction and Environmental
Engineering will work with students to contribute to active research on
underwater and aerial drones, water and air quality sensors, embedded algorithms
for sensor fusion, navigation and control, sensor technologies, wireless
communications, 3D printing and mechanical design of drone hulls, and
environmental engineering. By recruiting students nationally and from those at
Marquette and local community colleges - with a particular focus on women,
African-American and Hispanic students- the proposed program will bring together
students from diverse cultural and academic backgrounds, thereby increasing
participation and having a broader impact. This proposal will transform the way
the environment monitoring is done holistically with interdisciplinary
approaches, spanning multiple areas, while training the next generation of
engineers and researchers with more comprehensive views of the problems that
society faces today and in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program uses
an interdisciplinary approach to addressing open research questions in the area
of embedded and computational solutions using underwater and aerial drones for
the purpose of water and air monitoring, data collection, and analytics. Having
environment monitoring as the underlying theme, the proposed project is
interdisciplinary. This is a unique aspect of this proposal as it crosses
department boundaries to bring together into a holistic approach research
projects from three different departments. The objectives are to: 1) engage
student participants in research activities leading to intellectual flow
experiences, which will increase motivation and commitment to careers in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM); 2) increase
participation in engineering and science of women, African-American and Hispanic
students; 3) educate students for academic excellence and persistent
contribution to STEM for the greater good of humanity; and 4) mentor
participants for life-long learning careers in engineering. To achieve these
objectives, students will be immersed daily in research activities. These
activities will be facilitated via a series of bootcamps on writing,
entrepreneurship and machine learning, in addition to self-paced online
technical training, environment monitoring colloquium and lunch with speakers,
tours at local companies, and graduate seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site
is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.