* 1950597
* REU Site: Sustainability of Horizontal Civil Networks in Rural Areas
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Christine Wittich, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 445,241.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site, Sustainability of
Horizontal Civil Networks in Rural Areas, at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
will provide interdisciplinary research opportunities focusing on sustainable
civil infrastructure for rural areas to three cohorts of ten students, primarily
from institutions with limited or no research opportunities and/or students
underrepresented in STEM. Rural areas, which contain approximately 20% of the US
population and over 90% of the land area in the United States, are fundamental
to human well-being in both rural and urban areas. Rural areas provide resources
such as the infrastructure for U.S. food and bioenergy production as well as the
transportation infrastructure from inland urban centers to ports. Rural areas
are characterized by agricultural- and natural resource-based economics, stable
or declining populations with low population densities, and “farm-to-market”
localized transportation patterns, and these characteristics necessitate new
technologies and approaches for civil infrastructure. Despite the differences
between rural and urban regions, little attention is paid to the unique
challenges and opportunities for sustainability in rural areas. This REU site
will provide opportunities for student participants to engage in fundamental
research in two broad areas: 1) environmental and water resources challenges in
rural and agricultural areas, and 2) structural engineering, materials, and
transportation challenges for sustainable rural infrastructure. The research
conducted through this program is expected to increase the economic
competitiveness of rural areas and result in a trained workforce for unique
rural challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this REU site are: 1)
provide research experiences to undergraduate students with at least 60% of
participants from institutions with limited research opportunities, at least 50%
from groups underrepresented in engineering, and at least 40% first-generation
college students; 2) provide participants with first-hand exposure to the
engineering and infrastructure challenges facing the rural United States through
research and professional development opportunities; and 3) promote and sustain
the interest of undergraduate students in persisting in a STEM field and
pursuing graduate education. Through this REU site, 10 undergraduates per year
will be given an opportunity to conduct fundamental research with our faculty
mentors. In addition, this REU site will offer a series of communication
development opportunities including preparation of a conference paper, informal
presentations to their peers, formal poster presentations, and outreach to high
school students. It is anticipated that this REU experience will motivate
student participants to continue in STEM and to pursue graduate degrees in
engineering, which will contribute to diversifying the future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.