* 1950354
* SBIR Phase I:  Zero Emission Nested Loop Reforming for High Purity Hydrogen Production
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Kenneth Kelley, Pure Sustainable Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to meet the growing demand for reduction of carbon
emissions. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPS) indicates that the major
sources of emissions in the U.S. are from transportation, electrical generation,
and industrial processes. These sources collectively constitute 79% of the 6.5
billion metric tons of emissions in 2017. This SBIR project will enhance the
leading hydrogen production technology to become more efficient and release zero
carbon emissions. The hydrogen technology innovation will also help meet the
growing demand in the hydrogen market, valued at $136 billion and growing at 8%
annually, as well as unlock hydrogen in new industries, such as electrical
generation, that in the past have deemed hydrogen production as a non-viable
option due in part to the carbon emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project proposes to construct an innovative hydrogen reformer that is
more efficient than the leading hydrogen production technology while releasing
zero carbon emissions. The main technical risk the research will address is the
integration of technically complex systems into a seamless hydrogen generator.
The proposed project will break the integrated system into components which will
be evaluated prior to integration, thus reducing the overall project risk. Upon
successful construction and testing of the proposed system, PureTech will have
demonstrated the technical and economical feasibility of the proposed system.
This proof will allow PureTech to embark on a path to build large-scale hydrogen
production systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.