* 1950674
* Collaborative Research: Establishing a Novel Geophysical Monitoring Scheme for Delineating In Situ Carbonation Processes in Ultramafic Complexes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Masako Tominaga, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 108,878.00

This project investigates natural carbon sequestration processes in geologic
formations using geophysical methods. At the largest scale, this approach will
ultimately assess future geological applications for atmospheric CO2 monitoring
and mitigation efforts. The research seeks to establish a novel, field-based,
high-resolution monitoring technique for how carbon sequestration takes place
through natural carbonation processes. They use magnetics and gravity
measurements acquired by state-of-art sensors in the field. The survey site is
located within Atlin ophiolite, British Columbia, Canada,where previous studies
indicate exposure of the relevant rocks. Their approach allows the reseachers to
directly observe the carbonation process and gain insight into this important
scientific process as well as its impacts on the broader earth science
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical processes occurring during the
formation of Earth?s rock represents the largest single long-term sink in the
global carbon cycle. One such process is peridotite carbonation, the chemical
process in which gaseous carbon dioxide (CO2) is solidified by the interaction
of existing rock and water. Understanding peridotite carbonation is important
for understanding a variety of Earth science processes, including the exchange
of carbon between the atmosphere, hydrosphere (e.g., oceans, rivers,
groundwater, etc) and Earth?s crust and interior, the habitability of microbial
organisms hosted by this process, and the role that carbon (specifically amount
and distribution) play in the evolution of Earth. Furthermore, the peridotite
carbonation process serves as a permanent (i.e., stable and long-term) method
for storing CO2 and has the potential to be one of the most efficient
applications for geological CO2 sequestration. Thus peridotite carbonation may
provide a viable method for the long-term storage of anthropogenic (man made)
CO2. They test the hypothesis that observable changes in magnetics and gravity
signals correspond to the magnetic and gravitational attraction of the rock that
changes with variations in the naturally occurring carbon sequestration within
the rock. Previously, this hypothesis has only been tested in the laboratory
using small field samples; here they study this process directly in large field
studies, where previous mapping indicated the exposure and clear spatial
zonation in the field of mantle peridotite, serpentinite and listvenite (the end
product of the carbonation process of mantle peridotite) that are separated by
additional zones consisting of transitional assemblages comprising both adjacent
end-member assemblages.