* 1950191
* Building Capacity for a STEM Learning Network to Prepare Highly Effective STEM Teachers for Teaching in High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Timothy Clark, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2021
* USD 75,000.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective STEM K-12
teachers trained in culturally and linguistically responsive teaching
approaches. To do so, it will help Loyola University Maryland build
infrastructure for recruitment of undergraduates and professionals into its STEM
education programs. The project will also lay the foundation for preparing these
students to teach in high-need school districts in the Baltimore region. The
project team intends to develop a learning community of pre-service and in-
service teachers, as well as improve academic and professional advising and
develop opportunities for early teaching exposure in diverse, high-need academic
settings. The long-term goal is to develop and implement successful strategies
to recruit and retain STEM majors and professionals in the teaching
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Capacity Building project at Loyola
University Maryland includes partnerships among faculty in its School of
Education and National and Applied Sciences division, as well as representatives
from Baltimore County Public Schools, a high-need local education agency.
Project goals include the following: 1) develop, test, and collect baseline data
about STEM-education recruitment and retention strategies; 2) provide faculty
with professional development to test, disseminate, and integrate active
learning innovations in STEM and STEM-education courses; and 3) Develop a STEM-
Network collaborative to strengthen the relationship with Baltimore County
Public schools and to explore strategies to close the student-teacher diversity
gap. Findings and lessons learned from this work are intended to provide
information to the larger community of small, primarily undergraduate, liberal
arts institutions that train future STEM educators. In the long-term, this
Capacity Building project has the potential to contribute to developnent of a
diverse, experienced STEM teacher workforce, which in turn would support
improvement of K-12 student academic achievement and STEM skills readiness for
college success. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.