* 1950255
* Enhancement of Mathematics And Science Teachers in Rural Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Larry Browning, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 06/30/2025
* USD 898,037.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality STEM
teachers for rural communities. The goal of this project is to attract
undergraduate students to STEM teaching careers in biology, chemistry,
mathematics and physics. It will award these promising future teachers with
scholarships and educate them to become highly competent teachers in rural
schools. Mentoring by faculty and alumni will provide the future teachers with
support before and after they start their teaching careers. Through outreach and
mentoring in rural school districts, the project seeks to create a wide network
of support for excellent STEM teaching. The project will connect with school
districts that have a substantial number of Native American students. Through
virtual mentoring, online professional networking, and an annual alumni
conference, the project intends create community among rural STEM teachers so
that they stay in teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at South Dakota
State University includes partnerships with Flandreau School District, Brookings
School District, and the South Dakota Department of Education. The project seeks
to prepare and support 22 undergraduates majoring in biology, chemistry,
mathematics, or physics to achieve secondary teacher certification and become
highly qualified STEM teachers. The longer-term goal is to enhance the teaching
impact and persistence of alumni serving in rural schools by including them in
ongoing support and mentoring. The project's recruiting efforts include
activities in the Flandreau School District, which is on the Flandreau-Santee
Tribal Lands. The project design is informed by the Early Career Teacher
Resilience Framework. Research activities aim to use this framework, social
network analysis, and survey data to understand the role of project elements in
creating a resilient community of teachers who stay in the profession. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.