* 1950387
* REU Site: Polymer Innovation for a Sustainable Future
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* SARAH MORGAN, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 392,835.00

This Site is jointly funded by the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research
in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This REU Site
brings together undergraduate students from across the country to perform
research aimed at critical societal needs with faculty and students in the
state-of-the-art Polymer Science and Engineering Research Center. REU students,
recruited from primarily undergraduate institutions, historically black colleges
and universities (HBCUs), and community colleges, work in interdisciplinary
research teams and receive training in polymer science and engineering, science
communication, sustainability, and life-cycle analysis during the ten-week
summer program. Students participate in field trips to local industry, engage in
outreach for elementary students, and prepare abstracts for presentation of
their research at national conferences. This site helps develop the pipeline of
science and engineering researchers with the skills to address the grand
challenges of the 21st century while advancing fundamental research to support
applications such as recyclable composites for aerospace and automotive sectors,
on-demand degradable polymers for packaging, polymers from renewable feedstocks
for drug delivery, polymeric solar cells, and flexible printed electronics. Most
participants pursue graduate degrees in science and engineering after completing
the summer program and are ultimately employed in research and development in
industry, national laboratories, or academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The research objective of the REU site is to develop sustainable
approaches to materials development to meet critical societal needs while
improving utilization of energy and raw materials. Undergraduate student
researchers are engaged in fundamental materials research efforts that span the
complex, interdisciplinary facets of materials sustainability, including design
of materials for recyclability and degradability, synthesis of polymers from
renewable feedstocks, enhancing process efficiency, and designing polymers for
renewable energy applications, while gaining the tools to assess the
environmental impact of new material development. The research is organized in
three themes: (1) Design for Recyclability and Degradability (2) Sustainable
Polymers: (Bio) Renewable Feedstocks and Resource-Efficient Processing and (3)
Materials for Sustainable Energy. Students are trained in state-of-the-art
research facilities, including recently acquired X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS), small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) - wide-angle X-ray
scattering (WAXS), and advanced imaging instrumentation, and gain
interdisciplinary research skills through collaborative efforts with polymer
computational, synthesis, analysis, and processing
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.