* 1950830
* International REU site for Gravitational Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Paul Fulda, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2024
* USD 545,626.00

This award supports the International REU site for Gravitational Physics hosted
by the Physics Department at the University of Florida, Gainesville. The Laser
Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) and NSF supported Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatories (LIGO) projects take advantage of a growing
number of research-able faculty at small and minority colleges in support of
their research efforts. At this REU site, undergraduate students will have an
opportunity to establish contact with, experience the research environment of,
and work beside international collaborators involved in all aspects of
gravitational wave detection. They will be encouraged to develop ongoing
projects with their international partners. Exposure to research will help
cultivate students' independence, while the experience in an international
setting will furnish them with contacts within a global network, as they pursue
their future research. The research projects they are assigned will
simultaneously advance scientific knowledge and enable their personal
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detection of gravitational waves requires extremely
sophisticated techniques in experiment and analysis; it also involves large
facilities, significant manpower and international collaborations. Research
projects will take place at a variety of locations, including the Albert
Einstein Institute, Hannover; APC, Paris; the National Astronomical Observatory,
Tokyo; University of Glasgow; University of Birmingham; Cardiff University;
University of Adelaide; Australian National University, Canberra; the University
of Western Australia, Perth; Seoul National University, Seoul; Laboratoire de
l'Accélérateur Linéaire, Orsay; National Institute for Subatomic Physics
(NIKHEF), Amsterdam; University of Melbourne; and INFN laboratories, Italy - all
in conjunction with the University of Florida. The student participants will
gain experience in areas of astrophysics, computing, data analysis, electronics
and optics, while pushing current technological boundaries. The experience will
strengthen students’ interest in scientific research, establishing contacts for
them in an international, collaborative network. One of the main objectives is
to clarify the student participants’ future career plans by giving them a taste
of what life is like as a graduate researcher, and by exposing them to the
possibility of working overseas. This award advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea through the involvement of undergraduates in
research in Multi-Messenger Astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.