* 1950377
* OPUS: MCS: Using modern methods with historical museum specimens to elucidate the evolution of a widespread, ecologically important rodent species
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Jessica Light, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 05/31/2024
* USD 249,269.00

The North American deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus) is one of the most
widespread and variable rodent species in North America. This rodent is of great
public health interest because it serves as a reservoir for a variety of
disease-causing organisms that can be transmitted to humans, such as
hantaviruses and Lyme disease. There is substantial evidence that there may be
several different species within what is currently known as P. maniculatus.
Given the importance of this mouse as a disease reservoir, and as a model system
for many different kinds of biological studies, it is important to know how many
species there are within this group, where these species occur, and their role
in disease transmission and other biological processes. This project analyzes
the morphology and genetics of specimens from natural history collections to
examine morphological and genetic variation within P. maniculatus across North
America to discover and describe new species. Findings from this research may
uncover that only certain P. maniculatus species are reservoirs for particular
diseases and that not all species may be appropriate as model systems for some
biological studies. Due to the importance of this species in many biological
fields, the broader impacts of this project easily extend to public education.
The researchers will partner with the NSF-funded Biodiversity Literacy in
Undergraduate Education and local education initiatives to develop education
modules that will be disseminated to classrooms nationwide. The modules will be
based on the distribution, diversity, ecology, disease reservoir potential, and
cultural and biological influences on health and disease of P. maniculatus. The
modules will allow students to generate research questions using data from
natural history collections, which will foster understanding of the scientific
process and expose students to the importance of natural history collections in
fundamental science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although P. maniculatus has been a
model system for multiple topics in evolutionary biology, behavior and ecology,
there is evidence that there may be cryptic lineages within this widespread
species. Given the importance of P. maniculatus as a disease reservoir and as a
model system for studies in many disciplines, it is imperative to understand the
geographic variation within this species, and the extent to which it encompasses
unrecognized cryptic species. This project will analyze morphology, including
micro-CT scans, and genomic data derived from specimens housed in natural
history museums (promoting the utility and importance of these invaluable
resources). Combined analysis of genomic and morphological data will be used to
identify species lineages within the P. maniculatus complex. Findings from this
project will have important implications for using P. maniculatus as a model
system in disease ecology and other studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.