* 1950232
* Preparing Teachers to Address Challenging Scientific and Environmental Topics through Research, Dialogue, and Experiential Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2026
* Eyualem Abebe, Elizabeth City State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 723,285.00

This project seeks to serve the national need for high-quality STEM teaching by
recruiting and supporting 36 STEM undergraduates to become highly skilled
secondary school teachers. The Scholars will follow a 14-month accelerated
pathway that leads to both a Master of Science degree in Biological Sciences and
initial North Carolina teacher certification in grades 9-12 Comprehensive
Science. The project aims to help the Scholars develop deep scientific
knowledge, gain skills in modern teaching approaches, with mentorship
fromexemplary teachers in high-need schools. This combination of outcomes is
intended to prepare the Scholars to be highly effective STEM teachers. The
project includes a focus on developing Scholars' abilities to teach current
environmental topics applied to a local context. The project's broader impacts
include addressing teacher shortages in the state of North Carolina and serving
as a model for accelerated teacher preparation programs that include a master’s
degree in a STEM field. The project intends to emphasize recruiting of
academically talented Scholars from Black and rural populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project at Elizabeth City State
University is in partnership with Elizabeth City-Pasquotank Public Schools,
Perquimans County Schools, Gates County Schools, and the Northeast Academy for
Aerospace and Advanced Technologies. The project goals are to provide both
scholarships and an effective pathway for Scholars to earn a master’s degree,
and to prepare the Scholars to be successful STEM teachers in high-need schools.
Integrated coursework across science and education will allow Scholars to
develop deep understanding of current science, along with relevant pedagogical
approaches such as argumentation and inquiry. Scholars will also benefit from a
professional learning community focused on environmental awareness and literacy
and from induction support via mentor teachers, a summer institute, and a
professional development program specific to science educators. Innovative
recruiting activities focus on assisting potential Scholars to discern the
suitability of the master’s program for their interests and goals. Findings and
best practices of this project will be disseminated through scholarly
publications, presentations at professional conferences, and a dedicated
website. The evaluation will be conducted by an external evaluator using
interviews, surveys, performance on certification exams, and classroom
observations to gather both quantitative and qualitative information. A
comparison group from state and institutional data will be incorporated as
possible. The results will be used to improve all aspects of the project, many
of which will continue beyond the project's duration. This Track 1: Scholarships
and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.