* 1950217
* Mountaineer Mathematics Master Teachers: Supporting Teacher Leadership and Networked Improvement of Mathematics Education in West Virginia
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2026
* Jessica Deshler, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2026
* USD 2,999,596.00

This project aims to serve the national needs of developing and supporting
highly effective mathematics teachers as teacher leaders. The project builds on
a successful model in West Virginia for collaborative, teacher-led improvement
of mathematics teaching and learning. The project intends to identify, support,
and empower 40 experienced and exemplary secondary mathematics teachers across
West Virginia. In their time as Master Teaching Fellows, these teachers will
lead efforts to improve mathematics teaching and learning, statewide. In this
work, they will apply the tools of improvement science and networked improvement
communities. Through this approach, teachers themselves will identify and solve
specific problems in their mathematics classrooms. The Master Teaching Fellows
will iteratively test and measure the outcomes of the new methods through “Plan-
Do-Act-Study Cycles.” Ultimately, Master Teaching Fellows will increase their
knowledge and skills in mathematics content, mathematics pedagogy, issues of
access and equity in mathematics education, and leadership.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at West Virginia University includes internal
partnerships between the Department of Curriculum &amp; Instruction/Literacy
Studies, the Department of Mathematics, and the Center for Excellence in STEM
Education. It also includes external partnerships with the West Virginia
Department of Education, which will provide significant financial commitment,
and multiple high-need county school districts including Pocahontas County
Schools. Additional partners supporting the goals of the project include the
West Virginia Council of Teachers of Mathematics, the West Virginia Public
Education Collaborative, and the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of
Teaching. The project includes the following intended outcomes: 1) 40 Master
Teaching Fellows will actively participate in and expand a network to improve
their own mathematics teaching practice as well as their practice as teacher
leaders; 2) Master Teaching Fellows will initiate, lead, and sustain local
networked improvement communities with mathematics teaching colleagues in their
school and/or district; and 3) Master Teaching Fellows will be positioned as
instructional leaders, resources, and change agents in their school, district,
region, and state. These outcomes are intended to develop statewide capacity for
sustainable improvement efforts. The project aims to positively impact the many
teachers who will interact with Master Teaching Fellows as part of local
improvement teams, in some cases helping them to also become leaders themselves.
The project is designed to explore the effectiveness of improvement science and
networked improvement communities for supporting mathematics teacher leadership
and instructional improvement at scale. Research and evaluation efforts will
explore impacts of the project activities on teacher quality, teacher retention,
teacher leader identity development, teacher and administrator satisfaction, and
student achievement in mathematics. The project will pursue an ambitious vision
of statewide collaboration and will contribute to the field by documenting and
disseminating opportunities, obstacles, and lessons learned from work. This
Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.