* 1950656
* REU Site: Global Change Ecology at the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2020,04/30/2024
* John Parker, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2024
* USD 431,853.00

This REU Site award to the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center (SERC),
located in Edgewater, MD, will support the training of 10 students for 12 weeks
during the summers of 2020- 2022. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-
represented group, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the
online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last few centuries,
humans have dramatically altered the planet through habitat fragmentation,
increased greenhouse gases, species introductions, excess nutrient loading, and
native species extirpation. Determining and ultimately mitigating the
consequences of these global transformations is a major goal in ecology, and the
primary focus of the REU program at the Smithsonian Environmental Research
Center. SERC interns focus on how aspects of global change, including ecosystem
conservation, climate change, biological invasions, and altered biodiversity,
are changing ecosystem functions. Recent REU projects have included impacts of
hypoxia on oysters, the role of mutualistic bacteria in crop responses to
drought, and the impacts of tree diversity on soil formation. Complex
environmental issues require a multi-disciplinary approach and interns are
trained in many subfields including ecology, chemistry, genetics, quantitative
ecology, and science communication. The program is a 12-week period of field
research, laboratory work, and educational training, including a series of short
courses on research skills, scientific communication, responsible research
conduct and STEM careers. Applications for summer internships are due by
February 15. Internship applications require a personal statement, unofficial
transcripts, a resume, and 1-3 letters of recommendation. More information about
the program is available by visiting
https://serc.si.edu/pro_training/internships/projectmenu.aspx , or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Alison Cawood at cawooda@si.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. John Parker at
parkerj@si.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.