* 1950805
* REU Site: Pollinators, Climate Change, and the Aegean Archipelago
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Charlotte Simmons, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 01/31/2024
* USD 364,500.00

The two-month summer Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program based
at the University of Central Oklahoma (UCO) will engage students in a three-
phase, immersive learning experience within an international setting (Lesvos,
Greece). Honey bees, native to Greece and throughout Eurasia, will serve as the
model study organism for the program. Honey bees pollinate billions of dollars
of crops worldwide each year and impact both native and nonnative plants
(including agricultural crops) throughout North America. In recent decades,
environmental changes have dramatically decreased honey bees numbers in the
United States. This decrease is the result of Colony Collapse Disorder as well
as global pollinator decline. In addition to pesticides, parasites, and
pathogens (all implicated in pollinator decline), climate change contributes to
a “perfect storm” of ecosystem alterations that negatively affect pollinators.
This program will engage undergraduate students in the examination of the
ability of honey bees and other bee species to withstand immediate and long-term
effects of temperature change and associated long-term plant community changes
using behavioral, physiological, and ecological approaches. Given the economic
and environmental implications of pollinator decline, student communication of
these findings to both the public and the scientific community is a key
objective. Students will be encouraged throughout the program to engage in
public outreach using a variety of science communication resources. Arguably the
birthplace of the scientific process, Greece provides an opportunity for
students to learn scientific principles within a geographic region of great
historical significance as well as experience collaborating on global-scale,
scientific problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to the University
of Central Oklahoma (UCO) will support and train seven students per year for a
total of 21 students during the lifetime of the grant. These student
participants will be recruited primarily from institutions and backgrounds that
would otherwise provide limited opportunities in STEM research. Participants
will be selected based upon criteria that include measures of academic
performance and an essay as to why participation in the project will be
important to the students’ careers. One student, with a background in
communication, will be specifically recruited to serve as the lead scientific
communicator. This student will use both traditional and social forms of media
to disseminate student participation in and the results of the program. The
program has three phases, the first of which will include a mini-course at UCO
that includes Responsible Conduct in Research and mentorship training. The
second phase will consist of a longer period of field and laboratory research in
Greece where students will engage in a team-based investigation of one of the
best documented plant-pollinator ecosystems in the world. All field research
will be conducted on the island of Lesvos in collaboration with Greek scientists
from the University of the Aegean at Mytilene. Hypotheses will test predictions
about the role of climate change in (1) altering plant-pollinator interactions
(using short-term perturbation experiments), (2) pollinator learning capacities
(with proven behavioral assays), and (3) the physiological responses of
pollinators to temperature change (using measurements of thermal limits). The
program will conclude at UCO with student presentations. Post-program analysis
will consist of surveys conducted by UCO that assess the program’s research
experience impact on participants’ perceptions of their own growth in scientific
aptitude and the acquisition of pertinent scientific skill sets (computation,
experimental design, etc.). Research findings will inform growing concerns about
the impact of climate change on plant-pollinator systems in a model
Mediterranean as well as both natural and agricultural ecosystems throughout the
USA where honey bees were introduced nearly four centuries
ago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.