* 1950335
* Advancing Teacher Leadership in Urban Schools through the Noyce Mathematics and Science Master Teaching Fellowship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Lisa Lamb, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 2,999,825.00

This project aims to serve the national interest of supporting K-12 mathematics
and science teachers to become teacher leaders in high-need school districts.
When teachers become effective teacher leaders, they can better support the
achievement of their students. Such support is critically important in high-need
schools and districts, where much of the student body is socioeconomically
disadvantaged and/or historically underrepresented in mathematics and scientific
fields. The teachers in this project will develop and implement school-site
plans to improve the mathematics and science learning experiences of all their
students. They will also lead a sustained school-site focus toward meeting goals
related to mathematics and science learning. In addition, the project's teacher
leaders will take courses about K-12 Educational Leadership in mathematics and
science, apprentice with university faculty in research labs, and co-teach a
university course that is designed for prospective mathematics and science
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at San Diego State University
includes partnerships with four local, high-need school districts (Grossmont, La
Mesa-Spring Valley, Santee, and Sweetwater), the National Center for Urban
School Transformation, the California State Teachers Association, and the
Association of Mathematics Teacher Educators. Project goals include: (i)
providing five years of support to 20 Master Teaching Fellows, all of whom are
in-service mathematics and science teachers who will provide thoughtful,
sustained professional development for other teachers; (ii) enabling the Master
Teaching Fellows to present their work at professional conferences; (iii)
supporting the Master Teaching Fellows to serve as guide teachers for student
teachers; and (iv) empowering the Master Teaching Fellows to become teacher
leaders at their school sites. At their school sites, the Master Teaching
Fellows will seek to develop a positive transformational culture, provide all
students with access to challenging curricula, and support effective instruction
that promotes engagement and understanding (Johnson, Uline, &amp; Perez, 2019).
The research and evaluation conducted within this project are designed to
improve the understanding of how best to support STEM teacher leaders in urban
schools. Dissemination about this project will occur within the regional and
national Noyce community, as well as in publications in professional journals
and presentations at professional conferences. The project is designed to be
generative, so that the Master Teaching Fellows will continue to engage in
activities that will sustain their own practices after the professional
development has ended, as well as become expert in continuing to help other
teachers learn and grow. Thus, the project has the potential to continue to grow
cadres of effective mathematics and science teachers long after the project has
ended. By design, the program will have a far-reaching, multiplicative impact on
the teaching and learning of mathematics and science in schools in the San Diego
region. This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.