* 1950332
* Building Capacity for Master Teacher Specialization in STEM Leadership
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Mark Oursland, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2021
* USD 74,984.00

This project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to support and
retain effective STEM teachers. It seeks to build curriculum and experiences
that prepare emerging STEM leaders by developing a Master Teacher specialization
in STEM Leadership. These leaders will promote innovative STEM curriculum in
high-need K-12 schools, which in turn can motivate K-12 students from diverse
backgrounds to choose STEM careers, and especially STEM teaching careers.
Moreover, the STEM leaders will establish community partnerships to promote STEM
literacy and relevance to everyday life. This specialization, the first of its
kind in Washington state, will build upon existing community partnerships with
STEM Networks organized by the Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction
and Washington STEM to improve STEM education both locally and statewide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Central Washington University includes
partnerships with: the Wahluke School District, Educational School District 105,
partnered with South Central Washington STEM Network; and Educational School
District 171, partnered with the Apple STEM Network. Project goals include to:
(1) survey a diverse range of high-need local educational agencies and other
STEM education stakeholders to determine needs related to developing a Master
Teacher specialization in STEM Leadership; and (2) design a novel, research-
informed and National Boards aligned program to provide in-service teachers with
a Master Teacher specialization in STEM Leadership responsive to Washington
state needs. This work is grounded in literature outlining characteristics of
effective teacher leaders who can act as agents for change within their local
communities of practice, transforming the conditions for STEM teaching and
learning. First, the team will develop, implement, and analyze survey and focus
group input from community STEM stakeholders to determine desired attributes of
a STEM leader. This input will inform program curriculum and infrastructure for
the Master Teacher specialization. The project endeavors to build upon the
successes of Central Washington Universityâ€™s Teach STEM and Noyce Scholarship
programs to recruit and prepare STEM teacher leaders. By completing the STEM
Leadership program, STEM leaders will improve their own teaching practice,
develop knowledge and skills needed to mentor other teachers in best teaching
practices, and be prepared to successfully complete National Board Certification
if so desired. An external evaluator will provide formative and summative
feedback with respect to design processes surrounding the two programmatic
goals. This evaluation serves to engender continual improvement and to ensure
the success of the development of, and capacity building for, the Master Teacher
Specialization in STEM Leadership. Survey results, curriculum-related products,
and key findings from the design process will be shared regionally and
nationally through regional STEM Networks, presentations at professional
meetings, and peer-reviewed journal publications. This Capacity Building project
is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.