* 1950612
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in UAV Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Amar Raheja, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 01/31/2024
* USD 468,369.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at California State
Polytechnic University, Pomona (CPP) continues to increase undergraduate
students’ participation in research projects on unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)
technologies. Undergraduate students from 2-and 4-year institutions with limited
or no research opportunities will continue to be involved in UAV research
projects in a multidisciplinary environment. UAVs have potential to replace
manned aircraft for many dull, dirty, and dangerous missions such as
surveillance of disaster-hit areas, search and rescue, package delivery, traffic
monitoring, remote sensing, precision agriculture, crop dusting, border patrol,
battlefield damage assessment, and supply missions. UAVs are cheaper than manned
aircraft and pose no risk to human operators. The UAV industry is one of the
fastest growing sectors of aerospace industries. However, there is a lack of
students entering the workforce or graduate schools in this area. The proposed
REU Program is designed to increase students’ interest in UAV technologies by
means of first-hand experience on UAV research with direct mentorship by faculty
advisors. This will be helpful in preparing a strong workforce for future needs
of the aerospace industry, which is facing an aging workforce. This will also be
helpful encouraging them to pursue their studies for graduate degrees. This is
important as the interest among students for graduate degrees is declining. The
strong workforce that this REU Site will prepare will help mature the UAV
technologies for mass adoption of UAVs for various
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site offers undergraduates
opportunities to conduct research during a 10-week summer program on cutting
edge topics in UAV flight dynamics and control, increased UAV autonomy,
collision detection and avoidance, computer vision, artificial intelligence, and
aerospace robotics. Students will also get opportunities to learn about Federal
regulations pertaining to the operation of UAVs. In addition to their research,
students will participate in weekly research seminars, research meetings, and
professional development seminars that are designed to prepare a strong
workforce for the needs of industry and academia. The seminars will include
topics such as literature review, writing a scientific paper, improving written
and oral communication skills, technical presentations, applications to graduate
schools, opportunities for research/teaching assistantships and fellowships,
career paths, resume building, team building, and ethics in science and
engineering. The participants will also engage in outreach activities and give
presentations on UAV technologies to K-12 students at local schools. This will
enhance students' communication skills, allow them to see the broader
implications of their research, and see how they can positively impact society
through research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department
of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.