* 1950183
* Building Equity Leaders for STEM in NH:  A Teacher Leaders Program to Improve STEM Learning for All Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Lara Gengarelly, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,499,099.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective science and
mathematics education in grades six through ten. To achieve this aim, the
project will improve the leadership capacity of Master Teaching Fellows in high-
need school districts. The project will provide these emerging leaders with
professional development to deepen their STEM content knowledge, broaden their
STEM instruction skills, develop their teacher leadership skills, and expand
their implementation of equity pedagogies. The project focuses on broadening the
use of effective teaching strategies that serve under-resourced populations and
that support the new vision of teaching mathematics, science, and engineering
reflected in national recommendations and policy documents. It also will partner
with New Hampshire professional societies and school districts to prepare and
support the Noyce Master Teaching Fellows to serve as outstanding teacher
leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of New Hampshire
includes partnerships with Manchester, Nashua, and Rochester school districts,
and The New Hampshire Council of Teachers of Mathematics, The New Hampshire
Science Teachers Association, and the Leitzel Center, a STEM center connected to
the University. In-service certified teachers of mathematics and science who
possess a Masterâ€™s degree will be selected for support as Fellows. The five-year
project will address the following goals: 1) Recruit 15 exemplary in-service
teachers from STEM disciplines (grades 6th-10th) to become Master Teaching
Fellows committed to improving the educational opportunities and outcomes of
high-need students in three of the largest school districts in New Hampshire; 2)
Provide interdisciplinary, asset-based, locally responsive professional
development; and 3) support the Fellows to serve as outstanding teacher leaders
capable of designing and enacting project-based STEM learning that is culturally
responsive, relevant, and authentic, and who understand the effects of poverty
on learning. The project plans to create a new model for excellence in STEM
professional development that uses a cohort approach to developing teacher
leaders, is informed by principles of teacher learning across the career span,
involves multi-level collaborations, and is sustainable. Dissemination will be
addressed locally through New Hampshire professional society partnerships and
nationally at conferences and meetings. This Track 3: Master Teaching
Fellowships project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.