* 1950734
* REU Site: Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior Field Research at Mountain Lake Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Eric Nagy, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 371,154.00

This REU Site award to Mountain Lake Biological Station (MLBS.org, University of
Virginia), located in Pembroke, VA, will support the training of ten students
for ten weeks during the summers of 2020 - 2022. It is anticipated that a total
of thirty college and university undergraduate students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities, or belonging to groups under-represented in
science, will participate in the program. Participants will be trained in the
full process of scientific biological research, from thesis generation, to
hypothesis building, experimental design and execution, analysis,
interpretation, and communication. Many participants will present their work at
scientific confernces and publish in peer-reviewed scientific journals. All
participants will emerge as scientifically literate citizens. Assessment of the
program will be done thru the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Mountain Lake has
hosted a NSF REU Sites program since 1993.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
supports guided but independent, self-motivated original biological research in
field-based ecology, evolution, and behavior. Many university-based research
labs working at the host field station will mentor program participants in a
wide range of biological research areas (see past student research projects -
mlbs.org/pastprojects). Participants live and work full-time at the biological
field station. In addition to conducting their original independent research
projects, they participate in formal training in the design and conduct of
research, scientific ethics and professional behavior, writing and presentation
techniques, and other matters of scientific and academic life. They are required
to prepare professional grade written and oral proposals and final reports. The
program includes post-program career support, research mentor trainng, peer
mentoring, and three institutional partners (University of Puerto Rico, UVA
College at Wise, Nash Community College). The program application
(mlbs.org/reuapp) requires a personal essay, college transcript, and letter of
recommendation. Project PIs and research mentors evaluate applications. Research
areas for the upcoming summer are provided to applicants
(mlbs.org/REUFutureProjects). More information about the program is available by
visiting mlbs.org/reuprogram, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Eric Nagy at
enagy@virginia.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Butch Brodie at
bbrodie@virginia.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.