* 1950055
* OPUS: CRS: Phenotypic selection in nature: Analysis and synthesis
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Joel Kingsolver, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 297,174.00

Natural selection is the primary evolutionary mechanism that adapts organisms to
their environments, but the general patterns of selection in natural populations
remain poorly understood. In particular, biologists lack a framework for
connecting environmental change to changes in selection in the wild. The goal of
this project is to develop such a framework, by integrating empirical and
experimental data from field studies of insect populations with mathematical
modeling and new statistical methods. The approach will be used to evaluate how
recent environmental change has changed patterns of selection in insect
populations. The general framework will provide new tools for understanding how
habitat destruction, pollution, and other aspects of environmental change will
alter natural selection in populations in the wildâ€”and whether natural
populations can keep up with human-induced environmental changes. The project
will also synthesize and analyze the published scientific literature on
selection in the wild, and provide research training in biology, data science,
and statistical modeling for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenotypic
selection is a primary mechanism that drives evolutionary change and adaptation,
but biologists lack a quantitative framework that connects phenotype,
environment, fitness and selection in natural populations. The proposed research
will develop such a framework using the underlying data from field studies of
selection in insect populations obtained over the past 30+ years. The studies
focus on three general themes: integrating information from studies of natural
variation, experimental manipulations of phenotype and environment, and
functional models to quantify non-linear fitness surfaces and the resulting
patterns of selection; applying new statistical models for estimating selection
on reaction norms, performance curves, and growth trajectories; and modeling the
relationship between environmental change and changes in the fitness surface.
The project will also update existing datasets for standardized selection
coefficients, and provide new meta-analyses to evaluate the current evidence for
stabilizing and disruptive selection in the field, and whether variation in
selection is associated with variation in climate and other environmental
factors. The findings from these studies will be summarized in a research
monograph on phenotypic selection in the wild, and the data, associated
metadata, and R code for the analyses will be made openly available in an
appropriate repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.