* 1950964
* Conducting Polymer Coated Cathode Nanoparticles for Improved Battery Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Kenneth Lau, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 334,054.00

This grant supports research to enhance lithium ion battery performance and
longevity through research on a unique manufacturing process that generates new
scientific knowledge. Currently, lithium ion battery electrode materials are
prone to degrade when the battery is repeatedly used and recharged.
Specifically, cathode materials degrade in the highly energetic, corrosive
battery environment. To overcome these challenges and to make the cathode
materials more stable, a novel manufacturing process is used to wrap a
protective conducting polymer layer around the nanoparticles that make up the
cathode. This process creates an extremely thin film that helps keep the
underlying cathode nanoparticles active. The electrically conducting polymer
maintains a well-connected battery circuit and provides a physically dense and
chemically stable barrier for maximum protection. This project studies the
oxidative chemical vapor deposition process to manufacture protected cathode
materials for more stable, high performance batteries. The ability to coat
miniscule parts and components with ultrathin conducting polymers impacts
broader energy technology areas such as solar cells, fuel cells and
supercapacitors, which creates a more sustainable U.S. energy economy.
Furthermore, this coating technology enables applications in sensors,
electronics, smart textiles, biomedical and aerospace industries that makes U.S.
manufacturing more competitive. This research involves disciplines of
manufacturing, materials science, electrochemistry and nanotechnology that
attracts broad participation, particularly from underrepresented groups and
women, and helps equip the future U.S. workforce with cutting-edge science and
value-added skill-sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oxidative chemical vapor
deposition (oCVD) process is a solvent-free thin film coating technique that
directly polymerizes the monomer vapor into a solid intrinsically conducting
polymer (ICP) film through the use of an oxidant vapor. Being liquid-free, it
overcomes conventional solvent processing problems of encapsulating conducting
polymer coatings around cathode nanoparticles. Conducting polymers are often not
very soluble so they are not amenable to solution processing. Furthermore,
liquid methods are often less precise, which makes it difficult to produce
ultrathin, nanoscale coatings. The dry oCVD process shows promise in overcoming
these manufacturing barriers. However, this technology is relatively new, and
this research fills the knowledge gap by identifying the key processing factors
and mechanisms for achieving conformal, fully encapsulating ICP coatings around
particle substrates. The research further understands the precise role of the
coatings in stabilizing cathode materials and enhancing battery performance. The
research team conducts a comprehensive experimental analysis from materials
fabrication to device testing to understand the relevant processing-structure-
property relationships for achieving maximum cathode protection and superior
battery performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.