* 1950645
* REU Site for Nanotechnology in Health, Energy and the Environment
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Gary Halada, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 437,865.00

The renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU )Site for
Nanotechnology in Health, Energy and the Environment at Stony Brook University
in New York responds to the need to provide experiential learning opportunities
for undergraduates in the interdisciplinary field of nanotechnology. The project
stemmed from the need to implement an effective model for research-oriented
undergraduate education which meets the needs of both students (from different
academic majors, types of institutions - including community colleges, and who
have completed from one to three years of undergraduate education) and their
eventual employers (or graduate programs) in the emerging and changing
nanotechnology sector. It responds to the need to recruit students from diverse
populations, including under-represented groups, for enhancing diversity in STEM
fields, and the need to enhance engineering education with a focus on emerging
technology systems in the context of applications and societal impact. This is
accomplished through an approach which supports self-efficacy, multidisciplinary
team-building, understanding broader impacts of technology, and building the
skills necessary for research and life-long learning through a program of
faculty-mentored multidisciplinary research, professional development, and
exposure to real-world issues which reflect the impact of nanotechnology on
society, the business community, human health and the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period Stony Brook University will host
a ten week, eight intern multidisciplinary nanotechnology REU Site focused on
Nanotechnology in Health, Energy and the Environment, involving multiple
engineering departments and administered by the University’s Center for
Inclusive Education (CIE). Providing real research experiences for
undergraduates is a critical need for the successful education of the next
generation of engineers and scientists. The laboratories involved will provide
research experiences for REU interns in all aspects of nanotechnology and
nanomaterials development, including polymeric nanostructures for medical
applications, batteries, catalytic surfaces for energy and environmental
remediation, nanoscale surface engineering to enhance recycling and “green”
manufacturing, and development of nanosensors. This approach integrates a
comprehensive graduate education preparation model that has proven to be
effective in successful transition of undergraduate students into competitive
graduate programs. This REU site has supported 72 students directly over nine
years, augmented by 16 additional students through supplemental support. More
than half the REU interns were female and more than one third were members of
underrepresented minority populations. This support will enable the continued
targeted inclusion of underrepresented groups in nanotechnology research and
graduate education opportunities and leverages the resources of multiple
departments effectively. The project will also include a RET experience for a
STEM high school teacher. Results of this program will be widely disseminated to
the campus and local community, and to other scientists and engineers in the
U.S. and worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.