* 1950064
* Preparing, Supporting, and Retaining Elementary Mathematics Specialists in High-need Urban Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Alexandra Smirnova, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 04/30/2025
* USD 2,282,729.00

The project aims to serve the national need of increasing the number of
elementary mathematics specialists in high-need urban schools. Inclusion of an
elementary mathematics specialist on a team of teachers has potential to
systemically improve mathematics education, build studentsâ€™ mathematical
capacity to succeed, and increase student achievement in mathematics. Too few
students in the U.S. are attaining high levels of mathematics learning,
compounded by persisting gaps in mathematics achievement. This project aims to
improve mathematics teacher effectiveness and teacher leadership in elementary
schools in which many students have great economic needs and are from groups
that are traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. The project focuses on
the recruitment, preparation, support, and retention of elementary mathematics
specialists who deliver rigorous mathematics instruction and serve as
mathematics teacher leaders. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project at Georgia
State University includes partnerships with the metro Atlanta school district
Gwinnett County Public Schools and the nonprofit Corners Outreach. Project goals
include to: (1) recruit successful, experienced, and diverse elementary
mathematics teachers from high-need schools that serve underrepresented student
populations to become elementary mathematics specialists; (2) increase the
number of elementary mathematics specialists in these schools through evidence-
based preparation in two university endorsement programs; (3) develop elementary
mathematics specialists who are highly effective mathematics teachers and
teacher leaders; and (4) support and retain elementary mathematics specialists
as they serve as teacher leaders, including coaching university teacher
candidates, in these schools. This five-year project will involve 26 in-service
elementary teachers, aiming to promote mathematics equity and access, support
teacher retention in high-need schools, and situate teacher candidates in a
hiring pipeline. The project's teachers will be prepared and supported as
elementary mathematics specialists through completion of the K-5 Mathematics
Endorsement and Teacher Support &amp; Coaching Endorsement. In addition to
completing these two endorsements, teachers will also engage in a Professional
Learning Community and one-on-one mentoring. Evaluation and research involving
mixed methods will demonstrate how the intentional and continuous project
components affect the mathematical content knowledge, instructional practices,
beliefs, and teacher leader skills of elementary mathematics specialists.
Results have the potential to advance understandings in the areas of mathematics
teacher education and professional development, particularly of elementary
mathematics specialists in high-need schools. This Track 3: Master Teacher
Fellowships project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.