* 1950328
* Collaborative Research: Controlled source seismic investigation of the top of the Yellowstone magmatic system
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Brandon Schmandt, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 273,550.00

Among the most important mysteries regarding the Yellowstone volcanic system is
whether it currently contains upper crustal magma with high enough melt
fractions to be eruptible over human time scales. Prior imaging of the structure
beneath Yellowstone caldera offers potentially conflicting evidence with some
studies indicating magma that is unlikely to be eruptible and others indicating
magma that is near the eruptible range but only present in isolated locations.
These studies relied on relatively long wavelength sampling from natural seismic
sources such as earthquakes. This project will use a controlled seismic source,
a high-frequency vibrator truck, and hundreds of densely spaced seismic
instruments to scrutinize the top of the Yellowstone magma reservoir, estimated
to be about 4-8 km below the surface. This experiment will provide a new level
on constraint on the melts at the top of the magma reservoir. Additionally, the
project will gain insights on the distribution of hydrothermal fluids above the
magma reservoir including their depth extent and the degree of subsurface
connectivity among distinct geothermal basins at the surface. This project
increases the involvement of younger generations of scientists in controlled
source research projects, providing training in methods that are relevant to
natural resource exploration industries. Two graduate students will be trained
in applied seismic imaging. The investigators will engage with National Park
personnel to advance informal education for Yellowstoneâ€™s approximately 4
million annual visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project primarily seeks to
test whether seismic velocities near the top of the Yellowstone magma reservoir
are consistent with concentrations of magma approaching eruptible melt
fractions. Additionally, it will investigate reservoirs and pathways for
magmatic volatiles that influence upper crustal seismicity and the locations of
distinct geothermal basins within the caldera. A new ability to address these
questions will be provided by controlled source data collection with an array of
3-component receivers along two densely sampled transects whose locations are
guided by prior passive source imaging studies. Controlled source reflection
imaging and amplitude versus offset analysis are rarely possible above silicic
magma reservoirs, because most are too small or lack road access directly above
the reservoirs. In this case, favorable road transects exist above the magma
reservoir inferred from passive source imaging with sparser arrays and lower
frequencies. Prior estimates of melt fractions in the upper crustal reservoir
vary widely, and the new survey will help clarify the potential presence and
volume of eruptible magma using reflected wave amplitudes from controlled source
P-to-P and P-to-S reflections. The combination of Vp and Vs constraints also has
the potential to map subsurface accumulations of magmatic volatiles, which may
provide new insights into the physical properties of the source regions of
seismicity and deep underpinnings of distinct geothermal
basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.