* 1950466
* OPUS: CRS Synthesizing long-term data to forecast native understory plant community structure &amp; dynamics with invasion--species interactions, abiotic change &amp; physiology
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Carolyn Staples, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 04/30/2023
* USD 341,602.00

Forests in many parts of the world are negatively impacted by both high
populations of native ungulates herbivores (deer, moose, elk) and non-native
invasive plants. This project will explore overabundant herbivores’ and
invaders’ impacts at the individual, population, and community levels for common
native perennial wildflowers of forests. The project has three goals: 1.
Determine the relative effect and importance of deer herbivory, invasion, and
surrounding plant neighborhood on individual wildflower population’s persistence
using a community coexistence model. 2. Evaluate how the anthropogenic stressors
(deer, invasion) interact and forecast future forest wildflower composition
under the different scenarios created in the long-term experiment. 3. Share the
wildflower databases and collaborate with artists/designers on students’
training in design. Undergraduates will create products such as virtual reality
experiences, apps, or board games. Since US forests often experience both high
deer populations and invasion by non-native plants, the results of the community
models will be applicable at wide regional scales for basic scientists and land
managers; the student products will foster a broader public understanding of
ongoing changes to our forests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use
individual wildflower databases and abiotic data collected with NSF support to
build a cohesive community model and to project community coexistence using four
biotic and abiotic interaction landscapes imposed by a long-term field
experiment. The planned analyses will use growth, survival, flowering and seed
production databases for each wildflower species collected in the long-term
field experiment, in which the presence of both white-tailed deer and a noxious
plant invader are manipulated for nearly two decades. This approach is novel, in
that rather than being phenomenological or applying simulations, it will build a
mechanistic, process-based model to assess understory community coexistence
leveraging data from long-term experimental treatments. This modeling will add
value to prior individual or pair-wise interaction studies by providing a
unified framework to assess critical links and interactions between biotic
stressors, environmental characteristics, and species’ population dynamics to
forecast future community dynamics and composition. Undergraduate students will
be trained in data visualization using the same long-term databases used in the
community modeling of the forest understory. The design process, “Act &gt;
Reflect &gt; Change”, requires students to define and explore connections
between the specific content they attempt to visualize and refine their product
for their target audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.