* 1950247
* REU Site:  Molecular Biology and Genetics of Cell Signaling
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Jun Liu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 365,867.00

This REU Site award to Cornell University, located in Ithaca, NY, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020- 2022. It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities or are from an under-represented group, will be trained
in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the
program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this program is to provide a formative
research experience for talented undergraduate students, especially those from
underrepresented and disadvantaged groups, that will motivate them to pursue a
career in research, help them to be competitive for admission to research
intensive graduate programs, and increase their success in these programs. The
research focus is in the area of molecular signaling, a process that is
fundamental to almost every cellular event. Training faculty are selected from
various departments across the campus based on their research interests and
their commitment to mentoring undergraduate research. In addition to conducting
research in one of the participating labs, weekly REU group meetings with the
program directors and various workshops provide students with a broad view of
the signaling field in the general area of molecular sciences, opportunities to
improve their communication skills, information about graduate school and
careers in science, and awareness of responsible conduct of research. Students
are also required to take pre- and post-program surveys for program assessment
purposes. Students entering their sophomore, junior, or senior years, and
majoring in the life sciences are encouraged to apply. Preference will be given
to students with strong interest in gaining research experience in preparation
for graduate study. Details on the application process, participating mentors
and other information about the program are available by visiting
https://mbg.cornell.edu/undergraduate/summer-research-experience/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Kelly Liu at JL53@cornell.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Tim
Huffaker at tch4@cornell.edu). This award is supported by the Department of
Defense ASSURE program thru a partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.