* 1950832
* OPUS MCS: Developing a mechanistic understanding of methane production from small agricultural reservoirs in the Amazon-Cerrado frontier
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Marcia Macedo, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 01/31/2024
* USD 254,589.00

Damming small tropical streams has created hundreds of thousands of artificial
reservoirs across Brazil’s agricultural frontier, a lasting legacy of the
country’s long history of cattle ranching. The low-oxygen conditions in these
water bodies favors production of methane – a potent greenhouse gas that is
twenty-five times more powerful than carbon dioxide. Although these water bodies
are widespread and can persist for decades, we know little about the factors
controlling methane production in reservoirs, or their collective contribution
to the global carbon budget. This OPUS award addresses that knowledge gap by
supporting new research, relevant training, and mentorship opportunities for the
principal investigator. Exposure to cutting-edge lab techniques will allow her
to examine the mechanisms underlying methane production in reservoirs and expand
the scope of her future research. Resulting datasets will be useful for
scientists modeling the global carbon cycle, as well as national agencies tasked
with monitoring sources and sinks of greenhouse gases. They also have practical
applications for the management of reservoirs in Brazil and other tropical
regions. Ultimately, results will improve understanding of which pathways
dominate methane fluxes and help identify potential management strategies to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions in agricultural
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By facilitating the synthesis of data collected
with this award with datasets from over a decade of research in the southeastern
Amazon, this project will address several key research objectives. First, it
will help clarify the pathways of methane production and consumption through
analyses of stable isotopes (13C, D) and the dynamics of sediment accumulation
and organic carbon burial in reservoirs. Second, it will shed light on the
relative importance of different sources of organic matter driving microbial
methane production using a combination of radiocarbon (14C) and stable isotope
analyses. Carbon isotopes in sediments may also yield insights into the relative
importance of external sources of organic matter (i.e. carbon derived from
forest, pasture grasses, or soybeans) versus internal production (i.e. algae or
macrophytes stimulated by recent nutrient deposition). Lastly, this work will
inform global modeling efforts by characterizing the isotopic fingerprint of
biogenic reservoir emissions in the atmosphere and evaluating their relative
importance as a methane source. Ultimately, carbon isotopes may provide
important clues about whether reservoirs act as a global source or sink of
carbon in the landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.