* 1950788
* REU Site: Preparing RF Engineers for Communication, Imaging and Sensing (PRECISE)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Nezih Pala, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 362,807.00

Radio frequency (RF) technologies in microwave, millimeter-wave and terahertz
frequency bands has ubiquitous presence in modern electronics. Wireless
communication has enabled game-changing technology through LTE and 5G campaign,
which is ultimately responsible for the modern internet, big-data and cloud
computing boom. Smart electronics, Internet of Things (IoT), wearable
technology, all critically rely on continuous innovations in this area. RF
technology is also critical to the Nation’s progress through weather monitoring,
study of long-term climatic changes, enemy detection and neutralization.
Specifically, the Nation’s weather radars, space probes, network of enemy
detection radars and aspects of defense technology constitute critical
infrastructure and requires innovations. Based on this urgent need of research
and innovation in RF technologies, this REU Site project at Florida
International University (FIU) is aimed at providing research experiences to
undergraduate students through the Preparing RF Engineers for Communication,
Imaging and Sensing (PRECISE) REU site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within this site
nine students at early stages of their college experience will be recruited to
provide them an immersive research experience within the general theme of RF-
microwave-THz technologies for numerous commercial and defense applications for
nine summer weeks. The participating students will have the opportunity to work
on level-appropriate projects of cutting-edge research topics to contribute
towards applications in wireless communication, sensing and imaging. FIU’s
unique geographic location, combined with its targeted efforts will help to
recruit students from historically underrepresented groups and from colleges
without substantial research capabilities in the field, which is one of the
major goals of the project. The proposed program also includes research seminars
given by FIU faculty and researchers and engineers from industrial partners as
well as professional development activities to help students acquire critical
soft skills and to help in graduate school applications. PRECISE’s broader
impact is geared towards generating workforce to support the proliferating job
market in RF technologies within commercial, national and defense sectors. This
enhanced research experience through PRECISE, will increase interest among
undergraduate students and help address this urgent need. FIU is the largest
Hispanic Serving Institution in the US and ranks first in number of awarded
Hispanic engineering BS/MS degrees. Thus, the program allows participating
students’ exposure to diversity at FIU, which is crucial for their future career
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of Defense
in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.