* 1950795
* REU Site: Research in Symmetries at the University of Kentucky
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Christopher Crawford, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2024
* USD 319,997.00

This award supports a new Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at
the University of Kentucky. Eight undergraduate students per year will
participate in the 10-week summer REU site in Physics and Astronomy. REU
students will participate in research projects that address issues at the
forefront of modern physics and astronomy: What is the origin of matter in the
universe? Is there new high-energy physics which modifies the magnetic moment of
the muon? What is the nature of dark matter and dark energy that dominate the
composition of the universe? What prevents stars from forming from the cold
dense gas in the centers of massive clusters of galaxies? What types of phase
transitions must be understood in terms of topological invariants instead of
broken symmetries? What materials host exotic quantum spin liquid phases? REU
students will be trained with knowledge and skills to address these fundamental
questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program focuses around individual
mentored research projects in nuclear physics, condensed matter physics, and
astronomy, loosely related through the central theme of symmetry. These research
topics are part of the research programs of faculty mentors funded by NSF, the
Department of Energy, and NASA, tailored for accessibility to 2nd and 3rd year
undergraduates. They involve advanced physics techniques that are not normally
available at smaller institutions. REU participants will work together with
graduate students and postdocs in the lab, interacting daily with their mentors
to produce publishable results in these areas at the frontiers of physics and
astronomy. The program will also include professional development through a
series of seminars and workshops and include specific technical training in
computation and data analysis. Students will present results at a local poster
session and be encouraged to present at national conferences. This project is
jointly funded by the Division of Physics and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.