* 1950253
* Leveraging Partnerships to Increase the Number of Highly Qualified Mathematics and Computer Science Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Christopher Cox, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 74,948.00

This project aims to build capacity to prepare high-quality STEM teachers for
high-need schools and school districts, a critical national need. As the nation
expands its STEM initiatives to meet workforce demands, the need is also
expanding for more, highly qualified STEM teachers. To address this need, the
project will identify strategies to increase the number of highly qualified
mathematics and computer science teachers, and develop a pathway to best
accomplish this goal. Specifically, the project intends to develop a STEM
master's degree program with a concentration in STEM Education, which leads to
teacher certification. Project activities will include designing new STEM
education graduate courses and revising the institution’s mathematics and
computer science master's degree programs. This project aims expects that the
newly created degree programs will increase the number of highly qualified STEM
teachers in high-need school districts, thus enriching the STEM education of
students in these districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes
partnerships between the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, Hamilton County
Schools, and the Public Education Foundation, a local non-profit organization
that specializes in STEM teacher professional development. Such partnerships
will support the project’s success, since designing program activities that meet
the needs of each partner is likely to enhance the quality of the teacher
leaders that the project will produce. Project goals include: (a) strengthening
existing strategic partnerships among STEM departments and faculty at the
University, Hamilton County School administration and teachers, and Public
Education Foundation; (b) designing STEM Education graduate courses; (c)
revising master’s degree programs in mathematics and computer science programs
that will lead to teacher certification; and (d) designing ongoing professional
development for project participants. All design and planning will be grounded
in research-based practices and developed in accordance with current
practitioner recommendations documented in the teacher leadership literature.
For example, the project will follow recommendations for a 14-month residency
program. This collaboration, which includes higher education, a local
educational agency, a nonprofit, and industry, will disseminate information
about the program to all stakeholders. This Capacity Building project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.