* 1950994
* SBIR Phase II:  A Therapeutic Machine-Learned Triage Application For Early Detection and Triage of COPD Exacerbations
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Sumanth Swaminathan, E-THERA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2022
* USD 761,837.00

The broader/commercial impact of SBIR Phase II project aims to reduce
significant disease flare-ups in patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease (COPD), increase in-patient quality-of-life, and reduce expensive and
unnecessary healthcare utilization. COPD is one of the leading chronic
conditions driving potentially avoidable hospital admissions, accounting for an
estimated $25 B in 2018 patient care costs. Current at-home care support for
COPD patients is often completely missing or consists of action plans that fail
to provide effective, individualized care. Integrating health management and a
smart triage system offering instant healthcare guidance has the potential to
reduce unnecessary COPD hospitalization and provide long-term maintenance
treatment of COPD symptoms. The proposed project will develop an easy-to use,
personalized triage application that catches disease degeneration early, tracks
patient health history, and provides decision support to guide patients
appropriately. Moreover, an easily accessible, highly accurate, convenient
solution can empower patients to make better health decisions early.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project focuses on optimizing and
deploying a triage application that provides personalized decision support and
therapeutic benefit to patients with COPD. The proposed project will validate
this application for a new population and test the integrated system. Specific
technical tasks include the expansion of algorithms to include jointly diagnosed
COPD-asthma patients, an important population at risk, as well as optimization
of configurations for usability and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.