* 1950204
* Bridging Pathways to Prepare Highly Qualified Mathematics and Science Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2026
* Stephen Bismarck, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 640,491.00

This project aims to serve the national need for high-quality mathematics and
science teachers. To do so, it will support college students as they earn both
STEM and secondary education degrees, and prepare them to teach in high need
school districts. Specifically, the project will recruit Spartanburg Community
College STEM students to become Noyce Scholars. The Noyce Scholars will receive
scholarships as they pursue both a STEM major and a secondary education major.
Three different internship experiences will be available for college students to
work with middle and high school students. These experiences will enable the
college students to focus on the teaching and learning of mathematics and
science (biology/chemistry), while also working closely with university faculty
and highly qualified high school teachers. Once Noyce Scholars graduate as
certified teachers and are hired in a high-need school district, they will
attend a monthly pedagogical seminar series throughout the school year and
summer for the first two years of their teaching careers. Addressing the social-
emotional needs and challenges facing high-need schools will be the keystone of
the pedagogical seminar series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the
University of South Carolina Upstate includes partnerships with Spartanburg
District Schools and Spartanburg Community College. The project goals include:
1) to increase the number of STEM majors who also pursue a secondary teaching
degree from eight in 2018-2019 to twelve in 2022-2023, supporting a total of 21
different teacher candidates over five years; and 2) to raise awareness of STEM
education careers among community college students by providing internship
opportunities early in their degree programs. The project intends to develop
curricular and extracurricular programming that support the transition of
community college STEM students to a four-year institution and also to a
teaching major. Intended project outcomes include preparing Noyce Scholars to
become mathematics and science teachers who can meet the needs of diverse
students, as well as improving the retention of pre-service teachers. The
project intends to monitor and support new secondary mathematics and science
teachers through seminar meetings so that every Noyce Scholar remains in high-
need teaching positions six years after initial job placement. The project has
the potential to inform future initiatives that aim to prepare STEM secondary
education teachers who are both well qualified in STEM content area knowledge
and successful in engaging middle and high school students in high-need
environments. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.