* 1951057
* Bayesian Estimation of Restricted Latent Class Models for Ordinal and Nominal Response Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Aron Barbey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,999.00

This research project will advance statistical models and machine learning
algorithms used to describe the structure underlying human response data.
Decision makers and researchers in industry and academia collect and use large-
scale datasets to understand human behavior. Current methods extract profiles
underlying response data where the latent structure is known. However, the
latent structure is rarely known, so existing methods are appropriate in only a
few narrowly defined cases. The project will develop exploratory methods for
identifying common patterns and profiles when the latent structure is unknown.
The research will have broad implications in healthy populations and in clinical
populations, particularly in providing decision makers with fine-grained
information to accelerate human development and improve quality of life. The
methods to be developed will be applied to data involving individual differences
in cognitive performance, psychological factors that influence college student
academic behavior, and patient health outcomes. Graduate students will be
involved in the conduct of the research. Publicly available software will be
developed to provide researchers and decision makers with cutting-edge
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop and apply
statistical models that will enable precise, powerful modeling and testing of
hypotheses about systematic patterns in human response data. Restricted latent
class models (RLCMs) will be investigated for a broad range of human response
data, including ordinal ratings, rankings, and nominal choices. Methods for
estimating the latent structure for general RLCMs for ordinal and nominal
response data will be developed. Bayesian methods will be used to improve upon
existing models by offering a flexible framework that explores the underlying
structure. Project innovations will include establishing new identifiability
theory and investigating ordinal specifications in the latent structure.
Insights gained from this research could lead to significant developments in the
underlying statistical theory for estimation of latent structure models.
Advances in this theory will have implications for a broad spectrum of
applications beyond education and psychology, including other social science
disciplines and machine learning applications that cluster multivariate nominal
data according to underlying features. Researchers will be provided with tools
to relate the latent structure to other criteria, such as academic success,
effective decision-making, and health outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.