* 1951600
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical, Numerical, and Experimental Investigation of Flow Sensing by the Primary Cilium
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Yuan-Nan Young, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,999.00

This interdisciplinary team of three investigators will integrate mathematical
modeling, numerical simulations, and experiments to investigate key fundamental
issues surrounding the mechanosensory roles of primary cilia. Primary cilia are
solitary (one per cell), immotile, antenna-like microtubule-based organelles
extending from the surface of nearly every mammalian cell. Mechanical stimuli
(such as blood flow) cause deflection of the primary cilium, initiating
downstream signaling cascades to the rest of the cell. Defects in primary cilia
have been associated with atherosclerosis, osteoporosis, and cancer. Yet the
biochemical signaling pathways from primary cilia bending to cellular responses
remain a complex and unsolved problem that will be addressed by the three PIs.
Results from the proposed research will further our understanding of subcellular
mechanosensing of primary cilia, and will lay the foundation for designing
therapeutic strategies to treat various human diseases due to defected primary
cilia. The PIs will engage both undergraduate and graduate students to conduct
interdisciplinary research, and results from the proposed research can provide
new approaches in mathematical biology, biophysics, biomedical engineering and
medicine. The methods and techniques to be developed in this project will go
beyond the context of primary cilia and extend to other problems featuring
mechanically induced cellular functions, for example, in the regulation of
vascular tone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long speculated to trigger intracellular
calcium release as a second messenger for subsequent cellular biochemical
signaling and responses (such as change in patterns of cytoskeleton or altered
ion and solvent transport), recent experiments using genetically-coded calcium
indicators refuted the calcium-responsiveness of primary cilia for a range of
cells. Thus it is imperative to establish fundamental understanding of the role
of primary cilia in subcellular mechanosensing. One main challenge to identify
the pathway(s) from cilium bending to subsequent bio-chemical signaling is to
isolate primary cilium contribution from the rest of the cell responding
directly to the same mechanical stimuli. By using an optical trap, PI Resnick is
able to bend a single primary cilium without exerting force on the rest of the
cell, thus providing a great opportunity for insight to the missing pathways.
Combining this experimental technique with mathematical modeling (PI Young) and
numerical simulations (PI Peng), the team aims to (1) characterize the
mechanical properties of the primary cilium, (2) qualify the coupling between
cilium and cytoskeleton, and (3) identify the time scales and characteristics of
signaling activation to quantify ciliary-mediated flow sensing. Results from
these three aims will advance the mathematical modeling of the primary cilium
and how it couples to the intracellular signaling
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded with the Cellular
Dynamics and Function program in Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
and the Life Science Venture Fund in DMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.