* 1951301
* SBIR Phase II:  Manufacturing and Characterization of a Synthetic Platelet (SynthoPlateTM) Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Michael Bruckman, Haima Therapeutics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2022
* USD 949,173.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project aims to advance a technology for the treatment of uncontrolled
hemorrhaging (bleeding) after traumatic injury. Uncontrolled hemorrhage from
trauma is the a major cause of death, but an estimated 40% are potentially
preventable if hemorrhage control can be achieved rapidly. In hospitals, such
traumatic bleeding is treated by transfusion of donated blood to assist with
clotting to stanch bleeding, but this source suffers from lack of timely
availability, high risk of bacterial contamination, and short shelf-life (5-7
days). The proposed technology will rapidly stanch bleeding by adhering to the
injury site and amplifying the individual's clotting mechanisms. In addition, it
offers advantages of large-scale manufacturing, sterilizability, long shelf
life, and easy portability/storage for on-demand use. This project will advance
the engineering of this nanotechnology at scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase II project will advance the development of a synthetic hemostat
nanotechnology for manufacturing at scale. Uncontrolled hemorrhage from trauma
is typically managed by transfusion of donor blood-derived platelets, which
suffer from many disadvantages. This project will advance the development of a
synthetic platelet surrogate nanotechnology with the following technical
objectives: 1) Develop and validate lipid-peptide conjugation methods; 2)
Develop and validate lipid-peptide characterization methods; 3) Develop and
validate liposome manufacture methods; 4) Test at batch scale; 5) Test
consistency at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.