* 1951836
* Husky STEM Teacher Scholars: Creating New pathways and Broadening Participation in Mathematics and Science Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2026
* Kevin Haglin, St. Cloud State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 621,430.00

The project aims to increase the number of high-quality mathematics, chemistry
and physics teachers who can address student learning in high-need, diverse
schools. This goal has both national and local relevance. For example, to meet
local needs for STEM teachers, data indicates that the University will need to
triple the number of STEM teachers it produces. This project intends to help
address this need by developing a replicable model for recruiting students via a
well-established learning assistant program and supporting teacher candidates as
they begin STEM teaching careers. An area of emphasis will be to recruit STEM
majors from diverse cultural backgrounds, including students who begin higher
education at two-year institutions. This project aims to improve field
experiences for teacher candidates by engaging students in STEM outreach
activities and developing a model for effectively involving two-year institution
faculty and P-12 teachers in STEM teacher recruitment, preparation, and support.
The project intends to generate data about outreach results and relationships
with P-12 teachers. It intends also to document the impact of serving as a
Learning Assistant and Learning Assistant leader on teacher candidates’
effectiveness in the classroom. The overall project goal is to increase the
number and diversity of students obtaining STEM teaching licensure in Minnesota.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at St. Cloud State University includes
partnerships with Anoka Ramsey Community College, St. Cloud Technical and
Community College, and the St. Cloud Area School District. The project
anticipates supporting 24 undergraduate mathematics, chemistry, or physics
majors over the five years of the award. There are six project goals: 1) to
recruit STEM majors at two- and four-year institutions to become STEM teachers
via participation in outreach and the learning assistant experience with a
related co-teaching field component and cultural competency seminar; 2) to
create a pipeline using early P-12 STEM outreach opportunities, field placement
in diverse high-needs settings, and the learning assistant program; 3) to build
a strong relationship among college students, faculty, and teachers, that link
pre-service preparation with field-based best practices in STEM and culturally
relevant pedagogy 4) to engage Noyce Scholars in a research experience mirroring
the induction support that participants receive from the University during the
first three years of teaching; 5) to implement a project evaluation regarding
targeted outreach linked to best practices, learning assistant program
participation, cultural competency seminar, and action research as part of
assessment of teacher effectiveness during the Scholars’ first three years of
teaching; and 6) to pilot a scalable STEM teacher education program that
includes intentional support for teaching in high-needs districts. Research will
be conducted on how cultural competency training for pre-service teachers,
together with targeted field experiences with mentor teachers, influences
teaching and learning outcomes in secondary Mathematics, Chemistry and Physics
classrooms, especially for urban schools and areas with diverse student
populations. This Track 1 Scholarships and Stipends collaborative project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.