* 1951552
* IRES Site: Fractional-Order Circuits and Systems Research Collaboration with EU COST Action
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Todd Freeborn, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,861.00

This IRES Track I project provides U.S. students from the University of Alabama
(UA) in Tuscaloosa with 12-week summer international research experiences at the
Brno University of Technology (BUT) in the Czech Republic. This project supports
the collaborative research efforts of UA and BUT faculty focused on fractional-
order circuits and systems. “Circuits and systems” refers to the field
encompassing all design, analysis, and implementation efforts related to
electrical circuits. Electrical circuits are the foundation upon which all smart
devices, wireless communications, automotive systems, power systems, and
healthcare devices are built. Advancing circuits and systems in each of these
fields requires highly qualified engineers who can not only design and implement
circuits and systems, but who can creatively import concepts from new fields to
overcome challenges not yet even imagined. Fractional-order circuits and systems
is an emerging field expanding the boundaries of realizable electrical circuits;
changing how circuits are designed and implemented. Applications of fractional-
order systems range from the control of industrial machines with lower control
effort and lower energy costs to modelling the electrical impedance of skeletal
muscle to track changes in tissue properties to monitor for injury and disorder.
However, advances in the design and practical implementation of fractional-order
circuits and systems are needed before they can be quickly and efficiently
adopted into control systems and biomedical signal processing circuits. The need
for further research into this field was recognized by many universities in the
European Union (EU), who launched the COST Action CA15225, “Fractional-Order
Systems: Analysis, Synthesis and their importance for Future Design” to
coordinate research efforts; with collaborators from 23 EU countries, 2 near-
neighbor countries, and 3 international partner countries. This IRES site
supports advancing the COST Action by providing US students with research
experiences focused on the design, simulation and characterization of
fractional-order circuits, systems, and devices under the mentorships of faculty
at BUT, who are leading efforts with the COST Action. Six U.S. students each
year participate in a one-semester course prior to their international
experience to prepare them for their 12-week research under the mentorship BUT
faculty in Brno. The specific challenges addressed by student projects include
i) how to design and simulate fractional-order circuits for the electronic
filtering of signals, ii) methods to improve the emulation and fabrication of
fractional-order devices, and iii) alternative methods to characterize
fractional-order material properties. Beyond technical skill development, this
international research introduces students to the administrative and technical
challenges of coordinating and executing a large international collaborative
research effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program has several broader impacts
that include: i) increasing the number of students from under-represented groups
in STEM participating in research; ii) strengthening the international
collaborative research network between researchers in the US and the Czech
Republic; iii) increasing students intercultural maturity through interactions
with international students/faculty and participation in Czech social &amp;
cultural activities; and iv) increasing student understanding of graduate
studies to increase student pursuit of STEM graduate degrees. These impacts all
support the program focus to develop a diverse, globally-engaged workforce with
world-class skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.