* 1951788
* SCC-PG: Smart Technologies and Community Engagement to Address Data Gaps in Birth Outcomes Reporting
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Alexandrina Agloro, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 149,998.00

This one-year planning grant, a collaboration between Arizona State University,
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, and the Birthworkers of Color Collective (BCC),
investigates technology usage in a community of birthworkers in Long Beach, CA
to imagine how smart technologies could improve the collection, quality and
accuracy of data that is collected through the Los Angeles Mommy and Baby (LAMB)
survey. This survey critically influences strategies addressing perinatal issues
faced by different LA communities. Despite the importance of LAMB survey data in
shaping public health policy and the allocation of resources, the survey
currently lags more than two years in publishing survey results, and fails to
capture data from vulnerable populations. Important research questions to be
addressed include: What are BCC doulas’ everyday technology practices? and How
can a more diverse practitioner population contribute to the production of a
less biased and more secure data collection system? The questions asked in this
planning grant aim to 1) document the process of understanding and integrating
community partner needs into smart technology design, 2) increase knowledge
about mitigating algorithmic biases in synthetic learning and 3) improve the
security and trustworthiness of data collection in vulnerable populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses important social and technical
dimensions to examine approaches for improving birth outcomes and follow-on care
for vulnerable communities. The team takes a multidisciplinary approach to
address critical issues including design and assessment of community-based
research methods, integrated human and computer systems, while also taking into
account the ethics of AI and process-based systems. The proposed planning
activities include facilitating three workshops with the BCC doulas to develop
trust in the researchers and the integrity of the research process; examine
technological systems and infrastructures already in use with BCC and determine
technology behaviors; and introduce relevant smart technologies to co-develop an
understanding of how the doulas’ field expertise can minimize data collection
discrepancies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.