* 1951259
* SBIR Phase II:  Presbyopia Correcting Intraocular Lens with a Novel Refractive System for Restoration of a Complete Range of Vision and Spectacle Independence
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Kevin Harris, CLEARSIGHT, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 924,992.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase II project aims to address two
common conditions in the aging population, presbyopia and cataract, with a
single device. Presbyopia, the age dependent loss in the ability of the eye to
adjust focus, is expected to affect an estimated 1.4 billion people worldwide by
2020. Cataract, the irreversible clouding of the lens that results in blurred
vision and the leading cause of blindness in the world, is expected to affect an
estimated 30 million Americans by 2020. Currently no single product restores
both visual clarity and a complete range of spectacle-free vision following
cataract surgery. The proposed device will change the standard of care for
cataract surgery, leading to improved outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase II project will develop an intraocular lens using a new, highly sensitive
optical system that leverages large differences in refractive indices and has a
novel mechanism of action, potentially leading to levels of accommodation on par
with the abilities of a young, pre-presbyopic individual. Prospective
technologies may fail to exhibit adequate accommodative amplitude to restore a
full range of vision, produce unwanted visual artifacts, or are too complex for
adoption at scale. Using highly sensitive optics, the proposed device mimics the
shape of the natural lens while still maintaining relative simplicity, allowing
for maximum utilization of the minute forces in the eye to produce significant
accommodation and permitting the use of standard cataract surgical procedures.
This technical tasks associated with the new intraocular lens include: (1)
assuring visual quality through the device’s accommodative range, (2) optimizing
mechanics for restoration of a complete range of vision, (3) integrating
seamlessly with existing surgical procedures, and (4) testing implant longevity
and safety. Validating the objectives above through optical and mechanical
testing in benchtop, cadaver, and animal models will provide a strong foundation
for clinical investigations and translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.