* 1951104
* Optogenetic and biosensing technologies for a bioartificial pancreas system
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Emmanouhl Tzanakakis, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2024
* USD 553,880.00

Almost ten percent of the U.S. population suffers from diabetes. The associated
healthcare costs for this disease are the highest amongst major maladies. The
goal of this research project is to engineer a novel bioartificial pancreas
(BAP) device. The BAP device will require no patient intervention. It will
contain human pancreatic beta-cells, which are cells whose insulin secretion is
enhanced by blue light that is free of significant side effects. The BAP device
also will continuously monitor and respond to blood glucose level. This feature
should improve the regulation of blood glucose relative to daily insulin
injection therapies. A successfully developed BAP device would reduce many of
the long-term health complications resulting from large blood glucose swings
associated with daily injection therapies. The planned outreach activities for
this project feature inter-disciplinary training and research opportunities for
high school, undergraduate and graduate students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to build an
autonomous, closed-loop BAP platform. Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion will
be regulated by blue light, and embedded light-emitting diodes (LEDs) regulated
wirelessly will control the blue light application. The light will effect a
change in a photo-sensitive adenylyl cyclase. Coupling the BAP to a
transdermally-implanted, thread-based wireless glucose sensor will allow for
autonomous, closed-loop operation of the device. Specific project tasks will
include: (i) generating human beta-cells with photosensitive glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion, (ii) designing a hybrid LED/hydrogel device for delivery of
the photo-sensitive adenylyl cyclase-expressing human beta-cells, (iii)
realizing flexible glucose-sensing threads and wireless circuitry and (4)
integrating them with the hybrid LED/hydrogel. The project entails addressing
significant fundamental challenges in interfacing glucose sensors, electronics,
and LEDs with the function of living components for optimal operation in vivo.
This advance will offer broadly applicable insights for the manufacturing of
implantable devices. The generated photo-sensitive adenylyl cyclase-expressing
human beta-cells will be a valuable resource for screening diabetes drug
candidates and for increasing understanding of pancreatic cell
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.