* 1951759
* Modeling Across-Scale Feedback of Pathogen Virulence, Host Immunity, and Disease Control
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Hayriye Gulbudak, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 239,939.00

A current challenge for disease modeling and public health is to understand
pathogen dynamics across infection scales from within-host to between-host.
Viral and immune response kinetics upon infection impact transmission to other
hosts and feedback into population-wide immunity, all of which influence the
overall disease burden and trajectory of an outbreak. For example, dengue virus
(DENV) burden and host immunity are intricately linked; certain levels of pre-
existent antibodies in a host may actually enhance severity of secondary
infection with a distinct serotype. A better understanding of the coupled
immunological and epidemiological dynamics is critical for control strategies
against DENV, highlighted by recent debate over whether vaccination may increase
severe dengue infection. This project develops novel multi-scale modeling
frameworks with dynamical analysis, computational methods, and data fitting for
deciphering disease outcomes across scales. Three case studies are considered:
(i) the role of pre-existent antibodies on DENV severity and vaccination; (ii)
feedbacks in pathogen persistence and host immunity in Foot and Mouth Disease
Virus (FMDV); and (iii) effect of in-vector viral kinetics and inoculum
(infection dose) on vector-borne disease epidemics and control. By combining
these studies, across-scale feedbacks will be assessed for their influence on
disease burden and host immunity, and to provide insights on disease control and
dynamics. This work will provide undergraduate and graduate students with
advanced training in this emerging interdisciplinary scientific
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interconnection of infection scales, vital for
describing complex viruses, poses important mathematical/computational
challenges. While multi-scale models have been applied to infectious diseases, a
major limitation has been lack of bidirectional dependence of epidemiological
and immunological scales. In this research, population-wide epidemic models are
unified with individual infection dynamics to examine infection by multiple
strains, waning/boosting of immunity, and vector competence, along with disease
control. A new class of antibody-structured immuno-epidemiological differential
equation models will be formulated to depict connections between variable host
immunity and infection trajectories. Methods under development include
innovative equilibrium, stability, and persistence analysis, along with multi-
scale simulation approaches. Moreover, the multi-scale setting will be utilized
by fitting within-host/vector and epidemiological data to inform and validate
the models. For DENV, several datasets, ranging from virus-immune dynamics
during infection to epidemic incidence, will be combined to improve power and
prediction of the models, in collaboration with biologists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Mathematical Biology
Program of the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.