* 1951890
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Making Micromobility Smarter and Safer (M2S2)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Clinton Andrews, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,516,000.00

Urban transportation is experiencing rapid changes with the introduction of new
micro-mobility options. These include shared e-scooters, sit-down scooters,
e-bikes, and a range of other options. Within this mix of new modes, pedestrians
face substantial and growing risks on American streets where road designs cater
to drivers and automobiles dominate numerically. Over 6,000 pedestrians died on
U.S. streets in 2018, an 14% increase over 2015 and a 27% increase over 2014.
Human behavior, road design, environmental conditions, and technology each
influence the prevalence of crashes and improving traffic safety for all users
likely requires improvements along several of these dimensions. The rarity of
pedestrian fatalities and those injuries associated with e-scooters makes
disentangling the causal factors difficult. Hence, this project focuses on “near
misses” between vehicles and pedestrians, e-scooters, e-bikes, and bicycles. The
objectives of this project are to (a) use new methods to gather better data on
what determines pedestrian and micro-mobility risk, (b) create tools that
deliver more integrated solutions in collaboration with industry micro-mobility
partner Bird, and (c) test the tools in the service of the needs of the real
communities of New Brunswick and Highland Park, NJ. These tools will explicitly
integrate both the social and technology solutions to improve safety. Project
tasks include: (a) create an enhanced near miss detection capability using
multiple visual sensors and advanced computer vision techniques; (b) perform
behavioral experiments using both traditional tools (signage, temporary road
reconfigurations) and smart-city tools (sensor-equipped and networked mobile
actors and intersections); (c) conduct technological experiments integrated into
a prototype mobile-phone-based app for pedestrians, e-scooters, e-bikes, and
drivers; and (d) convene a community deliberation process that informs
development of a local smart transportation plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this proposed project resides, first, in the development
of a test bed equipped to evaluate social, technological, and integrated risk-
reduction strategies for vulnerable road users. One component is the refinement
of computer vision algorithms to much more accurately detect pedestrians,
e-scooters, e-bikes, vehicles; measure trajectories (direction, velocity);
measure near misses (deceleration, proximity, avoidance behavior); and
distinguish key user attributes (clothing brightness, gender, race, size). A
related contribution is to use digital models of the built environment to
improve the performance of the computer vision algorithms and allow spatially
explicit tracking of different entities. The second major contribution is to
acknowledge the sequencing and layering of social and technological strategies
as part of an integrated risk reduction portfolio. Vulnerable elderly, children,
and under-represented minority pedestrians and cyclists will benefit because
they are currently at disproportionate risk. The project will involve
undergraduate and graduate students in the research activities through
multidisciplinary capstone design classes, the summer Rutgers' Aresty
Undergraduate Research Program, and the summer RISE (Research in Science and
Engineering) program which introduces outstanding minority students to graduate-
level research through summer jobs with research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.