* 1951864
* SCC-IRG Track 2: CityGuide: Seamless and Inclusive Location-Based Services for Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jared Reyes, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,122,749.00

Persons with disabilities in our communities often find it difficult to achieve
and maintain an independent and high quality of life. A significant cause of
this issue is the challenge in independently accessing locations and services
within the community. In spite of advances in global positioning system
(GPS)-enabled applications, there are many daily-life scenarios where the lack
of adequate location-based services presents mobility and access challenges to
persons with disabilities. The long-term vision for this project is to design,
deploy, evaluate, and refine an inclusive community-wide system (accessed
through a smartphone app) called CityGuide that provides various auxiliary
location-based services (ALBSs) for people with disabilities (and the general
population), complementing satellite-based GPS systems. CityGuide will provide a
core wayfinding application as a service with the twin capabilities of
exploration and navigation. Building upon this core wayfinding service, numerous
other applications can be built; some specific applications of interest within
the scope of the project are: emergency evacuation, remote assistance, and
transit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project attempts to use a common technology
infrastructure to simultaneously serve the auxiliary wayfinding needs of people
with a broad range of disabilities. The top-level goal of using technology to
improve accessibility in communities naturally requires integrative socio-
technical research contributions that advances knowledge on multiple fronts.
From a technology design perspective, the project advances knowledge about
providing seamless and scalable indoor and outdoor location-based services. From
an information design perspective, the project advances knowledge about
contextually appropriate cues and content for a variety of location-based
applications. From a human-computer interaction perspective, the project
advances knowledge in applying universal design principles towards accessing
location-based services. From an economic analysis perspective, the project
advances knowledge about the impact of economies of scope and scale in the
feasibility and sustainability of accessibility technologies in small to medium-
sized communities. Expected societal impacts from the project include the
development of wayfinding technologies (and associated tech transfer) that
provides people with disabilities and also the general population a useful tool
to increase their independence, and thus, quality of life; and creation of a
model for other similar future efforts (beyond wayfinding) to address the need
for greater inclusivity in how various community-based services are
accessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.