* 1951504
* III: Small: Mining Heterogeneous Network Built from Multiple Data Sources to Reduce Opioid Overdose Risks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/05/2019,02/28/2022
* Yanfang Ye, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 02/28/2022
* USD 489,465.00

As opioid overdose deaths have continued to increase over the past decade across
the country, it is critical to understand the drugs involved in those deaths and
the potential role of polypharmacy (i.e., the concurrent use of multiple
medications) in opioid overdose deaths. However, due to the formidable
complexity of drug-drug interactions (DDIs) arising from polypharmacy, it is
challenging if not impossible to count them all manually. Therefore, there is an
urgent need for developing novel computational methodologies and models for
early detection of risky DDI patterns when opioids are combined with other drugs
(e.g., sedatives, muscle relaxants, anti-anxieties). Since relying on a single
data source for biomedical knowledge discovery often results in unsatisfactory
performance, the goal of this project is to design and develop a novel and
integrated framework (algorithms, models, and techniques) to construct a
heterogeneous network built from multiple data sources and extract useful
information from the constructed network to reduce the risk of opioid overdoses
resulting from polypharmacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key components of the
planned research are three-folds. First, the research team will construct a
heterogeneous network from multiple data sources for abstract representation.
Second, the team will develop scalable techniques for large-scale and dynamic
heterogeneous network representation learning. Third, the team will design a
novel deep learning framework with interpretability enhancement for early
detection of risky DDI patterns when opioids are combined with other
medications. The broad impacts of this work include benefits to the general
public by addressing one of the most challenging issues facing U.S. public
health today (i.e., overdose death prevention). The planned research in this
project is also beneficial to the intelligent information management domain
where multiple data sources are involved. The project integrates
interdisciplinary research with education through curriculum development, the
participation of underrepresented groups, and student mentoring
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.