* 1951632
* Collaborative Research: Mercury Oxidation Pathways in a Continental Atmosphere: High Temporal Resolution Measurements of Mercury and Oxidants at Storm Peak Laboratory
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Anna Gannet Hallar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 276,167.00

This project focuses on the study of atmospheric mercury. Mercury in the
atmosphere exists in the gas-phase elemental form, as gas-phase oxidized mercury
compounds, and bound to particles. The primary effort of this research will be
on processes and mechanisms that govern oxidation reactions in the remote
continental atmosphere. Mercury is a toxin that impacts neurological health and
development in humans. A more thorough understanding of the atmospheric
concentrations and chemical pathways of oxidized mercury is central to fully
determining its fate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three objectives to this
project: (1) Generate a high-quality dataset with accurate concentrations of
elemental and oxidized mercury, halogen oxide radicals, aerosol size
distribution, and other oxidants at a remote mountaintop site over the
continental U.S.; (2) Identify the chemical mechanisms and physical processes
that influence elemental and oxidized mercury in the free troposphere and the
planetary boundary layer air masses; and (3) Bolster existing long-term
measurements at Storm Peak Laboratory (e.g., to inform sources of new particle
formation) and facilitate dialogue with researchers at other mountain
observatories by sharing data analysis tools and expertise on best practices for
sampling oxidized mercury, nanoparticles, and halogens from high elevation
ground-based platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.