* 1951189
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of An Accurate Low-Cost Wearable Ultraviolet Dosimeter For The General Population
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Emmanuel Dumont, YouV Labs
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2022
* USD 799,923.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to provide a new tool promoting healthy sun behavior, a major public
health issue in the US as melanoma incidences have increased steadily over the
past 60 years. This technology is already used in clinical studies on sun
behavior across a variety of populations (children, adults, melanoma survivors,
people suffering from lupus) and can significantly improve the quality of life
for patients with disorders requiring particularly sensitive UV detectors to
prevent exposure to potentially carcinogenic levels of sun. This proposed
project will positively impact broader health with a device that can be
incorporated in personal electronic wearable devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will support the advanced development of low-cost UV
measurement. Sunlight is a complex electromagnetic source generating spectra
that vary strongly with the position of the sun, location on earth, weather
conditions from the ground to the stratosphere, and local shadows. Previous
detectors were based on simple linear, single wavelength calibrations
inappropriate for a signal with a varying spectral shape. The proposed project
will extend the development of a new system with a detection limit of 0.005 UVI
(UV Index, the health-relevant measure of intensity), compared with the state of
practice of 0.1 UVI; this extends traditional detection limits by integrating
machine learning. The Phase II research objectives are to engineer a prototype
system, reduce the package size, extend the machine learning capabilities, and
optimize system performance in real-world
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.