* 1951142
* Cooling During Deformation: An Overlooked Scenario with Implications for the Analysis of Ductily Deformed Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Steven Kidder, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 382,922.00

The spatial and temporal variability of stress magnitudes in Earth’s crust are
active and longstanding research areas in several branches of the geosciences,
e.g. geodynamics and earthquake mechanics. This study investigates a widely used
tool which relates grain size of rock samples to stress levels by conducting a
series of experiments in which rocks are cooled as they are deformed, mimicking
the cooling of natural rocks as they are carried by faults towards Earth’s
surface. The project explores the possibility that the statistics of grain size
distributions in such samples can be used to extract useful information about
the stress and deformation history of such rocks. The project is advancing
desired societal outcomes through: (1) improved understanding of processes
involved in earthquakes; (2) full participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM); and (3)
the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through
training of graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in
the Earth sciences and support of two early career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recrystallized grain size of rocks deformed
in the middle crust is routinely used to constrain differential stress
magnitudes and rock rheology. Such “grain size piezometry” requires an
assumption of microstructural steady state, however most exposed ductile shear
zones experienced deformation while cooling. Cooling causes an increase in rock
strength, and as a result, a stable recrystallized grain size is a moving
target. Recent rock deformation experiments demonstrate that, at ratios of
cooling rate to strain rate equivalent to those of typical natural shear zones,
recrystallized grain size is markedly out of equilibrium—recrystallized grain
sizes are twice as large as would occur if a steady-state were achieved. This
result motivates the primary goals of this proposal: 1) determine robust
criteria for recognizing microstructures that are affected by cooling during
deformation, and 2) develop a toolkit for constraining stress histories from
such rocks. Preliminary work on goal one demonstrates that there are systematic
differences in the shapes of grain size distributions of cooling ramp
experiments versus experiments at constant temperature. A suite of Griggs Rig,
general-shear cooling-ramp experiments over a 500°C range of temperature are
conducted. These experiments will--in conjunction with Electron backscatter
diffraction (EBSD) scanning electron microscopy data from well-constrained
natural samples and archival experiments carried out at constant
temperature—explore extrapolation of laboratory results to low temperature
geologic conditions, and potential effects of strain, initial grain size, and
the presence of porphyroclasts and secondary phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.