* 1951183
* SBIR Phase II: Leveraging Z-axis Milled Fiber to Enhance the Performance, Economics and Sustainability of Carbon Fiber for High-Volume Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Anvesh Gurijala, Boston Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,300,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of a high-performance,
economic, and sustainable carbon fiber material and associated processing
technology for consumer electronics, aircraft interiors, and mass market
automobiles. In current processes, roughly 30% of carbon fiber is typically
scrapped during manufacturing. By 2024, an estimated 50,000 metric tons of
virgin carbon fiber will be scrapped and disposed in landfills. The proposed
technology will extract value from scrapped fiber and prevent disposal, offering
up to 25% cost reduction compared with carbon fiber products commercially
available today. This technology creates higher usage and new opportunities for
this advanced material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will support the development of a high-
performance composite that utilizes low-cost and sustainable milled carbon
fiber. An industrial roll-to-roll production process will be used to compound
virgin carbon fiber with milled fiber. These reclaimed fibers are oriented in
the Z-axis using a proprietary technology adapted from an industrial process
originally developed to make thermoset products. The proposed project will
develop a market-ready thermoplastic product with dense Z-axis reinforcement
while retaining key in-plane properties. This new thermoplastic product will be
targeted towards translation to high-volume consumer electronics, aircraft
interiors, and automotive applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.