* 1951927
* SCC-PG - Connecting Communities through Smart Tools and Sensors to Deliver Enhanced Ecosystem Services and Economic Returns from Regenerative Farmland Management
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Keith Paustian, PECAN STREET INC.
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The way that we manage our agricultural lands is at the nexus of two of the
greatest challenges facing humanity: 1) reversing land and soil degradation
while maintaining sustainable production of food and fiber to meet growing
global demands, and 2) harnessing the potential of soil carbon sequestration for
drawdown of atmospheric CO2 to help stabilize global climate. To accomplish
these goals will require fundamental changes in agricultural land management and
the broader structure of our food systems. Central to this restructuring must be
an emphasis on improving soil health and managing agricultural systems to
provide environmental ecosystem services (e.g., carbon sequestration, improved
water quality, reduced erosion, biodiverse pollinator habitat, etc.) as
important coproducts to crop yields. Supporting the transition to, and
maintenance of, this so-called regenerative farmland management requires
monetizing the value of the various environmental services provided and ensuring
that farmers retain a greater proportion of the value of both the crops and
environmental services they cultivate. Our proposal seeks to develop a greater
understanding of the opportunities for and barriers to adoption of regenerative
agricultural practices, as well as collective decision-making about land use
management by regional farming communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out
this investigation, this project will bring together the nation’s leading soil
scientists and social scientists with Pecan Street’s award-winning engineering
team to design an integrative research project laying the technological and
social foundations for facilitating regenerative farmland management. This
project will 1) enhance and expand an existing farm greenhouse gas (GHG)
accounting system (COMET-Farm) with state-of-the-art sensors and geospatial
datasets to better facilitate landscape-scale assessments for rural communities,
and 2) pilot that system in select communities with a goal of nudging farmers
off individual-level decision-making towards collective decisions about
regenerative farmland management that will result in improved, marketable carbon
sequestration and ecosystem service provisioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.