* 1951224
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: GOALI: Detecting and Reconstructing Network Anomalies and Intrusions in Heavy Duty Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Jeremy Daily, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2021
* USD 108,772.00

Heavy vehicles (e.g., trucks and busses) are a critical element of U.S. and
worldwide logistics, often carrying cargo of high value or high risk (e.g.,
explosive liquids and gasses). Heavy vehicles often have hundreds of Electronic
Control Units (ECUs) that communicate over an internal network to carry commands
(such as "engage the brakes") or share sensor data (such as the temperature of
pressurized cargo unit carrying petroleum). ECUs with access to the
communication network can send any message they want. If the network or an ECU
is compromised by an attack, the truck or a cargo container safety mechanism
could malfunction. This project is gathering data from operational trucks to
better understand communication among components of heavy vehicles and
developing techniques to detect attacks in this
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is working to accomplish three
main objectives: (1) Collect representative Controller Area Network (CAN) bus
data from operational heavy vehicles, (2) Develop detection systems that can
distinguish anomalous CAN bus network traffic, and (3) Test and verify the
detection systems to reduce the number of false positives. The team is
developing a log algebra to efficiently assess live CAN traffic using embedded
devices with limited resources. Data is being gathered from truck traffic during
highway operation, enabling the application of machine learning algorithms for
anomaly detection. The team is evaluating the effectiveness of their intrusion
detection techniques in their heavy vehicle testbed, using synthetic attacks
against testbed ECUs and real-world CAN traffic data.