* 1951881
* RUI: The impact of malnutrition on T cell homeostasis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Melanie Gubbels Bupp, Randolph-Macon College
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 670,324.00

During times of food shortages or malnutrition, organisms devote less energy to
defending against infections. Indeed, malnutrition reduces the total number and
functionality of specific immune cells. This may result in permanent
deficiencies in immune defenses, even after adequate nutrition is restored. Data
presented in this project suggest that organisms may have evolved mechanisms to
minimize these immune defense deficiencies during malnutrition. This research
explores the hypothesis that malnutrition triggers specific immune cells (T
cells) to conserve energy to preserve a slightly larger number of immune cells,
which ultimately minimizes the deleterious effects of malnutrition. Mice are
used as a model organism to test this hypothesis. In the absence of infection,
immune cells move in a coordinated fashion throughout the body. This behavior is
critical for immune defense and is costly in terms of energy usage. This
research will examine if malnourished immune cells disengage from these
coordinated patterns of movement. Genetically-altered mice will also be studied
to characterize the molecular pathways that may contribute to these energy-
saving behaviors. Overall, this project will enable a better understanding of
the mechanisms that contribute to the conservation of resources during
malnutrition. This information may help researchers understand more about
immunity in animals and humans. In addition, high-school Latinas and
undergraduate research students will gain career mentorship and technical
training related to experimental design, data acquisition and analysis, and
scientific communication throughout this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
clear that the activation of the immune response is hindered during
malnutrition. However, it is unclear how malnutrition affects the immune system
in the absence of infection. The maintenance of a sufficiently large and diverse
population of T cells (one type of antigen-specific adaptive immune cell) is
critical for the initiation of a functional and appropriate immune response.
This research explores a potential mechanism that may preserve a larger
population of naïve T cells during short-term malnutrition. The hypothesis is
that glucocorticoids act to quickly reduce the total number of peripheral T
cells and induce an energy-saving, super-quiescent phenotype in T cells during
malnutrition. Thus, this research will determine whether malnutrition reduces
the number of naïve T cells via a glucocorticoid-dependent mechanism and if so,
whether glucocorticoid upregulation of a particular cell surface receptor
(CD127) is involved. Glucocorticoids will be inhibited in wild-type mice using
known chemical glucocorticoid inhibitors. Complementary research will use mouse
strains that have a conditional deletion of the glucocorticoid receptor in T
cells, and mouse strains that have a selective mutation of glucocorticoid
response elements upstream of the CD127 gene. These experimental systems will be
used to determine if malnutrition eliminates rhythmic circadian T cell
migration, reduces T cell migratory speed, redirects naïve T cells to
temporarily reside in the bone marrow, or disrupts distinct lymph node entry
efficiencies between CD4+ and CD8+ T cells utilizing the adoptive transfer of
labeled T cells and flow cytometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.