* 1951911
* SCC-PG: SUNRISE: Using Mobile Games in Rural Tribal Communities to Promote Social and Emotional Resilience in Youth
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Ashish Amresh, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2022
* USD 149,896.00

Youth living on tribal reservations experience behavioral health disparities at
some of the highest rates in the United States due to disparities, including
lack of community-based preventative measures, stigmas surrounding mental
illness and accessing behavioral health care, and lack of perceived need for
behavioral health care. This planning grant seeks to investigate the feasibility
of a sociotechnical, community-based behavioral health intervention that
integrates, for example, tribal community values, mobile health, and educational
gaming. The research will be carried out in partnership with the Hopi
Opportunity Youth Initiative (HOYI), an organization that seeks to address the
social and emotional needs of youth living on the Hopi Reservation through
service learning, mentorship, and community
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating expertise from computer science,
psychology, education, and applied Indigenous studies, this interdisciplinary
approach aims to be impactful for many tribal and remote communities that
struggle with access to behavioral health care services by making behavioral
health education more palatable to youth and accessible to communities that lack
robust telecommunications infrastructure. The research activities seek to: (i)
identify the behavioral health concerns of the Hopi community; (ii) ideate the
design of a SUNRISE (Sustainable Resilience for Social and Emotional Health)
app; and (iii) characterize the telecommunications infrastructure available to
the community. The study leverages and combines several approaches that have
been demonstrated to successfully bolster behavioral well-being in American
Indian/Alaskan Native youth populations. Strengthening social and emotional
resiliency skills in tribal communities is a critical first step in addressing
other pernicious economic, educational, and physical health inequities
experienced by these communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.