* 1951677
* Collaborative Research: Predicting Colloid Distribution in Subsurface Granular Media by Resolving Nanoscale Heterogeneity and Continuum-Scale Flow Field Topologic Impacts
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Diogo Bolster, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 08/31/2024
* USD 203,472.00

Protection of groundwater resources from pathogens and other contaminants, as
well as cleanup of legacy contamination, requires the ability to predict the
mobility of contaminants in groundwater systems. Under environmental conditions,
interactions with media surfaces may lead some very small particles known as
colloids to move far greater distances than expected, leaving practitioners of
groundwater resource protection and remediation without a viable way to predict
their transport. This work integrates measurements of nanoscale characteristics
of surfaces with transport and modeling experiments within a pore-scale
theoretical framework that can be used to better predict the mobility of
colloids. In addition to developing modeling tools for researchers and training
graduate students, the knowledge gained will be disseminated to the general
public by working with middle and high school teachers, participating of
informal community-level events, and collaborating on Learning Abroad classes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observed transport behavior of colloids at the pore
scale may be reproduced through inclusion of nanoscale heterogeneity in
mechanistic trajectory simulations. Currently such representation is determined
empirically via match to transport experiments but lacks testing on known nano-
patterned surfaces. The proposed project will combine experimental observations
of colloid interaction with nano-patterned surfaces and mechanistic trajectory
simulations to address knowledge gaps on (1) relationships between discrete
representations of nanoscale surface heterogeneities and measurable
physicochemical surface characteristics and (2) mechanistic parameterization of
the fate of colloids beyond the pore scale. Nano-pattern surfaces will be
characterized using force-volume atomic force microscopy. Multi-grain micromodel
experiments, both in the laboratory and in silico/computational, will elucidate
links between pore scale flow fingering, accumulation of near surface colloids,
depletion of a fast-attaching subpopulation of colloids, and deviation from
expected retention profiles under unfavorable attachment conditions. Results
will be integrated with state-of-the-art upscaling approaches to build
consistent theoretical models to predict colloid transport processes at
continuum scales. The proposed research will: 1) improve our theoretical
understanding of colloid transport in groundwater and other unfavorable contexts
to the benefit of water resource protection and remediation: 2) provide a suite
of simulation tools for practitioners and researchers; 3) enhance graduate
student education through short courses regarding particle transport and surface
interaction; and 4) outreach a broader population regarding the role of
particulates in trace element fate and transport in subsurface and surface
aquatic systems. Outreach include engaging middle and high school science
teachers during summer internships, participation in community-level events,
such as Science Alive and Science Sunday, held at libraries and local parks, and
collaboration on Learning Abroad classes in Ecuador.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.