* 1951095
* Emergence and Coordination of Rhythmic Activity in Respiratory Neurons and Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Rubin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 461,242.00

Breathing in mammals occurs regularly throughout life without the need for
conscious control. This remarkably robust behavior results from the activity of
networks of neurons deep in the brain that interact to produce coordinated,
rhythmic outputs that drive breathing. Although certain aspects of this process
are well understood, experiments have revealed features that go beyond existing
theories, and this project will apply new modeling and analysis approaches to
investigate these effects. A first set of issues that will be studied relates to
the ways that specific patterns of respiratory neuron outputs emerge, change
across development, and are affected by feedback signals. A second direction of
investigation will focus on how activity spreads and becomes coordinated across
a population of respiratory neurons, as needed to effectively drive the muscles
that initiate each breathing cycle. Additional avenues for research will involve
the mechanisms of system-wide coordination across multiple populations of
neurons that interact to produce the full breathing cycle over a range of
conditions. The work will be completed in collaboration with experimentalists,
and results of the project will lead to improved models to explain results of
respiratory experiments and will generate new predictions. In addition to
enhancing understanding of respiratory function and dysfunction, this project
will have broad implications: theoretical methods developed to study the spread
of coordinated activity will be relevant to other neural networks and to the
spread of disease, opinion and information, while approaches for analyzing
processes that evolve at very different rates will apply to other settings as
well. Trainees contributing to this research will gain experience in using
computational methods to address data-driven questions in neuroscience. Methods
and findings developed will contribute to the training of students via local
group meetings and courses and will be disseminated more broadly via
publications, presentations, and model sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rhythmic
activity of networks of neurons underlies a wide range of repetitive behaviors
such as walking, scratching, and breathing. This project will address rhythm
generation, coordination, and control via a focus on neuronal networks in the
mammalian brainstem associated with respiration. In the rhythms that these
networks produce, multiple populations of neurons take turns activating at
specific relative times and with specific activity patterns within each
breathing cycle, and the activity within each population rapidly synchronizes
when it arises. This work will analyze how activity with complex dynamic
features, called bursting, arises in specific neurons and subsequently spreads
across the population in a particular brainstem region during the inspiratory
phase of breathing. Analysis of the bursting patterns, which will be done across
multiple stages of development, will involve novel mathematical analysis of the
dynamics of systems with components that evolve on several distinct timescales.
The resulting theoretical advances will have implications for the study of other
biological and physical systems with multiple timescale dynamics. New results
will also be attained, using mathematical and computational methods, about how
the coordination of bursting across the network depends on the pattern of
connections across the neurons involved and the properties of the synapses
through which these neurons communicate. These advances will also have broader
applicability to other processes involving the spread of activity in a network
from a small set of local initiation sites. Finally, this project will include
investigation of coordination of activity across multiple neuronal populations
to produce functional respiratory outputs, including issues of flexibility and
robustness under changes in feedback signals due to environmental or metabolic
demands. These steps will be guided by novel experimental data, will involve
collaboration with experimentalists, and will result in advances in basic
understanding as well as predictions about alterations underlying certain
respiratory dysfunctions. The project will include diverse graduate students and
undergraduates who will gain valuable research training, will impact educational
efforts, and will lead to dissemination of results and model
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded jointly by the MPS Division
of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the Mathematical Biology Program and
BIO/IOS through the Neural Systems Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.