* 1951480
* SBIR Phase I: Vibration Energy Harvesting-Based Sensor System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* James McCullagh, CREATHADH ENERGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to use novel energy harvesting
techniques to benefit the expanding wearables market and improve the lives of
patients who use prosthetics and orthotics. New integrated circuit technology
enables vibration energy harvesting from a physically much smaller vibration
harvester. These smaller harvesters enable multiple applications. For example,
battery life in wearables to track heart rate and steps walked could be
extended. Also, fabric-based vibration energy harvesting applications could be
realized in military and first responder uniforms to power communication
devices. Similarly, for commercial markets clothing-integrated sensors for
digital health applications could be powered by vibration harvesting. Finally,
first markets will be explored for vibration harvesting systems integrated in
prosthetics or orthotics to improve the quality of life for patients. A sensor
system in orthotics could detect medical complications in patients suffering
from diabetic neuropathy. These new energy harvesting circuits could potentially
also power sensors integrated into prosthetics that could identify structural
and mechanical problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a vibration energy interface circuit
that allows cold start-up from record low voltages and low currents using novel
CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor) design techniques. These CMOS
design techniques use only one vibration harvester input to charge large loads
such as 100µF capacitors without the use of a transformer or Schottky diodes.
Lowering the minimum start-up voltage in a vibration harvesting interface
circuit has been a significant area of circuit research in integrated circuit
design over the last decade. The innovation proposed for this SBIR Phase I
project uses a classic Cockcroft-Walton charge pump with large off-chip 100µF
capacitors. The charge pump's rectification is designed in CMOS to allow
leakage-based signals to form and switch the charge pump's rectification from
cold start-up. In this project there will be continued research into integrated
circuit techniques and solutions to lower the minimum start-up voltage in a
circuit interface to a vibration harvester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.