* 1951147
* An Investigation into the Governance of Village Life
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Tate Paulette, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,948.00

A team of researchers will undertake research to study the organization of
small-scale, village-based societies and, especially, resistance to the process
of state formation. Archaeologists have long been interested in documenting and
explaining the origins of the state, but attention has recently shifted toward
societies that explicitly sought to prevent state formation, that is, to prevent
the accumulation of wealth, power, and authority in the hands of any particular
individual or group. Understanding how these intentionally small-scale,
decentralized, and egalitarian societies operated can yield new insight into the
diverse forms of governance organization that have developed, persisted, and
thrived alongside states. Archaeology offers the only scientific means of
glimpsing the operation of such organization in prehistory. Given its focus on
the physical remains left behind by past societies, archaeology also draws
attention to the spaces, places, and objects that helped people construct and
maintain specific governance systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will use archaeological evidence for food production, craft production,
community organization, burial practices, symbolic representations, and trade to
study governance organization in a village-based, egalitarian society
contemporary with and in close proximity to the classic centers of state
formation. Excavations are designed to collect evidence for the governance of
village life in one small settlement and thereby provide a glimpse into the
operation of such a small-scale, locally organized, and deliberately maintained
alternative to the state. The research will consist of a three-year program of
archaeological data collection and analysis that includes study of ceramic,
lithic, metallurgical, architectural, zooarchaeological, palaeobotanical,
osteological, and geoarchaeological remains. Drawing on these diverse data sets,
the project will provide a new perspective on the deep history of efforts to
build and maintain more equitable social systems. It will also contribute to
international education, training, cultural heritage preservation, and human
resource development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.