* 1951482
* Spreading Speeds and Non-Spreading Solutions for Spatial Population Models with Allee Effects
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Bingtuan Li, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2024
* USD 179,996.00

Spatial dynamics of populations remain poorly understood when compared to what
is known about fluctuations in population size. For example, we have very
limited understanding of how variability is maintained when populations spread
across landscapes, why populations are often patchily distributed in space, and
how phenology (the timing of biological events) influences these processes and
patterns. The Allee threshold or critical size for population growth plays a
particular role in spread of many populations. This project develops and
analyzes mathematical models to investigate how a combination of an Allee effect
and over-compensatory growth can produce oscillations in spreading speeds and
robust non-spreading solutions across regions of parameter space, and to
determine biologically when these outcomes should be expected. The project aims
to extend these results to address important questions such as how "invasion
models" can yield growth and persistence of a species in multiple, spatially
separated patches within an unbounded habitat, and how phenology, stage-
structure, and barrier zones affect spatially spreading systems. The findings of
this research are expected to have direct, critical implications for controlling
the spread of invasive species or promoting the reintroduction of native species
into areas of extirpation. Graduate students will be trained through involvement
in research at the interface of mathematics and biology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our understanding of spatial population
dynamics through rigorous efforts in four mathematical areas. These are: (i)
analysis of integro-difference equations to characterize oscillations in
spreading speeds and existence of non-spreading solutions; (ii) development and
analysis of spatial models where Allee effects and over-compensation are
generated by phenology and where dispersal is critical to population
persistence; (iii) construction and examination of stage-structured models with
an Allee effect; and (iv) creation and exploration of spatial models with an
Allee effect and a stationary or moving barrier zone. For the models, the
existence and stability of traveling wave solutions with constant and
oscillating speeds will be established, and the links between the Allee effect
and population dispersal will be explored. The minimal width of a barrier zone
needed to stop, slow, or reverse a population invasion will be determined.
Methods from differential equations, integral equations, and dynamical systems
will be employed to identify conditions under which solutions spread into open
space or stop invading. Applications of the models to biology will be addressed
through studies of spread of species such as the gypsy
moth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.