* 1951418
* JST: SCC-PG: Socially-integrated Technological Solutions for Real-time Response and Neighborhood Survival After Extreme Events
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Cynthia Chen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 95,000.00

Situated on opposite sides of the Pacific Ocean, the US Pacific Northwest Region
and Japan face significant earthquake risks from similar geophysical conditions.
The Pacific Northwest is considered overdue for a Cascadia Subduction Zone
8.0–9.2 magnitude megaquake. When it happens, the estimated direct fatalities
for Oregon and Washington states are up to 10,000, with economic losses of more
than $80 billion. For the comparably sized region of Japan facing a Nankai
megathrust earthquake, estimated fatalities are 80,000–323,000 lives and about
$900 billion in economic loss. In the immediate aftermath of a megaquake, most
of the disaster response agencies and personnel, if not all, will be overwhelmed
and many neighborhoods in the region will need to rely on themselves to maintain
essential activities for a prolonged period. To support these essential
activities, communications will need to be robust enough to function under
highly uncertain circumstances, and to enable real-time and reliable information
sharing for efficient resource allocation and matching. This proposal represents
the US portion of a planning grant for a collaboration with researchers from
multiple Japanese Universities as part of the NSF/JST collaboration for the
Smart and Connected Community Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant
builds the capacity of a partnership of engineers and planners on both sides of
the Pacific Ocean (Seattle area and Japan) to developing these critically needed
communications and information-sharing technologies. The joint team will partner
with three communities in Washington State and the city of Nagoya in Japan, to
ensure that initial technical prototype ideas have real, place-specific
relevance and applicability. Focus groups and community workshops will identify
specific community needs, values, resources and concerns, and provide a feedback
loop for evaluating the prototypes. It is expected that by working with these
communities, the technological tools to be developed will be socially
integrated, not only helping communities to address the critical need to prepare
for a possible mega-earthquake but also to enhance resilience in the face of a
wide range of life uncertainties and disruptions, and to improve communities’
daily quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.