* 1951186
* SBIR Phase II:  Microwave ablation system for creating precision directed ablation zones
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Punit Prakash, Precision Microwave Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,009,464.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase II project proposes continued
development of a directional microwave ablation (MWA) system. During MWA,
doctors use image guidance to insert a thin needle-like applicator into a target
tumor and then energize the microwave antenna embedded in the applicatorâ€™s tip
to heat and kill the tumor. MWA is especially important to the large population
of cancer patients who are poor candidates for surgery or other physically
demanding therapies, such as chemotherapy or radiation therapy, due to tumor
location or poor health. All currently available MWA systems are only capable of
producing a roughly spherical or teardrop-shaped treatment zone centered on the
axis of the applicator, which is not suitable for treating tumors located near
critical anatomy or irregularly shaped targets. This limitation often leaves
doctors with a difficult choice of risking undertreatment and disease recurrence
or risking overtreatment and damage to critical healthy anatomy that may cause
pain or life-threatening complications. Directional MWA would allow the
physician to instead place the applicator alongside the tumor and direct heat
toward the target and away from nearby sensitive tissues. New clinical
techniques enabled by directional MWA could facilitate faster, safer, more
effective, and lower cost treatment of localized tumors, and potentially broaden
the range of diseases that could be treated in a minimally invasive
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As microwave antennas typically require physically
large structures to achieve a high degree of directivity, developing a small
diameter (&lt;2.0 mm) applicator suitable for minimally invasive treatments is
technically challenging and requires the use of novel design methods,
fabrication processes, and materials. Technical work in this Phase II projects
includes: 1) Industrialized design of the prototype ablation applicator and
transmission cable hub, and associated fabrication and assembly process
development to improve quality and clinical usability; 2) Testing and
characterization of clinical delivery parameters, and developing an algorithm
that informs treatment planning for the creation of customizable treatment
zones; 3) Development of a programmable multi-channel MW generator platform,
affording customizable control of energy delivery parameters, and 4) Detailed
system integration and in vivo system performance assessment and
characterization to develop treatment planning and dosing guidelines. We will
employ an approach integrating multiphysics computational models, benchtop
experimentation in ex vivo tissue, and in vivo experiments in porcine liver and
kidney to design, optimize, and validate our applicators and integrated
microwave ablation system. The goal of this R&amp;D effort is to complete the
technical design of a clinically viable directional microwave ablation
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.