* 1951292
* 10th African Materials Research Society (A-MRS) Conference 2019
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Eric Garfunkel, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 11/30/2020
* USD 49,000.00

This award to the Materials Research Society supports mainly the participation
of US based-scientists at the Tenth African Materials Research Society (A-MRS)
Conference. The A-MRS conferences bring unique value by pulling together leading
international scientists and engineers to discuss recent advances in broad areas
of materials research and to help define future research priorities including in
areas of critical need for Africa. The themes for the 10th A-MRS conference
include materials for energy; health, nanoscience/nanotechnology;
agriculture/Environment; sustainable buildings and constructions; computational
materials science; and materials for mining and mineral processing. The
conference also includes sessions on education/networking in materials science
and engineering curriculum development, web-based learning, exchanges, summer
schools on manufacturing and structural materials. The themes of the conference
appropriately address topics of interest to the global community as well as
issues specific to Africa. The funds will support travel and participation costs
of students and young scientists currently working in American universities,
some support will also be used to bring in leading senior international
scientists and African graduate students. The Conference will be held at the
Nelson Mandela African Institute of Science and Technology (NM-AIST) in Arusha,
Tanzania in December 2019. Organized by the African-MRS with strong support of
the Materials Research Society (MRS), the heart of the Conference is to build
knowledge, foster relationships and promote action to further the understanding
in the broad fields associated with materials science and technology. Similar to
past African-MRS Conferences, participants will come from around the world, with
an anticipated attendance of 500. The award is from Division of Materials
Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.