* 1951393
* Conference on "100 Years of Mock Theta Functions; New Directions in Partitions, Modular Forms, and Mock Modular Forms"
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Larry Rolen, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 02/28/2023
* USD 7,500.00

This award provides partial support for the conference "100 Years of Mock Theta
Functions: New Directions in Partitions, Modular Forms, and Mock Modular Forms."
This conference falls on the 100 year anniversary of Ramanujan's original
definition in his deathbed letter to Hardy and will take place at Vanderbilt
University in Nashville, Tennessee on May 18-19 2020. The main theme will be on
new developments around the area of partitions, and especially ranks, cranks,
and other partition statistics. This conference is oriented at establishing and
furthering dialogue on new developments at the boundary of combinatorics and
modular forms. This will foster collaboration between researchers working in
these fields, and the conference will feature a problem session to delineate and
disseminate critical questions, as well as a discussion panel about issues
affecting junior and minority researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular,
modular forms and mock modular forms have long been essential tools in the study
partitions and other combinatorial sequences. Mock theta functions have led to
many results on rank and crank congruences, asymptotics, and inequalities, and
conversely, such partition statistics have motivated the development of harmonic
Maass forms. Very recently, Stanton has highlighted several conjectures of his
and Garvan's in unpublished notes. These conjectures seek a combinatorial
refinement of the rank and crank statistics. These suggest a deeper structure
both on the combinatorial side and in the mock modular form world. These
conjectures have the potential to open up new areas of research at the
intersection of combinatorics and mock theta functions. Given these cutting-edge
questions and the fitting nature of Ramanujan's anniversary of introducing mock
theta functions, it is a particularly opportune time to gather experts from
these two fields to discuss the future of such questions and related topics, and
to involve the next generation of junior researchers in this conversation and
collaboration. Further details can be found on the conference website:
https://my.vanderbilt.edu/mock/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.