* 1951499
* CBET: Probing the Effects of Nanoparticle Morphology and Density in Bacterial Adhesion on Bioinspired Nanometallic Arrays.
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Marco De Jesus, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 06/30/2024
* USD 454,623.00

Dr. Marco De Jesus and his group at the University of Puerto Rico - Mayaguez
will adapt bioinspired replicas of naturally occurring and engineered metal
nanostructures to gain a deeper understanding of how bacteria interact with
nanoscale surfaces whose morphologies are smaller than microorganisms. The
investigators will perform an assessment of the structural parameters which
influence bacterial adhesion and colonization to devise new materials with
controlled bio-adhesive properties for biomedical and environmental
applications. In collaboration with the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences
at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, the team will assess the performance of
cellular adhesion and colonization onto metal nanoparticle arrays. Results of
these studies have the potential to impact areas of national interest including
the construction of advanced biosensors, medical devices, and cellular grafting
applications. The project will provide interdisciplinary training and research
opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students in
nanotechnology, chemical sensing, and bioanalytical chemistry. The project will
involve at least two graduate and six undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve our current
understanding of how bioactive agents interact with nanomaterials at the
liquid/solid interface. Specifically, in collaboration with the Center for
Nanophase Materials Sciences at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Dr. De Jesus and
his team will assess how surface morphology and packing density influence the
ability of bacterial cells to attach and colonize nanostructured surfaces. The
team is particularly interested in the impact of these properties on the
sorption and effective binding of bacterial agents towards the development of
scalable and transferable nanostructures. These nanostructures can be used to
inhibit pathogen proliferation in medical devices and implants and to improve
bacterial binding for biosensing and controlled cell adhesion applications.
Using competitive binding experiments and multivariate Raman analysis, the team
will identify the structural dependence of surface interactions of mixed
chemical agents to elucidate surface selectivity and trends for practical
quantitation of mixtures. The successful completion of this project will provide
new advances toward the rational design of nanomaterials with tailored
properties for specific biological applications. The project will provide
research and training opportunities for a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students at the University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez in nanotechnology
applied to biochemical systems, with direct exposure of the graduate students to
state-of-the-art facilities at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Nanoscale
Interactions Program in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems (CBET) Division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.