* 1951647
* Understanding tree species response to urban heat using high resolution remote sensing
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Michael Alonzo, American University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2023
* USD 416,659.00

Movement of water from the ground up to tree leaf surfaces, where it evaporates,
is an important means by which green infrastructure cools cities. This water
movement—or transpiration—is also linked to a tree’s ability to store carbon via
photosynthesis. However, it is not well understood how different tree species
respond to urban heat with respect to maintenance of transpiration at high
temperatures or shifts in the dates of leaf development and leaf fall. Thus,
cities do not have adequate information to choose the species that are best
equipped to thrive under stressful conditions and bolster climate resilience
under warming. This project uses drone and satellite imagery analysis to observe
these responses in a manner only previously possible under laboratory
conditions. This project will increase our understanding of how trees in an
urban environment can help to mitigate the warming of cities though the cooling
impact of trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information on how species and planting
site (e.g., downtown street tree, suburban park tree) influence urban forest
transpiration is lacking, in part because it is difficult to account for a
city’s high degree of land cover heterogeneity at fine spatial scale. This
project accounts for rapid changes in tree response to heat over space and time
through use of high-resolution imagery analysis. Drone measurements of leaf
temperature and chemistry will be acquired multiple times per day to examine the
extent to which photosynthesis and transpiration track one another or diverge.
Weekly satellite imagery capable of measuring leaf abundance at the individual
tree scale across a large city will be used to assess changes in urban forest
start and end of season, a fundamental control on seasonal transpiration. These
analyses are among the first to provide observational evidence of how urban tree
function may be altered by increased heat at daily and seasonal
increments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.