* 1951197
* SBIR Phase II:  Intelligent Planning and Control Software for EV Charging Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Narayanan Sankar, Microgrid Labs Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,099,861.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a modeling, simulation and optimization
software for fleet electrification projects. Electric vehicles (EVs) are
expected to comprise 70% of all new buses and 15% of all commercial trucks by
2030. Electric vehicles are more expensive than diesel buses and need additional
investments in charging infrastructure; furthermore, electrification is complex
as several factors influence its design, cost and performance. The transition
from diesel to electric buses could impose significant loads on the local
electrical network, entailing significant upgrades to the electrical
infrastructure at the facility and the utility grid. The proposed software will
offer the electric vehicle industry a platform to analyze the battery, charging
infrastructure, and energy infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the problem of
planning and operating electric vehicle fleets, especially medium and heavy-duty
fleets. The technology uses stochastic optimization and discrete event
simulation to optimize fleet sizes to minimize costs and meet operational
requirements. The proposed work will create a model of the joint transportation
and energy processes (i.e., the driving and charging processes). The proposed
software will enable real-time optimization of system
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.