* 1951725
* A Pathway to Equity: Recruiting and Retaining Underrepresented Populations in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Ayanna Shivers, Lincoln University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,177,030.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in providing students in all
schools in the United States with a high-quality STEM education. This project
will assist the nation in reaching this goal by creating a “grow your own”
pathway of STEM majors who will prepare for careers as teachers in high-need
communities. To prepare STEM majors to teach effectively in high-need school
communities, they need educational experiences that address cultural diversity
at all levels. This project will provide this training by implementing evidence-
based practices aimed to improve STEM student learning and retention in
undergraduate STEM majors. The project activities include: providing summer
internships to engage first- and second-year college students; funding full
scholarships to undergraduate juniors and seniors; and mentoring future
teachers. This project will prepare certified middle and high school STEM
teachers via academic and practical experiences, including high-quality clinical
field placements in both urban and rural schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at Lincoln University, a Historically Black College and University, will
include partnerships with Moberly Area Community College, Jefferson City School
District, Kansas City Public Schools (high-minority/high percentage of free and
reduced lunch recipients), and Mexico School District (rural). Over five years,
the project will provide scholarship and mentoring support to 32 undergraduate
majors in biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics. These students will also
be provided with the pedagogical-content knowledge skills needed to succeed as
teachers in high-need rural and urban school districts. Project goals include:
(1) Increase the number of university STEM majors pursuing a career in K-12 STEM
teaching; (2) Assist “Grow Your Own” programs in Jefferson City, Kansas City and
Mexico, MO in developing STEM majors who will return to their respective
hometowns to teach after completion of the STEM baccalaureate degree; (3)
Promote STEM as a viable career field for underrepresented populations; and (4)
Construct an inquiry-based, culturally responsive curriculum that can be
integrated into undergraduate STEM and teacher preparation programs. This
project will use a mixed-methods design to assess project effectiveness.
Dissemination efforts will include sharing findings at relevant national
conferences and in education research journals. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.