* 1951583
* Modeling DNA Allostery and Its Effect on Gene Compaction and Regulation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Nikolaos Voulgarakis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 274,756.00

Life depends on the ability of an organism's proteins to promptly and accurately
read the genetic code stored in DNA molecules. During this fundamental process,
specific proteins randomly search for the proper DNA segment and then aggregate
around it to form a molecular machinery that processes the genetic information.
The accuracy and efficiency of DNA search is quite remarkable given the fact
that the size of these proteins is about a thousand times smaller than the
typical length of a gene. Currently, there is no rigorous theory explaining how
proteins identify and bind to specific targets on DNA. Such a theory will not
only lead to a quantitative understanding of fundamental functions of DNA, it
will also help scientists investigate the cause of diseases, such as cancer and
diabetes, and ultimately advance drug discovery. This project will introduce a
novel hypothesis according to which the search process is partially facilitated
and directed by the DNA molecule itself. New mathematical models will be
developed to study specific mechanical changes of the double strand that have
the potential to assist proteins in finding their way towards the desired DNA
segments. Results will be validated by direct comparison with experimental data.
This project will train both graduate and undergraduate students in the broad
field of mathematical biology, with special effort to recruit students from
underrepresented groups and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA allostery,
i.e., the process by which proteins binding at one location of the double strand
affect the properties of other proteins at a distant location, has been
increasingly recognized as a key-factor in DNA functions. It has been
traditionally believed that allosteric interactions are mediated through
specific DNA deformations, such as twisting, bending, and stretching. The
proposed research will introduce and explain the physical mechanism of a new
type of allostery through protein-induced DNA bubbles. Such a conformational
change can spontaneously create protein filaments capable of regulating DNA
packaging. To study this effect, this project will develop a novel mathematical
framework that describes the stability of a polymer in the presence of time-
dependent rigidity. The resulting protein-DNA structures are highly adaptive in
external stimuli and can provide special biomechanical pathways that help
proteins find specific gene segments (e.g., promoters) in a more efficient way.
The efficiency of the search process will be studied as a mean-first-passage-
time problem of a specially designed reaction diffusion
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded with the Chemistry of Life
Processes program in the Division of Chemistry and the Genetic Mechanisms and
the Molecular Biophysics programs in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.