* 1951249
* SBIR Phase II:  Microbial conversion of pectin-rich agricultural byproducts into specialty chemicals
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Luke Latimer, ZestBio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 949,255.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is enabling commercialization of novel
technologies that convert pectin-rich agricultural byproducts into useful
specialty chemicals for existing multi-billion dollar chemical markets. The
United States is a leading producer of pectin-rich byproducts, including the
citrus (&gt;5 million tons annually), apple (&gt;5 million tons annually) and
sugar beet (&gt;37 million tons annually) industries. With this platform
fermentation technology, it is possible to perform specific chemical conversion
of these US byproducts into value-adding products. Implementation of this
technology can increase overall revenue from crops far exceeding current
byproduct mitigation strategies. This offers reduced volatility in crop value,
financial sustainability for farmers, and construction of rural fermentation
facilities. Furthermore, by using existing crop byproducts and eco-friendly
fermentations, the resulting chemical products will be have lower environmental
impact than competing chemicals made from petroleum or sugar.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is
designed to improve the conversion of industrial pectin-rich agricultural
byproducts into specialty chemical products. Each year, large volumes of
agricultural byproducts, such as citrus peels and sugar beet pulp are produced,
but lack value-adding technologies. By using novel scientific breakthroughs in
microbial metabolism and tools for strain engineering, microbial organisms can
be engineered to convert the sugars from these byproducts into useful chemicals
through environmentally sustainable fermentation. The goal of this Phase II
project is to improve the production rate for the synthesis of the first
chemical product using this technology. The first objective is to improve the
oxidative metabolism of the host organism to aid in strain productivity. The
second objective is to use a combinatorial library of strains to refine and
optimize the microorganisms' fermentation rate. The final objective is to take
the improved strains and optimize the fermentation conditions using bioreactors.
This three pronged-approach promises to improve chemical production
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.