* 1951071
* Discriminating slow slip earthquakes and sediment gravity flows from oceanographic signals: the Alaska Amphibious Community Seismic Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Albert Hermann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 152,358.00

Subduction zones represent the most serious seismic hazard to United States
coastal population centers. The episodic but unpredictable earthquakes from
these subduction zones generate undersea landslides called turbidites that
produce dangerous tsunami waves that can inundate coastal cities, producing epic
damage and large-scale fatalities. The 2011 Tohoku earthquake, turbidite and
resulting tsunami that claimed 15,899 deaths in Japan is a recent example of
this hazard, where the damage to infrastructure continues to the present day.
The 1964 Magnitude 9.2 Alaska margin earthquake and tsunami was the largest
seismic event to hit the United States in modern times, causing over $2.3
billion dollars in damage and pointing clearly to the potential risks of
subduction zone earthquakes and tsunamis to U.S. coastal cities. The recently-
conducted National Scientific Foundation Community Seismic Experiment deployed
ocean bottom instruments in a 14-month off-shore experiment on the Alaska margin
in order to assess this risk. An additional suite of sensors and data loggers
was added to this experiment by the University of Washington, specifically to
evaluate the risk from turbidite currents initiated by Alaskan margin
earthquakes. Within this current project, these new data will be integrated from
all of the community experiment sensors in order to (1) determine the minimum
magnitude earthquake that can trigger both turbidity currents and tsunamis, (2)
produce numerical models to eliminate the production of false positive alarms
that are generated from non-seismic Alaskan winter storms and ocean currents,
and (3) help assess the potential for the Alaska Subduction Zone margin to
produce the large tsunamis that potentially threaten the west coast of the
United States and Canada. The project includes support for a UW graduate student
whose PhD thesis includes training in evaluating subduction zone seismic
hazards, a numerical modeler who will construct an Aleutian Island regional
ocean model to help evaluate false positives produced by storms and local ocean
current eddies and an expert in identifying marine landslides on subduction zone
margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent NSF Alaska Amphibious Community Seismic
Experiment deployed 74 Ocean Bottom Seismometer instruments in the 14-month off-
shore experiment on the Alaska subduction zone margin. In addition, the
University of Washington added an additional 105 sensors and data loggers to
these seismometers, specifically to identify turbidity currents generated by
both local and distant seismic activity and by non-seismic initiation due to
winter storms and vigorous ocean eddy circulation. This study will leverage the
availability of the Community Experiment seismic data, bottom pressure and
temperature data, and the generation of a regional ocean modeling system ocean
circulation model. The primary goal is to develop improved techniques to correct
bottom pressure time series for oceanographic phenomena in order to optimize the
identification of long-duration seismic events and sediment gravity flows.
Specifically, the study will integrate the multiple observational proxies which
include bottom temperature, pressures at a stable reference site, network-
averaged temperatures and pressures, atmospheric pressures and sea surface
heights, together with the generation of a numerical model to improve
oceanographic bottom pressure predictions and corrections. The seafloor
instrument pressure data will also be used to investigate the effectiveness of
differencing along-isobaths rather than the traditional approach of using a
deep-water single-station reference dataset. The combined Community Experiment
data will also be analyzed for short-term temperature signals diagnostic of
turbidity currents and more subtle signals of precursory flows and enhanced
pressures from long-lived suspended sediments. If turbidity flows are identified
on the Alaskan margin, seismic data and models will be used to assess the
triggering mechanisms and slope stability based on swath bathymetry maps, and
sediment properties obtained from archive drilling and piston
cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.