* 1951917
* SCC-PG: Help by Any Means: Sociotechnical Protocols for Multimedia Requests for Assistance to Next-Generation 911 Services
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Andrea Tapia, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2022
* USD 149,395.00

Between 1968, when 911 was designated as the national emergency number, and
1993, when 90% of Americans gained access to 911 services, public education
campaigns taught citizens how to dial 9-1-1 for help during an emergency and
dispatchers trained to process telephone calls from citizens in distress. Now,
with the adoption of Next-Generation 911 (NG911) systems, how to “call” for help
becomes more complex: citizens will be able to send text, image, and video data
in SMS/MMS messages (and possibly even a social media channel) to 911
dispatchers who remain trained as call takers, not data analysts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While nascent computational methods exist to processes
multi-channel, multimedia requests for assistance and recent fieldwork with 911
dispatchers at Public-Safety Answering Points (PSAPs) specify requirements to
process these requests, the protocols necessary to coordinate uses of NG911
systems around multi-channel, multimedia data remain unspecified and much less
standardized among emergency response officials and the public. These protocols
include instructions for what citizens should include in multimedia 911
messages, PSAP procedures for coordinating citizen use of alternative 911
channels, and updated call taking and dispatch protocols facilitating
collaborative sensemaking of multi-channel, multimedia information that enhances
situational awareness among first responders during an
emergency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant supports efforts to engage
citizens, 911 dispatchers, and first responders to co-design Help by Any Means
(HAM) protocols that will coordinate the use of multi-channel, multimedia
requests for assistance during a crisis. These efforts will contribute to the
transformation of emergency services around NG911 infrastructures, including the
design of public service announcements educating citizens when and how to
request help using alternative and multimedia 911 communications, as well as
PSAP procedures for processing and integrating multimedia information in ways
that enhance emergency response capacities. Additional contributions include
understanding the social and technical implications of text-to-911 and social
media-to-911 services as viewed by a range of stakeholders in the NG911
transition, as well as adduce insights into the design and management of data-
driven public services beyond those of emergency
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.