* 1951852
* SCC-PG: Privacy and Fairness in Planning when using Third-Party, Heterogeneous Data Sources
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Adam Aviv, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 161,673.00

Civic and community planning today is able to draw from a wealth of mobility and
location data generated by residents who both actively and passively participate
in data collection. Mobility information can be gleaned from a number of
sources, which are often collected and maintained by third-parties for uses in
multiple, heterogeneous applications. However, when combined, these third-party,
heterogeneous data can paint a rich picture of movement through the urban
landscape, that could be an important source of information for community
planners. However, the naive inclusion of heterogeneous data sources, such as
through machine learning, presents a number of technical and social challenges
that impact the privacy of city residents and raise important questions around
fairness and social justice. The data is not uniformly distributed across
communities, potentially leaving out important populations and biasing
algorithmic decision making, and the highly detailed location information may
leak information about residents that should be protected.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this planning grant, this project will address
basic research challenges associated with privacy as well as fairness in the
application of heterogeneous data for community planning that take into account
both resident participation and planner decision making. Including: (1) How do
we both identify and mitigate potential biases in community planning that can
arise from heterogeneous, third-party data sources? (2) How do we design
privacy-aware algorithms that can merge disparate and incomplete data while
providing meaningful results for community planning? (3) How do we combine
principles of fairness and bias with privacy preserving data analysis methods?
(4) How do we identify under-representation within data sources and explore
factors that contribute to participation? (5) How do residents and community-
planners understand privacy with respect to mobility data? Additionally, the
project will seek to expand community partnership and outreach during the
planning-grant process through community workshops to identify key aspects of
the basic research and how the outcomes can be integrated into
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.