* 1951971
* SCC-PG: Early Community Intervention for Neighborhood Revitalization Using Artificial Intelligence and Emerging Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Hye-Sung Han, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Housing abandonment in urban American communities presents a profound challenge
for residents and city governments. In Kansas City, over 10,000 houses have been
abandoned, with safe demolition costing $10,000 per house. However, demolition
further weakens the physical and social fabric of disadvantaged neighborhoods.
This proposal empowers community members, city leaders, technologists, and local
public-school students in a planning process to leverage the use of Artificial
Intelligence (AI). The proposal leverages collaboration with the municipal
government to use cameras on city vehicles to identify early markers of housing
decay. The intention is to develop an early warning system where local
government and neighborhood associations can provide micro-policy inputs in
order to halt the process of abandonment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
formed a well-integrated multidisciplinary team of data scientists, community
leaders and social scientists to lay out the scientific and engineering
foundations for addressing the issue of abandoned housing. In this planning
grant, the project concentrate on a small neighborhood of Kansas City, Missouri
(KCMO) to develop the tools and planning required for reducing the issue of
housing abandonment. Specifically, the project will focus on the Ivanhoe
neighborhood, which is home to around 5,500 mostly low-income minority residents
(95% African-American, 35% below the poverty level) and which has about 40% of
its land occupied by vacant lots and abandoned properties. Specific objectives
of this project are i) enhancing scientific knowledge of housing abandonment by
applying deep learning technology and statistical modeling, ii) fostering a
multidisciplinary and diverse research community to develop tools for measuring,
predicting, and preventing the spread of housing abandonment, and iii)
integrating KCMOâ€™s community stakeholders into a series of community projects
for optimal self-control to reduce abandoned housing and resolve residual
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.