* 1951193
* SBIR Phase II:  Advanced Manufacturing of Ultra High Molecular Weight Polyethylene and Metal Hybrid Structures for Bicycle Spokes
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Charles Spanjers, BERD LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 800,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the replacement of steel with synthetic
materials that are stronger and lighter. The beachhead market for this
technology is the performance bicycle spoke market, which is a $180M global
market. The potential benefits of this technology go beyond cycling because the
polymer-to-metal interface has other potential applications. Cable assemblies
are used in a wide variety of applications and industries such as industrial,
aerospace, construction, and consumer goods. Advances in the termination of
synthetic cable assemblies will enable the creation of higher strength-to-weight
ratio cables and thereby increase efficiencies in transportation applications
and improve the safety of tension based systems. An application of particular
societal benefit is wheelchair wheels, where weight reduction increases
portability for those with physical disabilities. Investment in termination
technologies for high performance polymers will also help bridge the gap between
polymer research and industry, helping society benefit from developments in
polymer science occurring in academia. Finally, the ability to produce low-cost
rope terminations will increase US manufacturing competitiveness because the
majority of high-volume production is outsourced to low-cost labor
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will develop an advanced manufacturing process for ultra high
molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) and metal hybrid structures for bicycle
spokes. UHMWPE has a strength-to-weight ratio of fifteen times that of steel,
but it cannot be utilized in many applications because of the difficulty in
manufacturing high-strength bonds to metal. The primary objectives of this
research are to automate the insertion and bonding of stainless steel rods
inside the hollow cavity of braided fibers, and to automate the creation of eye
splices. These operations require delicate manipulation of fibers in a confined
space, and are typically performed manually. Instead, we will develop novel
automatic machinery that will create these bonds, inspect the final product, and
validate the strength with 100% in-process inspection. Another objective of this
research is to develop a black surface coating process for braided UHMWPE
fibers. To achieve this, we will identify a surface pretreatment procedure to
add functionality to the non-polar backbone of UHMWPE, develop the coating
chemistry, and create an in-line coating system that integrates with our
manufacturing process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.