* 1951781
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track 1: Socio-ecological training in a tropical landscape
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jordan Karubian, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 12/31/2023
* USD 127,578.00

To enhance the ability of the United States researchers and students to
establish international collaborations, this IRES program provides cross-
disciplinary research training and cultural enrichment in Ecuador. Over three
years, the project will train 24 U.S. undergraduate and graduate students, with
a recruitment focus on underrepresented groups in STEM fields. In order to
investigate how variation in land management practices by residents affects the
integrity of landscape ecological processes, as well as human health and well-
being, participating students will conduct field research on forests, birds, and
people within a fragmented tropical landscape Through intensive mentoring by
U.S. and Ecuadorian researchers before, during, and after the international
experience, students will gain training in developing research hypotheses and
study design, collecting field data, and analysis and dissemination of research
findings, including in peer-reviewed publications. By targeting students from
underrepresented groups, the project will help increase the diversity of ideas
and perspectives on factors that either exacerbate, or ameliorate, the effects
of land management practices on environmental and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research to be undertaken by U.S. students will
take place within Ecuador’s Chocó Biogeographic Zone, where local management
styles range from intensive deforestation for agriculture and cattle to
maintaining high tree cover for hunting and sustainable harvest
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our over-arching hypothesis is that higher tree
cover in this landscape will benefit natural systems (via promoting seed
dispersal by fruit-eating vertebrates) and human systems (by improving food
security and reducing thermal stress). To evaluate how tree cover effects the
diversity, abundance, and foraging of fruit-eating birds, participants will be
able to combine satellite imagery analysis with field-based quantification of
bird population metrics, movement patterns, and fruit removal rates collected
via mist-netting, radio-tracking, and fruiting trees observations. These
correlational approaches may be complemented by an experiment in which nest
boxes are placed in a range of habitats to determine if the availability of
nesting holes limit bird populations in agricultural areas. Avian seed-dispersal
data can also be evaluated in relation to forest structure, elevation, and the
thermic environment to investigate its effect on seed deposition and seedling
recruitment. To understand factors limiting vegetative regeneration, students
can study the diversity and abundance of seeds arriving in seed traps; the
effects of seed density, location, and species composition of dispersed seeds on
seedling growth, survival, and demography; and impacts of herbivory through
field-based experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand how tree
cover relates to human well-being, students will investigate the role of forest
cover in moderating ambient temperatures and how the thermal environment
directly (dehydration, heat stress) and indirectly (work patterns, food
security) influences human well-being. Participants can also evaluate how land
cover, gender, and market access may influence dietary patterns and human
nutritional status. This will involve data collection on macronutrient and
micronutrient intakes as well as anthropometric measurements of adults and
children (height, weight, circumferences, and body composition).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this interdisciplinary research are expected
to elucidate how integration of biodiversity into agriculture systems may impact
both ecosystem function and human health, thereby informing how growing human
populations, increased deforestation, and a warming climate may affect our
planet and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.