* 1951263
* SBIR Phase II:  Advancing High-Power Diamond Devices Towards Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Manpuneet Benipal, ADVENT Diamond
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2023
* USD 949,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the improvement of high-power devices that
will enhance the efficiency and reliability of electric vehicles (EVs) and their
charging stations. The development of the proposed high-power devices will
potentially reduce EV charging time to less than 10 minutes by increasing the
charging module's power from 300 kW to over 1 MW. Furthermore, this technology
can potentially increase the range of electric vehicles significantly by
increasing efficiency, and miniaturizing power modules by eliminating cooling
systems. These systems are based on diamonds, which have special properties when
used in advanced devices, and will be easily extended to applications requiring
high-temperature operation (above 300 C) and high-power switching capabilities,
such as geothermal drilling, aerospace, and power grids, as well as application
in extreme environments and space exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will fabricate next
generation semiconductor high-power diodes (1200 V blocking and 10 A forward
current at less than 10 V) that are reliable at high temperatures (300 C) and
overcome many of the challenges with existing technologies. Diamond has a higher
breakdown field than other existing semiconductor (wide bandgap) materials;
thus, diamond devices offer the potential of higher blocking voltage. Technical
objectives of this project include optimizing the workflow of material
deposition, device design and device fabrication processes to achieve 1200 V
blocking voltage by developing device designs that increase breakdown field by
2-4 times to enable broad translation of this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.