* 1951038
* Robust and Interpretable Bayesian Quantile Longitudinal Analysis in Social and Behavioral Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Xin Tong, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This research project will develop statistical techniques that address
robustness and interpretability challenges in longitudinal studies for applied
researchers in the social and behavioral sciences. Longitudinal studies help us
understand changes in behavior. Although longitudinal research has gained
popularity in social and behavioral sciences, it often faces methodological
challenges. This project will contribute innovative methods to the longitudinal
data analysis literature. The research will increase the scope of applications
of longitudinal analysis to areas where data distributions deviate from
normality, missing values frequently exist, sample size is small, and data are
sparse and irregular. The project has the potential to identify different
effective interventions for subjects with different characteristics, potentially
benefiting minority groups. Free open-source software will be developed so that
technically sophisticated methods can be readily implemented by substantive
researchers. The project also will provide training opportunities for the next
generation of statisticians and psychologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems
associated with longitudinal data include the handling of non-normal and/or
missing data, small sample sizes, large measurement errors, high-dimensional
variable selection, and population heterogeneity. This project will address
these problems by developing a Bayesian quantile growth curve modeling strategy.
Instead of modeling the change of conditional means, the new approach will model
the change of conditional quantiles, which avoids the distributional assumption
of data in general. The investigators will use the Asymmetric Laplace
distribution to convert the problem of estimating a quantile growth curve model
into a problem of obtaining the maximum likelihood estimator for a transformed
model so that computationally powerful Bayesian methods can be applied
conveniently and missing data can be flexibly addressed. Constraints on the
natural shape of the overall change trajectory will be imposed through penalized
functional principal component analysis. This approach will yield practical and
interpretable estimated growth trajectories for applied researchers. The new
methodology will be powerful enough to allow researchers to conduct valid,
interpretable, and robust analyses of collected data regardless of the data
distribution. In addition, because the method will work well for small-sized
samples, the reproducibility problem in social and behavioral sciences may be
reduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.