* 1951378
* SCC-PG: Building capacity for data-driven physical activity interventions in communities with depression and obesity hotspots
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Cynthia Chen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, more than 40% of
adults with depression are obese and adults with depression are more likely to
be obese than adults without depression. Combined together, depression and
obesity are two of the most common public health problems in the United States.
Yet, effective exercise programs that help people to lose weight and cope with
depression symptoms do not always reach communities with the greatest need.
Mining data through electronic health records (EHR) and digital health
technology can help to improve the reach by identifying communities most
affected by obesity and depression. Once identified, engaging those communities
is critical to informing locally-tailored interventions that will be adopted.
The purpose of this project is to build capacity for combining health data
analytics with community engagement efforts to identify, and design better
interventions for, communities facing obesity and depression.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project (1) integrates heterogeneous data sources,
machine learning, and geospatial analysis to identify geographical areas with
high levels of depression and obesity called community hotspots, and (2) engages
community members from hotspots to co-design desired physical activity
interventions. Project findings will advance the field by yielding new ways for
hotspot detection based on diverse real-world data and community-level
intervention design while laying the technical and collaborative foundations
necessary for future success. Technical contributions include novel data
analytic methods, data sources, and metrics for hot-spotting using regional EHR
data. Collaborative partnerships developed through this project will guide
future extension of engagement to a broader number of community hotspots. More
broadly, this work will benefit society through a data-driven, community-
partnered approach that improves the health and wellbeing of citizens by
addressing two of the most significant US health problems: depression and
obesity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.