* 1951757
* The Structure, Evolution, Dynamics and Cloud and Precipitation Characteristics of Extreme Summer Arctic Cyclones Revealed Through Comprehensive Life Cycle Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jonathan Martin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2024
* USD 521,911.00

The cyclones of the Arctic summer pack an extra punch as they strike when the
region is at its most vulnerable. The sea ice cover that protects the ocean
surface from storm winds in winter is thinned by summer melt, allowing the winds
to push the ice apart and mix up warmer subsurface water that promotes further
melting. The lack of ice cover in summer also allows the winds to drive ocean
waves which erode coastlines, where the warming of recent decades has thawed
permafrost and removed the protective skirt of landfast ice. Fortunately summer
Arctic cyclones are weaker than their winter counterparts, but recent work
suggests a strengthening trend in summer. The "Great Arctic Cyclone" of August
2012 was stronger than all but a dozen of the winter cyclones in the 30 year
record of pan-Arctic observations from weather
satellites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impacts of Arctic cyclones and their
connection to sea ice decline has prompted interest in their structure,
dynamics, and cloud microphysics. Naturally they have much in common with the
more familiar cyclones of the middle latitudes, but there are interesting
differences: they are often larger, sometimes covering most of the Arctic basin,
they are not closely connected to regions of strong temperature contrast and
fast jet streams, they can continue to intensify even after they occlude, and
their clouds are unusually abundant in liquid droplets (as opposed to ice
particles). The abundance of liquid water in the clouds increases the
downwelling infrared radiation they generate, warming the lower atmosphere and
promoting sea ice melt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award uses a
combination of satellite observations and meteorological data (including winds,
sea level pressure, moisture, and temperature) to investigate summer Arctic
cyclones at various stages in their lifecycles. The cloud radar and lidar
instruments on the NASA A-Train satellite constellation provide cross sections
through the cyclones, and data for specific stages of cyclone lifecycles are
identified according to their sea level pressure. The observational analysis is
complemented by computer simulations using the Weather Research and Forecasting
model. One question addressed is whether there are clues in the large-scale
environment that could be used to determine which cyclones will grow to extreme
size and intensity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has broader impacts due to
the strong impacts of summer cyclones on Arctic sea ice and coastal erosion, as
noted above. The project also supports two graduate students and employs
undergraduate students on an hourly basis, thereby promoting the education of
the next generation of researchers in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.