* 1951020
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a novel graft to provide safe and reliable vascular access for hemodialysis patients
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Joseph Knight, INNAVASC MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2022
* USD 799,943.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Phase II Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will advance the development of a device to eliminate
complications associated with maintenance hemodialysis, a life-sustaining
therapy for patients suffering from renal failure. Hemodialysis (HD) enables
blood to be withdrawn and cycled through a dialysis machine that performs the
function of the failed kidneys. This process must be repeated at regular
intervals and thus requires repeated, high flow access to circulating blood.
Adverse events due to mode of access and device failure are frequent, costing
the healthcare system billions of dollars per year and leading to significant
morbidity and mortality for patients. Currently, no technology on the market
addresses dialysis graft needle injury or graft material degradation due to
needle trauma. The proposed device will minimize injury levels and decrease the
probability of serious complications for chronic HD
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Phase II SBIR project will advance a
technology for prosthetic arteriovenous grafts (AVGs) for hemodialysis. The
general principle is to engineer a graft with a backplate material optimized for
rigidity to prevent needle injury, while maintaining sufficient flexibility to
maximize optimal flow. The technical objectives include: 1) systems engineering
to optimize the cost and performance trade space; 2) advanced biocompatibility
testing; 3) design verification and validation
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.