* 1951997
* SCC-PG: Flood Hazard Management &amp; Practitioner Information Network for Florida Coastal Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Andrea Galinski, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Florida ranks first in the nation for estimated potential residential exposure
to hurricane storm surge damage. Fundamental to pre-disaster planning and post-
disaster recovery activities is the availability of integrated datasets that can
help communities better understand the type and quantity of affordable housing
stock at risk. However, oftentimes, even when available, these datasets may be
outdated, incomplete, not shared across local departmental jurisdictions, or
need significant processing to become more useful for planning and recovery
activities. There is an urgent need for practitioners to be able to leverage
each other’s information, skills, and experience to develop forward-looking
strategies to create a more resilient affordable housing system. This Planning
Grant project creates a Flood Hazard Management and Practitioner Information
Network for Florida Coastal Communities to establish the foundation for future
pre- and post-disaster management as well as strengthening technological and
social/planning issues related to coastal communities. This project will focus
on co-producing a more comprehensive description of the problem and the
challenges to creating more resilient affordable housing, as well as co-
producing a process to develop solutions that are both effective and useful to
the community. To seed this new Practitioner Information Network, University of
Florida will collaborate with a county and a Regional Planning Council in
Florida which can be scaled across broader regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Smart &amp; Connected Communities Planning Grant project creates a Flood Hazard
Management and Practitioner Information Network for Florida Coastal Communities
to establish the foundation for future pre- and post-disaster management as well
as strengthening technological and social/planning issues related to coastal
communities. This project answers integrative research challenges under three
Research Trusts: (1) Data and Information: Creating a Neighborhood Flood Hazard
typologies; (2) Increasing Information Access - Smart and Connected Information
Infrastructure; and (3) Connecting Communities - Flood Hazard Management and
Practitioner Information Network. Among others, this project develops and tests
novel scalable methods to seamlessly acquire, validate, and transfer data
related to three pilot communities in a county’s residential structures’ Lowest
Floor Elevation and other pertinent characteristics that determines flood hazard
to a Housing Information System. Scalable methods include image-based processing
via publicly available street views and data gathered via crowd source. Through
two community-based participatory workshops, this project co-produces a more
comprehensive description of the problem and the challenges to creating more
resilient affordable housing as well as a process to develop solutions that are
both effective and useful to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.