* 1951114
* SBIR Phase II:  Manufacturable Implementation of Thin Glass for Next Generation Electronics Packaging
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Shelby Nelson, MOSAIC MICROSYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,463,506.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a packaging platform for the next
generation communications electronics, particularly for 5G applications for
defense and commercial use. Enabling the processing of thin glass substrates for
next-generation communications and packaging needs will mean faster
communications with improved power efficiency. The wide range of applications
and end markets include mobile devices and infrastructure, automotive radar,
internet of things, and other uses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project enables thin glass packaging
solutions to be processed in existing semiconductor factories. As the need for
data volume drives wireless technology towards frequency bands in the 30-100 GHz
range, commonly used packaging substrates begin to fail. Glass is an attractive
alternative due to its dimensional stability, smooth surfaces, low RF absorption
up to 100 GHz, limited dielectric constant variation with temperature, and
moisture insensitivity. Reduced thickness also decreases interconnect length
(yielding low loss and low latency) and reduces overall product thickness. Thin
glass can be difficult to handle in a free-standing state. In this project, thin
glass using a novel handling solution will be fully metallized and patterned on
both sides, creating test structures verifying through-glass via integrity,
reliability, and robustness. Optimized metallization approaches will be
explored, along with improvements to second-side processing, for commercially
relevant wafer substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.