* 1951376
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Algebraic Geometry and Singularities in Positive and Mixed Characteristic
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Sandor Kovacs, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 172,461.00

Algebraic Geometry studies algebraic varieties which are geometric objects
defined by polynomial equations. One of the most natural problems in this area
is to understand the singularities that naturally occur when considering
algebraic varieties and how these singularities influence the global geometry of
algebraic varieties. In recent years there have been a number of breakthroughs,
especially in the case where we consider solutions over the complex numbers. At
the same time new techniques and approaches have emerged for studying solutions
in positive and mixed characteristics. The primary goal of this collaborative
project is to advance and unify these ideas to further understand and solve some
of the most challenging programs in both local and global algebraic geometry. In
addition the project provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PIs will investigate singularities in
positive and mixed characteristics by using a variety of techniques including
those arising from the minimal model program, from the theory of
F-singularities, and from Scholze's work on perfectoid algebras and spaces. The
PIs will also organize workshops, a summer school and a conference, aimed at
training young researchers in this area, disseminating recent results and
facilitating further advances and breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.