* 1951974
* SCC-PG: Planning Live, Sustainable Community Asset Mapping for a Dementia e-Friendly Alabama
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Nicole Ruggiano, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Among the 5.7 million Americans with Alzheimerâ€™s disease or related dementia
(ADRD), most reside in the community and receive care from unpaid family
caregivers. ADRD caregiving is complex and caregivers often report having a lack
of support and barriers to services, which often results in feelings of
depression, burden, and isolation. At the same time, primary care providers
report being unaware of local supportive services that they can refer patients
and caregivers to for support. There is particular urgency to address issues of
ADRD care in Alabama, where there is an expected 17% increase in cases of ADRD
over the next six years and patient/caregiver populations that are
geographically isolated, vulnerable, and unaware of local support services and
resources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To better support ADRD caregivers and link them
to needed services, this planning project will engage community stakeholders in
four regions of Alabama to initiate the development of a community asset mapping
(CAM) technology that: (a) utilizes volunteered geographic information (VGI) and
data mining; (b) is self-monitoring for data accuracy and quality; and (c) can
be used by community residents and providers to connect families with supportive
resources that address their ADRD needs. To inform the development of this
technology, the planning project will collect data from a variety of
stakeholders (people with ADRD, caregivers, providers, policymakers) through
interviews, focus groups, and surveys. The data collected will address a number
of conceptual issues in developing the proposed technology and promoting its
adoption and engagement by stakeholders. The project will also explore and
evaluate approaches to managing data that takes into account both space and
time, available data sources for data mining, and data mining algorithms for the
proposed technology. Overall, the planning project will explore how new crowd
sourcing protocols may drive community engagement with a VGI technology that
aims to address issues of ADRD care and caregiving. More importantly, the
project can potentially transform social science research on ADRD care and
caregiving from existing technology approaches that are used in isolation (e.g.,
internet searches) or by small groups (e.g., virtual support groups) towards a
connected community approach that facilitates social and mutual support and is
driven by local needs to improve care and quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Smart and Connected
Communities and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.