* 1951728
* Rotational Drift-Diffusion of Proteins in Dynamic Bilayer Lipid Membranes
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Yongcheng Zhou, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2024
* USD 192,253.00

Surrounding living cells and many subcellular compartments are membranes, which
allow the passage of certain information and materials but block some others.
Membranes deform at different magnitudes, sometimes drastically, during this
selective transport, and the processes are facilitated and regulated by various
protein complexes. Proteins accomplish regulation through attaching to or
residing in membranes at specific locations. Understanding and quantifying the
number and orientation of these membrane proteins on dynamically deforming
membranes is essential for developing medications and therapeutic strategies to
facilitate or suppress membrane transport. By integrating mathematical modeling
and computational simulations, this research will examine (1) how the rotation
and translation of proteins leads to the deformation of bilayer membranes; (2)
how deformation leads proteins to stay at specific positions and orientations;
and (3) how these interactions are related to protein structure and membrane
composition. This investigation aims to provide reliable models and efficient
algorithms for protein-membrane interactions and related biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bilayer membranes in cells are highly
dynamic, heterogeneous environments with multiple critical biological functions,
many of which are regulated by specific proteins through various protein-
membrane interactions. The rotational and translational localizations of
membrane proteins are the major driving mechanism of membrane morphological
changes. Yet quantification of these localizations in dynamical bilayer
membranes remains mathematically and computationally challenging. This research
strives to introduce principal directions and curvature to account for
orientation-dependent localization in membranes and the resulting membrane
deformation. Surface drift-diffusion equations with integer and fractional
orders will be derived for low and high protein densities. Through integrating
mathematical and computational investigation of these equations, the research
will generate a predictive model for the dynamics of bilayer membranes with
surface protein flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.