* 1951875
* SCC-PG: Developing technological solutions to improve indoor air quality and thermal comfort in urban communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Prathap Ramamurthy, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2021
* USD 141,825.00

The goal of this project is to improve the indoor air quality and thermal
comfort of at-risk urban communities. Indoor air quality is the leading housing
health concern of both renters and homeowners with more than one in three
renters and one in four homeowners expressing concerns over, for example, dust,
mold, dampness, and lack of sufficient ventilation. The Environmental Protection
Agency ranks indoor air pollutants amongst the top five environmental risks to
the public as they can be up to 100 times higher than outdoor pollutant levels.
However, current limitations in sensor spatial and temporal resolution have
restricted the ability to accurately forecast indoor air quality. This planning
grant will support the development of a research plan for a sensing, modeling,
communication and visualization platform for forecasting indoor air quality
incorporate input from a set of stakeholdersâ€”including, residents, activists,
local government policy makers and regulators. The project will be based in New
York City and the preliminary research will be conducted in two communities: one
in the South Bronx and another in Harlem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
aim is to establish a technological framework to combat socioeconomic inequities
in exposure to air pollution that could be scaled up and applied across
different cities. The planned experiments will help to identify the primary
indoor polluatnts that impact the communities partnering on this project and
will help to partition the impacts of outdoor and indoor pollutants on indoor
air quality. The work will also identify the role played by urban morphological
and human behavioral characteristics on indoor livability and will allow for
testing of various sensing and communication platforms. Last, it will involve
piloting a data visualization tool that will inform communities and public
health officials about unsafe indoor air quality and temperature conditions and
suggest appropriate actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.