* 1951074
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Field Drug Test System for Law Enforcement
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,05/31/2023
* David Nash, IDEM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,099,661.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop technology that will improve law
enforcement (LE) effectiveness in combatting the U.S. illegal drug epidemic,
which contributed to over 67,000 drug overdose deaths in 2018. An affordable,
effective field drug test system, superior to conventional color test kits and
Raman-based test systems, would address this challenge, particularly because the
widely used color test kits are outdated, hazardous, and susceptible to a high
false positive rate. This novel drug test system will improve the accuracy,
reliability, ease of use, safety, and affordability of field drug identification
and permit data analysis that will help LE reduce the supply of dangerous drugs
from the communities they serve. This innovation has the potential to expand
into other markets, including medical diagnostics and environmental
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will implement a novel system for on-site presumptive drug
testing and collection of drug intelligence for LE. Conventional color tests are
inaccurate and highly flawed, often resulting in failure to accurately detect
common drugs and novel drug analogues as they are introduced into the illegal
substance market. Commercially available handheld devices that utilize Raman
spectroscopy are superior to color test but are too expensive for local and
state LE agencies to widely adopt. The research objectives involve further
developing a system that leverages photoluminescence spectroscopy in a low-cost
handheld spectrometer, a sampling device that uses a drug-indicating
chemosensor, and software that consists of a mobile app and cloud-based
technology to help identify illegal substances and specific drug signatures. The
anticipated technical results will be the optimization of the handheld
spectrometer design and drug-sampling device, identification of new
photoluminescent chemosensors for controlled substances, and software to enhance
the accuracy of the sample data analysis. This system will establish tools for
forensic analysis of drug signatures and regional trends in illegal drug
trafficking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.