* 1951191
* SBIR Phase II:  Drones for Industrial Indoor Robotic Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,12/31/2022
* SK Ganapathi, Vimaan Robotics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2022
* USD 949,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project would be the ability to deploy drones in
industrial and commercial indoor environments as aerial robots. A key
requirement to deploying drones in such indoor environments in the presence of
people is to make them safe and non-threatening. In addition, for drones to
function as robots, they need to be made fully autonomous and minimize the need
for human operation or intervention. These attributes are not possible with
conventional drone technology today. The ability to use drones as aerial robots
can open opportunities in applications, such as warehouse inventory scanning,
construction, security, and factory automation. Such robots can enable functions
such as scanning and reconstruction of the environment, or also “pick and place”
at high throughput within factories. The use of drones in industrial indoor
environments for these applications can also result in broader societal
benefits, including improved worker safety inside industrial indoor environments
(by performing tasks that may otherwise require harnesses, forklifts or
ladders); reduced environmental impacts (in construction sites by catching
discrepancies early and minimizing rework and material wastage), and larger
benefits (enabling automated factories of the future).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
Project has the potential to advance the frontiers of knowledge in design and
control systems for use in drones and other applications. Drones face challenges
relating to efficiency, noise and safety. This research addresses design and
control systems for rotorcraft and enables improved performance, broadening the
range of applications. This research project will be focused on the design and
modeling of the system, development of the control mechanisms for the system,
and integration, test and demonstration to advance legacy technologies hitherto
deployed in rotorcraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.