* 1951039
* SBIR Phase II:  Feasibility of a Wearable Blindness Prevention System
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Joshua Park, GLOBE BIOMEDICAL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,406,359.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase II project aims to further
advance novel wearable technology for glaucoma patients and prepare the
technology for broad adoption. Glaucoma, the leading cause of irreversible
blindness, has an unknown cause and affects more than 70 million people
worldwide. Currently, there is no cure for glaucoma, but early can often save
oneâ€™s vision. Eye pressure is the most commonly used measure for predicting and
monitoring glaucoma. The wearable technology developed under this SBIR project
will monitor eye pressure throughout the day and allow clinicians to provide a
higher quality of care for at-risk patients. The technology uses photographs to
measure how the eye stretches under high pressure. This project aims to adapt
the imaging technology into stylish eyeglass frames and develop custom software
for converting photographs to eye pressure measurements, informing providers and
improving compliance associated with at-home medication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance a novel technology in which
wearable eyeglass frames are used to track intraocular pressure (IOP) by imaging
the level of pressure-induced mechanical strain associated with the tissue at
the front of the eye - specifically, exposed sclera. IOP is, by far, the most
commonly used metric for predicting glaucoma, the leading cause of irreversible
blindness. In this project, a custom machine learning algorithm will identify
characteristic patterns residing in small regions of the scleral images and, by
tracking pressure-induced displacement of the regions, calculate IOP. The key
objective of Phase II is to accurately measure IOP in real-world conditions with
human in-vivo studies, incorporating necessary electronics in the frames. The
technology will be further developed in order to improve correlation of the
algorithm with conventional IOP captured during the image collection
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.