* 1951384
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Dynamic data structures for vectors and graphs in sublinear memory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jelani Nelson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 258,000.00

Sublinear-space data structures have been of major recent interest, with
applications for example in streaming algorithms, distributed computation,
randomized linear algebra, and compressed sensing. Small-space solutions fit in
fast cache, thus providing time speedups as well, and also require less storage
and less bandwidth in distributed settings. This proposal aims to develop novel
methods for designing and analyzing sublinear-space data structures for two
seemingly different but closely related objects: vectors and graphs. The PIs
also plan to teach advanced graduate courses whose topics overlap with the focus
of this project. Furthermore, both PIs plan to train and mentor graduate and
undergraduate students students in research, organize workshops, and write
survey articles. The PIs plan to also participate in outreach activities to non-
computer scientists and to K-12 students, and to broaden participation in
computing. The research itself may also have industrial impact, being related to
databases, network traffic analysis, and data mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs will focus on a set of problems that can be captured by the turnstile
streaming model: some high-dimensional vector x in R^n receives coordinate-wise
updates, which in the case of graphs could have n = (|V| choose 2) (where V is
the set of vertices), and edge insert/deletion then corresponds to
addition/subtraction from some entry in x. This project aims to further the
understanding of fundamental questions related to small-space dynamic data
structures for vector updates, and especially as they relate to graph
problems.&lt;br/&gt;For example:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Small-space vector
update data structures: the insertion-only case: In the insertion-only case,
vector updates increment coordinates of x, so that x is a frequency-count vector
of the number of occurrences of various items in a data stream. The PIs plan to
attack some of the most fundamental problems in this model, such as norm
estimation, heavy hitters, and continuous monitoring of
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Fully dynamic streams and applications to
graphs: Many of the best-known small-space dynamic data structures for graph
problems operate by reducing to vector-update problems. For example, the only
known nearly linear-space algorithm for spectral sparsifiers operates by
reduction to l_2 heavy hitters, and algorithms for connectivity, k-edge
connectivity, minimum spanning trees, and several others reduce to vector
coordinate-sampling problems. Many open problems though still remain, e.g. what
is the optimal space complexity for connectivity in dynamic streams? The PIs
also plan to investigate several other dynamic graph and hypergraph
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.