* 1951182
* Molecular Genetic Investigations of Auto-straightening Using Brachypodium Roots as Model
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Patrick Masson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,762.00

Plants are anchored in place but can move and grow in response to the physical
environment. One such remarkable response is to gravity: regardless of the
position of the plant, whether turned upside down or sideways, young plant roots
will grow in the direction of gravity, towards the Earth and shoots will grow
away from gravity, in the direction of light. How the plant perceives and
responds to gravity stimulation is a question that has intrigued scientists a
century and a half, since the time of Darwin. It is now known that variations in
cell growth drive the movement of roots, but the growth patterns are subtle and
complicated. Recently it was discovered that during the gravity response, roots
grow down by curving and also self-straightening, a mechanically puzzling but
essential phenomenon related to how the roots acquire water and nutrients from
the soil. This project investigates how self-straightening occurs using
interdisciplinary methods, including novel imaging techniques, mathematics,
molecular genetics and genomics. The long-term goal is to identify the genes
that control the curving root response to gravity. Understanding how roots grow
into and through the soil will open the door to manipulating and selecting for
more efficient root growth. As the world faces changing water availability and
deficits, this research could uncover root responses that can be harnessed for
crop improvements. The project also brings the wonder of plant movement to the
general public through establishing museum displays complete with images and
information about root growth. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in inter-disciplinary biological research to help move these studies
into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant organs have the ability to sense a
curvature and respond by straightening, a process that is evocative of
proprioception. This auto-straightening response contributes to organ's posture,
an important determinant of overall plant architecture, productivity and market
value. When gravistimulated, Brachypodium roots initially respond by developing
a strong downward curvature whose rate decreases after the tip reaches a
45-degree angle from the vertical. At this point, the root straightens before
undergoing a new round of curvature. This process reiterates several times
before the tip reaches a vertical posture. From then on, the root tip continues
to oscillate around the vertical. A mathematical model was built to recapitulate
these complex behaviors, and used to estimate explanatory parameters of the
movements for a total of 46 distinct Brachypodium accessions. This allowed the
development of a genome-wide association study (GWAS) aimed at identifying
contributing genes. Several DNA polymorphisms were found to be associated with
the amplitude of the oscillations. The main objective of this project is to
investigate the cellular characteristics of these oscillations, and study the
molecular mechanisms controlling them. The specific aims are: 1) Characterize
the spatio-temporal distribution of curvatures and accompanying auto-
straightening phases during a graviresponse; 2) Investigate the involvement of
auxin gradients in their regulation, and 3) Initiate a molecular
characterization of these oscillations, using transcriptomics and GWAS
approaches to identify candidate regulators. These experiments will lead to a
better understanding of the molecular and cellular mechanisms that govern auto-
straightening and proprioception in plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.