* 1951446
* Multiscale Multiphysiology Models of the Brain
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Daniela Calvetti, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,001.00

This project will develop mathematical models to study the link between
electrophysiology, metabolism, and hemodynamics in the human brain. The human
brain, accounting for only 2% of total body weight, consumes about 20% of the
oxygen supply to produce energy needed to support its functions. Brain functions
depend in a crucial way on the vascular system delivering oxygen and metabolites
where needed and removing waste products in a timely fashion. Several questions
related to the coordination of blood flow and brain activity level are still
waiting for a definite answer, for example why an oversupply of oxygenated blood
is delivered to activated brain regions. Understanding the coupling between
brain electrophysiological activity and cerebral blood flow is crucial in many
brain studies, and a model explaining the mechanism connecting cerebral
electrophysiology and hemodynamics will be the key to interpret experimental
data. The metabolic processes guaranteeing brain functions require a
coordination between different types of brain cells, neurons and astrocytes, and
are the crucial link between electrophysiology and hemodynamics. Multiscale,
multi-physiology mathematical models are necessary to evaluate the feasibility
of proposed interaction mechanisms, test novel oxygen transport paradigms, and
understand the interplay between local and global brain phenomena. This project
will open a mathematical window on the interactions and feedback of different
human brain functions, with potential to uncover metabolic or vascular causes
behind some brain disease states. Students will be trained through involvement
in the research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated spatially
distributed mathematical models developed as part of the project will be used to
understand the signaling mechanisms linking neural activation to changes in the
cerebral metabolism and hemodynamics, with a particular interest in the role of
oxygen in normal brain activity and in the presence of cortical spreading
depolarization waves related to migraine and traumatic brain injury. The new
predictive computational models for the electric, metabolic, and blood flow
dynamics of brain activation under normal and abnormal conditions will be based
on ordinary and partial differential equations and will account for multiple
spatial and temporal time scales. Modeling challenges arise from the need to
interface brain functions at widely different spatial and temporal scales,
involving quantities as different as electric charges and biochemical species
concentrations. The design of a model capable of relating phenomena occurring in
the gap junctions to changes at the organ level, e.g., in the concentrations of
biochemical species or hemodynamic response, will be a great asset for the
mathematical modeling community and may serve as a template for a variety of
spatial and temporal multiscale paradigms. The models will depend on a multitude
of parameters, whose estimation will be carried out within a Bayesian framework
utilizing the tools developed for computational inverse problems. An important
contribution of the project will be the quantification of uncertainty in the
model predictions, which will indicate how much variability can be
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.