* 1951510
* Collaborative Research: Mechanistic Models of Cooperative Biopolymerization Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Tomas Gedeon, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 370,007.00

Synthetic biology is currently used to develop advanced medical treatments using
engineered bacterial consortia. Bacteria are able to exquisitely fine-tune their
growth rate to their environment, responding efficiently to sudden environmental
changes. Abundance of ribosomes in a cell correlates tightly with the growth
rate, and growth rate is controlled by the abundance of ribosomes that translate
mRNA into protein. This biopolymerization process is influenced by an
interconnected web of both direct and indirect feedbacks that depend on both
transcription of genes and translation of ribosomal mRNA. Transcription and
translation rates play a key role in response time of the microbe to changing
conditions. This research seeks to develop a comprehensive mathematical model to
describe ribosome assembly and abundance control in bacteria. The project
emphasizes the integration of a broad knowledge of molecular biology, principles
of physics, mathematical modeling and sensitivity analysis of a complex
biological system. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be trained to
use tools from mathematics and physics within the broad field of systems
biology, thereby contributing mathematicians with interdisciplinary skills
towards the national goal of STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
new continuum model will have the flexibility to describe three
biopolymerization processes: transcription of ribosomal RNA, transcription of
mRNA of ribosomal proteins and the translation of ribosomal proteins. The model
for each process is referred to as an individual compartment within the full
assembly model. The prototypical compartment is a generalization of vehicular
motion models, and it provides a mechanism for including inflow and outflow
phenomena as well as torque-assisted transcription when appropriate. The full
ribosome assembly model is described by a system of ordinary differential
equations whose variables are related to the outputs of the individual
compartments. The full model also includes a set of feedbacks that regulate
initiation and translocation rates governing the dynamics occurring within each
compartment. Ribosome production rate is the key determinant of bacterial growth
rate, and it depends on several fundamental quantities including the response
time after a nutritional up-shift or down-shift, the combined time of
transcription and translation, and the time to produce a ribosome. Several
system parameters exhibit inherent uncertainties due to the stochastic nature of
availability of various enzymes. The project includes a sensitivity analysis
effort to quantify effects of the most crucial system parameters on each
fundamental quantity. Examining these effects and their variability allows one
to determine the average community response of bacteria to its environment. The
variability in microbial community response to antibiotic application is often
an important determinant of antibiotic effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded jointly by the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS)
through the Mathematical Biology Program and BIO/MCB through the Program of
Genetic Mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.