* 1951928
* JST: SCC-PG: Understanding Heat Resiliency via Physiological, Mental, and Behavioral Health Factors for Indoor and Outdoor Urban Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Ariane Middel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 75,000.00

Exposure to extreme heat is harmful to human health and well-being. As cities
grow and both the incidence and intensity of high-temperature events increases,
the management of population heat exposure while minimizing disruption to day-
to-day activities is becoming a growing challenge among urban planners and
residents alike. High temperatures pose especially large potential risks for
vulnerable populations such as the elderly, young children, and low-income
families. This Smart and Connected Communities Planning Grant supports the
creation of a collaborative working group of researchers in mobile systems,
computational imaging and sensing, urban climate informatics, and economics
alongside key stakeholders of community members, city officials, urban planners,
and designers to investigate potential strategies to increase heat resiliency in
urban populations. In collaboration with researchers and community members from
Japan, this project will seek to identify, promulgate, and promote strategies
for heat-risk reduction and resiliency - both within and across cultural
contexts - while also investigating the importance of local cultural factors in
the spread and adoption of such strategies at the individual and societal
levels. This work will span both the United States and Japan, two populations
whose cities suffer different issues related to heat exposure. This project will
support travel, preliminary research studies, and workshop forums with community
partners. The outcomes of this planning grant will include pilot studies and
data collection for measuring physiological factors for heat effects, as well as
a multiscale framework for linking physiological, behavioral/mental, and
socioeconomical/cultural factors for heat resiliency across the United States
and Japan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify and assist
stakeholders in tackling challenges facing at-risk populations in communities
due to extreme heat. In particular, the project plans and builds capacity for
future research aimed to study (1) physiological markers for heat stress and
exposure, leveraging techniques from physics-based computational imaging and
mobile health sensing, as well as (2) mental and behavioral models for
individuals exposed to heat conditions, and how they interact with one another.
Results will be used to develop user-centric thermal comfort models for
individuals exposed to extreme heat conditions. This includes both physiological
effects due to quantifiable environmental conditions such as temperature and
humidity, but also subjective assessment of an individualâ€™s tolerance to heat
based on clothing, activity level, past exposure history and experiences. A key
focus of this project is to study these factors across communities in the United
States and Japan. This includes planning and piloting preliminary data
collection efforts for three cities: Amherst, Massachusetts; Phoenix, Arizona;
and the greater Osaka region, Japan. Researchers with expertise in sensor
development, heat sensing, mobile health, economics and behavioral modeling, and
urban climate and infrastructure will collaborate to understand key research
questions about the challenges and need for solutions in this application
domain. This research will interact with key stakeholders in the three
communities across the United States and Japan, and insights gleaned from the
research will be shared with the community to develop effective strategies to
build climate-smart cities. Workshops and collaborative activities will
strengthen research ties between the international institutions, including
capacity building and planning for integrative research in the future to tackle
heat resiliency in both the United States and Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.