* 1951210
* SBIR Phase II:  Affordable point-of-use water disinfection through mass-produced nano-silver embedded paper filters
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,12/31/2025
* Theresa Dankovich, FOLIA Materials Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,781,997.00

The broader impacts of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project focuses on the research and development of an antimicrobial nanoparticle
filter paper for low-cost point-of-use water purification. The proposed project
will develop an antimicrobial paper water purifier, packaged like a coffee
filter, to be distributed through retail channels. This project will offer safe
water to many communities throughout the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase II project will advance the development of a process using large-scale
paper machinery and similar reel-to-reel processes to manufacture low-cost nano-
metal functionalized materials, such as nanosilver filter paper. Phase II
objectives include: (i) optimize the process to reduce materials and other
costs, increase flow rate, and maintain high-quality performance, (ii)
demonstrate a more robust filter system by mitigation of water chemical and
microbiology variability through improved formulation and formal determination
of product shelf-life, (iii) demonstrate production at pilot and industrial
speeds and output levels, while validating a non-destructive quality control
program, and (iv) integrate third-party product safety certification
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.