* 1951741
* Enhancing High-resolution Terrain Data Model for Improving the Delineation of Multi-scale Hydrological Connectivity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Guangxing Wang, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2023
* USD 170,718.00

The project is to create a new geospatial and hydrological modeling approach
that improves the identification of rivers and streams using high-resolution
digital elevation models (HRDEMs). Accurate identification of these river and
stream networks is necessary for monitoring environmental process such as the
transport of nutrients and aquatic species. The results will create an
intelligent hydrological model by combining methods in geographic information
sciences, artificial intelligence and cyberinfrastructure that will enable
multi-scale analysis of river and stream networks. The model, algorithms, and
datasets generated from this project will be freely available to the public and
benefit a broad scope of natural resources management activities, such as
watershed monitoring, wetland conservation, and aquatic species protection. The
results of this work will be incorporated into educational curriculums and
disseminated to the broader educational community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
a critical need for datasets and modeling approaches that can be used to
generate hydrologically corrected HRDEMs and delineate hydrologic features like
wetlands, road culverts and bridges at a fine scale. To improve the modeling
accuracy, this project will develop a geospatial artificial intelligence-
hydrological modeling framework that is compatible with HRDEMs. A deep learning
model and an image dataset of drainage crossing locations will be developed to
identify the locations of hydraulic drainage structures as virtual flow
barriers. The effects of hydraulic drainage structures, HRDEM resolutions, and
flow direction algorithms on the delineated hydrologic features and their
connectivity will be assessed via controlled experiments for an optimal
combination. The model will be implemented on high-performance computing
clusters to speed up the geocomputation. This project will substantially advance
the state-of-the-art of terrain-based hydrologic modeling integrating methods in
geographic information science, artificial intelligence, and
cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.