* 1951385
* Collaborative Research: Consequences of Environmental Stochasticity for the Spatial Dynamics of Savanna-Forest Transitions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Jin Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 06/30/2023
* USD 58,374.00

Changing temperature and rainfall patterns globally will have major effects on
vegetation patterns, in some cases shifting the nature of ecosystems
dramatically with consequences for wildlife, and for the services that natural
systems provide to humans. These “critical transitions” are possible outcomes of
environmental shifts in a wide variety of systems, including the savanna and
forest transitions that this project will address, in which changes in frequency
of fires can be especially important in changing the nature of these key
ecosystem types. Building on previous work by the project leaders, this research
will develop and apply state-of-the-art mathematical models, in concert with
empirical studies, to predict how changing environmental conditions will mediate
shifts in the savanna-forest boundary. This project will also enhance education
and training at multiple levels, including the training of a postdoctoral
fellow; development of graduate and undergraduate research projects; and data
visualization through collaboration with artist and educator Neil
Goldberg.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential for multiple stable states,
respectively forest and savanna, in vegetation systems has been previously
demonstrated, combining empirical work with dynamical systems models. The
introduction of spatial effects leads to systems of partial-differential or
partial differential-integral equations, including stochastic influences, which
of course are more complicated to analyze, but are crucial for predicting the
shifts of boundaries. This project will develop and apply new methodologies
drawn from non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, and will generate novel
mathematical results, in particular in terms of fluctuations around the mean-
field limit, developing new approaches to these stochastic systems, and applying
a novel landscape-flux approach. A key element will involve the training of a
truly interdisciplinary postdoctoral fellow to be fluent both in the
mathematical dimensions of the project and the ecological data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded jointly by the MPS Division
of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the Mathematical Biology Program and
BIO/DEB through the Cluster of Population and Community
Ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.