* 1951073
* Cycling of Dissolved Organic Matter in the Pacific and Indian Oceans Using Radiocarbon
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Ellen Druffel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 01/31/2024
* USD 734,045.00

Controls on the Aging of Marine Dissolved Organic
Carbon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the organic carbon in ocean water is in the
dissolved form. Surprisingly, the age of this dissolved organic carbon is
thousands of years old, even though it is thought to form during photosynthesis
in the surface ocean. One explanation for the age of this carbon is the amount
of time that it takes for carbon to circulate through the ocean. Investigators
at the University of California Irvine (UCI) will investigate the aging of
dissolved organic carbon in the Pacific, Southern and Indian oceans using C-14
isotopes. This work is important for knowing how carbon produced from human
activities will be distributed on Earth in the future. This project will support
the work of two graduate and two undergraduate students, providing hands-on
experience that will prepare them for careers as scientists and educators. Both
graduate students will be involved in a variety of educational activities. They
will also help teach a short course on applications of C-14 in Ecology and Earth
System Science for graduate students, technicians, postdocs and researchers
during summer. UCI is a Hispanic-serving institution (27% of undergraduates
identify as Hispanic), and 60% of students who attend UCI are first generation
family representatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This study will examine the
concentration, isotopic (14C, 13C) and molecular composition of dissolved
organic carbon (DOC) in depth profiles from the Pacific, Southern and Indian
Oceans. This information will help to determine the main controls on DOC cycling
in the world’s oceans. The project will test the hypothesis that circulation is
the primary control on DOC cycling in the deepest water (&gt;3500 meters). The
research will also investigate two alternative processes that could influence
the age of DOC in deep water (2000-3000 meters): (1) dissolution of surface-
derived particles and (2) input of ancient carbon from hydrothermal vents and
flanks. Spectroscopic and spectrometric measurements designed to characterize a
portion of the DOC will be performed on surface and deep water. Results will be
incorporated into an inverse model of DOC cycling to determine the main
processes controlling the DOC cycle in the ocean. DOC may serve as a sink for
excess carbon dioxide produced from human activities and the size of the
refractory DOC pool in the ocean could increase as circulation slows. Measuring
the 14C age of DOC in the surface and deep ocean is important for understanding
how the global carbon cycle will change as the Earth's climate
shifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.