* 1951062
* SBIR Phase II:  Implementation of a Digital Health Platform to Enable Behavioral Health Integration in Multiple Care Settings
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Adam Pardes, NeuroFlow, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,446,109.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase II project aims to enable
behavioral health access and engagement across the continuum of care by
improving outcomes, overall wellness, and cost of care by combining integrated
care, evidence-based tools, and data science. Approximately 1 in 5 adults in the
U.S. experience mental illness in a given year, which costs an estimated $752
billion in healthcare expenditures annually. The proposed work will use
artificial intelligence and data science capabilities to create personalized
patient experiences outside of clinical settings to improve health outcomes,
care team efficiency, and resource utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase II project will use artificial intelligence and data science capabilities
to create personalized patient experiences outside of clinical settings. This
project will: 1) advance a system with EHR interoperability managing a bi-
directional flow of discrete data; 2) automate components of the platformâ€™s
comprehensive content and assignment library; and 3) use artificial
intelligence, specifically real-time natural language processing, to identify
and support patients that are potentially in crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.