* 1951430
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Privacy-Preserving Mobile Data Collection for Social and Behavioral Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Liyue Fan, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 315,997.00

Social and behavioral research has a long history of collecting digitized data.
With more and more studies incorporating participants' smartphone sensor and
usage data, individual privacy has become a serious concern. Although
researchers are trained to exercise confidentiality, sensitive information can
be inferred from the smartphone data about the participants and their
environment (e.g., families and communities). Without a systematic solution to
address privacy concerns, participants may withdraw and request removal of their
data from studies. This project aims to provide privacy protection to study
participants during data collection, thus encouraging research participation.
Furthermore, the project demonstrates that meaningful research results can be
derived while honoring the participants' privacy
preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project bridges the privacy-enhancing
technologies community and social and behavioral research community by focusing
on the usefulness and limitations of privacy technologies, collectively.
Specifically, the project (1) includes a systematic review of privacy-preserving
methods for commonly collected smartphone data types and develops open-source
tools compatible with widely adopted research platforms; (2) studies the
usefulness of data privacy methods and identifies limitations and open
challenges, by incorporating the perspectives of social and behavior
researchers; and (3) further studies participant privacy concerns and the
utility of privacy-enhanced data through a case study on refugee vocational
behavior, which focuses on using survey and mobile behavioral data to predict
job-search behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.