* 1951985
* From damage zone to core: quantifying mechanical and hydrological coupling during fault-zone structural evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Laurel Goodwin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 369,406.00

Fault zones are important structures that dictate the magnitude and distribution
of earthquakes and fluid flow in the earth’s crust. Understanding the evolution
of these structures is therefore integral to improved earthquake hazards
assessment, petroleum and/or ore-mineral exploration, and geologic storage of
carbon and/or nuclear waste. A fault is not a single surface, but rather
consists of one or more zones of high deformation, called “fault cores”,
surrounded by zones of low deformation, called “damage zones”. Most of the
offset across a fault, including earthquake-related motion, occurs within the
discrete fault core(s), which typically record intense crushing and grinding of
rock. In contrast, damage zones are more diffuse, and typically record
distributed deformation including discrete fractures and/or smaller faults.
Collectively, the character and distribution of fault cores and damage zones may
influence seismic wave propagation and energy release during earthquakes. They
also dictate a fault’s ability to act as a conduit, barrier, or combined
conduit/barrier system for fluid movement below the Earth’s surface. This
research is designed to improve our knowledge of how fault cores and their
surrounding damage zones change through time during the development of fault
zones. More specifically, this research is constraining: 1) how long it takes to
develop damage zones, particularly in relation to the development of fault
cores; and 2) how fluid flow moves through damage zones versus through fault
cores throughout a fault’s lifetime. The collected data are being used as a test
case for digitally storing and sharing multi-disciplinary earth science data
sets in the open-access, community-developed StraboSpot Data System. The project
is contributing to STEM education by supporting the training of graduate and
undergraduate students. Finally, this project contributes to the outreach
mission of the University of Wisconsin-Madison Geology Museum by participating
in the improvement of “Stories in Stone”, which uses an inquiry-based narrative
style to teach the public about earthquake science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers are integrating structural, geochemical, and geochronological
analyses to test the hypothesis that fault core and damage zone development are
linked – both mechanically and hydrologically – throughout the development of
individual fault zones. Analyses are focused on syntectonic, authigenic mineral
phases localized within fault cores and damage zones, which provide a rock
record of the timing, character, and conditions of deformation and fluid flow in
individual fault zones. The researchers are collecting three complimentary data
sets. Outcrop and microstructural examination constrain the nature and
distribution of fault-zone deformation and mineralization from the meso-to-micro
scale. Geochemical and isotopic analyses of authigenic mineral phases determine
the source and character of fluids that migrated through distinct fault
structures, in addition to constraining the temperature conditions of
deformation. Finally, a novel combination of geochronological analyses
facilitates a comparison of the timing of deformation and fluid flow between
fault cores and their surrounding damage zones. Integration of these data sets
provides unique insight into fault-zone structural evolution and its effects on
fault mechanics and fluid flow, thereby generating an improved understanding of
seismicity and mass transport in the crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.