* 1951791
* Building Bridges: Fifth EU/US Summer School on Automorphic Forms and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* James Brown, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 02/28/2023
* USD 19,215.00

This award supports US-based participants in the meeting "Building Bridges: 5th
EU/US Summer School on Automorphic Forms and Related Topics (BB5)" taking place
July 6 - 11, 2020 at the University of Sarajevo in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
summer school consists of three mini-courses. Each mini-course will have two
prominent instructors as well as a teaching assistant. Students will attend
three hours of lecture each morning and work on problem sets in the afternoon.
Students whose research overlaps with the topics chosen for the summer school
will be given priority for funding. The summer school at BB5 will bring students
at different stages in graduate school together to explore the material in the
mini-courses. This mix has proven successful for both the more junior and more
senior graduate students in helping them reach their full potential in learning
the material. In addition to the mix of level of the students, the participants
come from a diverse list of countries. The organizers strive to achieve a
diverse mix of genders, ethnicities, and nationalities. This exposure is a good
experience for the students and allows them to make connections they would not
make at other more regional or national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automorphic forms touch many aspects of not
just number theory, but mathematics in general. It is important to adequately
train the next generation of researchers in this field. It can be difficult for
students to get up to speed on the latest developments in the theory due to the
large background demands as well as the delays inherent in publication. This
summer school brings together instructors at the cutting edge of research in the
field of automorphic forms and students interested in the field. Instructors are
known excellent expositors who will ensure a rewarding experience for the
students; it is critical that students come away with an understanding of the
material in the courses for the school to be a success. The three mini-courses
will focus on (1) lattices, finite quadratic modules, and Weil representations;
(2) homogeneous dynamics and number theory; and (3) quantum ergodicity and
subconvexity of L-functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.