* 1951152
* SBIR Phase II:  Real-Time Nitrogen Sensor for Wastewater Treatment Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Ecatherina Roodenko, Max-IR Labs, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,099,666.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project will be to supply nitrogen sensors for
wastewater treatment process control and automation, potentially saving $600 M
per year in electric energy for the U.S. municipal wastewater treatment
industry. Municipal wastewater treatment processes are based on energy-intensive
aeration. Currently, the primary monitoring method is sending “grab-samples” to
a lab, with delays in receiving results. By enabling real-time process control
of the energy-consuming denitrification process, electric energy usage can be
reduced by 20% or more. The economic impact to each municipal wastewater
treatment plant is an average energy savings of $200 k per year, with less than
6 months payback, and lower operating costs while reducing/preventing out-of-
control effluent events. Competing technologies for real-time nitrogen sensors
are limited by poor performance, high maintenance needs, high cost, and
reliability problems. The proposed new sensor offers a reliable, cost-effective,
low-maintenance alternative with potential applications in direct potable reuse
(DPR), and managing environmental water quality in agricultural fertilizer
runoff, industrial discharge and feed-lot monitoring. The proposed system will
help assure the nation’s clean water supply. In addition, as a platform
technology for use in related fields, future applications include industrial
sensors for real-time manufacturing process control, homeland security sensing
for chemical and biological defense, and biomedical use for point-of-care
diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II project proposes to
develop an infrared-detection sensor for real-time monitoring of nitrogen as
nitrate, nitrite, and ammonia in municipal wastewater. The technology addresses
strong IR attenuation in water with the first industrial-scale sensor
application based on a fiber-optic evanescent wave technique, guiding mid-IR
radiation from a tunable quantum-cascade laser through an IR waveguide rather
than through the wastewater itself. The incorporation of an ion-exchange
material as an encapsulating medium reduces interference and acts as protection
against fouling. Novel control algorithms for auto-calibration enable long-term
autonomous operation and ensure a reliable signal-to-noise ratio, for 24x7 real-
time control of the energy-intensive aeration process. The proposed nitrogen
sensor will have a wide range of sensitivity, from 0.1 ppm to 250 ppm, and can
be used for other important chemical species with fingerprints in the mid-IR
spectral range, such as phosphorus and organic contaminants, making it a robust
tool for water quality assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.