* 1951212
* SBIR Phase II:  Directional Permeability Enhancement Using Electric Well Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Mehrdad Mehrvand, EDEN GEOPOWER, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2023
* USD 790,370.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a novel waterless rock fracturing
technology that can replace hydraulic fracturing in the future. Hydraulic
fracturing requires pumping of millions of gallons of water into a reservoir to
create permeable pathways within the rock, and increase hydrocarbon recovery
rates. However, hydraulic fracturing technology has been banned in some regions
within the United States, and in various countries across the globe due to water
scarcity and environmental concerns. This has left trillions of dollars in
petroleum resources trapped within the earth, negatively impacting the global
economy. The waterless fracturing technology being developed under this project
utilizes pulsed electrical energy to fracture rocks instead of water, allowing
for hydrocarbons to be recovered with minimum environmental impact. The research
conducted during this project will provide further insights into the advantages
of utilizing electricity to fracture petroleum reservoirs and assist in
accelerating successful commercialization of the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop
a novel electric reservoir stimulation method to increase reservoir permeability
without requiring pumping of hazardous material into the subsurface. This
project will advance the development of an electric stimulation method by
testing it on rock samples under higher pressure and temperature conditions, to
mimic the downhole conditions of several common petroleum reservoirs and allow
for optimization. This project will also include the design of a downhole tool
that will be utilized to carry electrical current from the surface to the target
reservoir for field demonstrations of the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.