* 1951317
* Attosecond Electron Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Stephen Leone, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Stephen Leone of the
University of California, Berkeley, uses sophisticated laser techniques to study
some of the shortest time processes in molecules. Modern laser technology allows
us to track the motion of the atomic nuclei in molecules as chemical reactions
take place. However, the electrons that make up the bonds between atoms are
thousands of times less massive than nuclei and therefore move much faster. This
research project seeks to follow electron processes inside molecules that occur
within 100 – 200 attoseconds (One attosecond is a decimal point followed by
seventeen zeros and then a “1”). The fast measurements are accomplished by using
laser light with wavelengths in the extreme ultraviolet and x-ray regions of the
spectrum. The goal of this project is to characterize the motions of electrons
in molecules undergoing chemical reactions, and perhaps catch the electron cloud
in the moment when it is about to choose one reaction path over another. The
research is important to understand the fundamental principles of charge flow
(negative electrons and positive nuclei) and the breaking and reforming of
chemical bonds for utilization of sunlight energy. Further benefits to society
arise from the development of laser measurement capabilities that push the
boundaries of short time durations in chemical dynamics using tools that require
precision stability of lasers and optical platforms. These capabilities are
certain find use in many areas of science and technology. In addition to the
three graduate students who are directly involved in this project, members of
the Leone research group engage in informal educational activities, including
laboratory tours for high school students and teachers, and outreach events in
coordination with the Lawrence Hall of Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast
transient absorption in the extreme ultraviolet and X-ray, techniques developed
in the Leone laboratory, are employed to make attosecond time-resolved dynamics
measurements as a way to probe chemical dynamics that can separate electron
dynamics timescales from nuclear motion. Electron correlation and superposition
states play central roles in chemical processes on these short timescales.
Attosecond probe pulses are produced via the process of high harmonic generation
using carrier-envelope-phase stabilized driver laser pulses, and ultraviolet
pulses are used to excite molecules by well-defined one-photon absorption. Core
level transitions probed in reporter atoms are site- and oxidation-state
specific, bond-length-sensitive, and electronic-state-dependent, providing an
orbital-specific way to measure ultrafast dynamics. Objectives are to study
attosecond and few-femtosecond time processes of curve crossing, passage through
conical intersections, electronic and vibrational quantum mechanical
superpositions, and charge migration recurrences. Molecules are chosen for study
that have very different electronic configurations in multiple excited states or
chemical environments around the molecule that are recognizable by spectroscopic
means for charge flow, or for their relevance in chemical processing. The
broader impacts of this work involve the development of tools that push the
limits of time, important as both the dimensions and speed of devices decrease
and as quantum principles in molecules are considered for computing
architectures. Students who participate in this project learn an array of
principles relevant for high technology professions that enable the speed and
dimensions of ubiquitous electronic devices to
decrease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.