* 1951364
* Collaborative Research: RoL: Detecting and predicting the relative contributions of fecundity and survival to fitness in changing environments
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Caroline Williams, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 359,880.00

The research will address an urgent societal need, which is to accurately
predict biological responses to environmental change. This project aims to
improve prediction techniques by investigating how animals respond to shifts in
both average environmental conditions and short-term, extreme environmental
conditions. Average environmental conditions over time determine rates of energy
gain and subsequently reproductive rates, whereas survival can be strongly
influenced by short-term, extreme environmental conditions. In many species, the
relative importance of reproduction and survival in determining fitness change
systematically along environmental gradients. Along a mountain slope,
reproduction is constrained at high altitudes by a short, cool, growing season,
while survival is challenged at low altitudes in summer due to hot temperature
extremes. The project goal is to develop a general modeling approach that can
bridge levels of biological organization, space and time to predict shifts in
survival and reproduction constraints and thus improve our ability to forecast
responses to environmental gradients and change. The project will greatly expand
two education and outreach projects. The TrEnCh project
(trenchproject.github.io) will develop and share additional computational and
visualization tools to Translate Environmental Change into biological impacts.
The Beetle Project, offering hands-on modules to study climate change responses,
will focus on expanding educational access across levels of English literacy and
socioeconomic status. Furthermore, the project will provide integrative training
in evolutionary ecology, genomics, physiology, and quantitative skills to a
diverse group of high school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage survey and specimen
data, from recent and historical periods, in an assemblage of grasshopper
species found along a montane elevation gradient that vary in traits such as
dispersal, phenology, morphology, and thermal specialization. Field reciprocal
transplant experiments will quantify the integrated response to the environment,
while assessing whether local adaptation and plasticity moderate reproduction
and survival constraints along the environmental gradient. The transplants will
use physiological and genomic biomarkers to test the hypothesis that survival
constraints predominate at low elevations, while reproduction constraints
predominate at high elevations. Lab common garden experiments manipulating
environmental attributes that vary with elevation (temperature, temperature
variability, photoperiod, radiation, hypoxia) will test physiological mechanisms
that underlie fitness constraints. Model building will integrate these
physiological mechanisms to predict responses to the elevation gradient. Then,
historic survey and specimen data will be used to test whether these models
successfully hindcast patterns of genetic, physiological, phenotypic, and
demographic responses to 50 years of environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.