* 1951112
* Community Facility Support: Management and Operation of a Continental Scientific Drilling and Coring Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Erik Brown, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 04/30/2025
* USD 4,042,235.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Program community facility award supports
operations and management of the Continental Scientific Drilling Facility
(CSDF). Several types of Earth science research require analyzing materials such
as soil, rock, water, and microbes below the ground surface. Drilled boreholes
also allow installation of instruments below the surface that improve our
understanding of earthquake processes, or the movement of water below the
surface, or processes that form different minerals and change rock into soil, or
the best ways to harness geothermal energy. Over time, sediment layers are
deposited in lakes, and each of the sediment layers contains information about
the conditions around the lake at the time it was deposited. Collecting core
samples from lakebeds allows analysis of the layers of sediment to understand
how climate, water, ecosystems, volcanoes, and Earthâ€™s plate motions have
changed in the region near the lake, throughout the entire lifespan of the lake.
Reaching these materials deep below the surface requires drilling and core
sampling. These procedures are complex, expensive, and can be high risk, and the
tools, instruments, and data systems are specialized. CSDF supports hundreds of
research projects per year that involve short coring in lakes to deep drilling
in crystalline rock. Activities of the CSDF include: project development;
logistics and contracting; field operations management; outreach, diversity, and
education; rental and sales of specialized equipment and supplies; core
scanning, splitting/slabbing, subsampling, and description; subsample
preparation and analysis; maintenance of repositories for stewardship of
samples, data, publications, and reference collections; cyberinfrastructure
development; physical infrastructure development; and community
coordination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific drilling and coring are essential
for the advancement of the Earth Sciences. They are the primary means to access
fresh, unweathered materials that are not exposed at the surface. Core samples
from lakes and other sedimentary basins provide archives of environmental and
ecosystem history, allowing reconstruction of the Earth-life system through time
to understand system changes and ecosystem response and resilience. Core samples
and boreholes provide a means to understand hydrologic, geologic, and
geochemical processes operating at depth, through sampling, in-situ
measurements, and long-term monitoring. Subsurface microbiological communities
may be sampled and analyzed to understand their role in rock weathering, fault
mechanics, and other geologic and geochemical processes. Scientific motivations
are diverse, including hydrology and fluid transport, geochemistry,
geomicrobiology, paleorecords of the Earth-Life system, volcanology and
magmatism, tectonics, geothermal, fault mechanics and seismicity, rock
weathering, and bolide impacts. Coring and drilling operations that enable this
science are often complex, highly technical, expensive, and entail substantial
risk, and the equipment, tooling, instrumentation, and data management systems
required are specialized. Although requirements vary between projects, the many
commonalities allow economies of scale by leveraging shared expertise and
resources, even as projects range in depth or cost by a factor of 100,000 or
more. The Continental Scientific Drilling (CSD) Facility delivers resources for
all of these communities in accordance with their
priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.