* 1951331
* Long-term consequences of supervisor hostility
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2026
* Ryan Vogel, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 597,542.00

Supervisors often control the allocation of outcomes (e.g., compensation,
promotion opportunities) that are important and valuable to employees. Because
of these power dynamics, supervisors who are hostile toward their employees
elicit strong negative reactions that ultimately harm employees and cost U.S.
organizations billions of dollars in reduced productivity. To date, researchers
have focused only on the short-term consequences of supervisor hostility and
have neglected to consider the idea that psychological trauma that often comes
along with interpersonal mistreatment can remain with its victims for years into
the future. Studying this phenomenon over a longer time horizon also raises the
possibility that some employees ultimately grow from this experience, just as
some trauma victims experience growth after great devastation. This project
explores the cognitive, emotional, physiological, and behavioral differences
exhibited by employees who have been the target of supervisor hostility in the
past. Project results may provide guidance to practitioners interested in
helping abused employees recover from long-term harm. Further, by demonstrating
that an organization that bears no direct responsibility for the original abuse
nonetheless bears some of the costs, we hope to inspire a collective sense of
responsibility for changing the cultures, climates, and structures of work that
enable supervisor hostility. Moreover, based on the idea that minorities and
those without structural power are often targeted by hostile supervisors, we
hope that our research will contribute to its reduction and ultimately help
level the playing field in terms of minority employment opportunities. Finally,
our research may contribute to public policy regarding the type of work
environments desired and tolerated by society. We hope the results will
contribute to conversations that change management practice for the benefit of
employees’ well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a multi-method approach,
employing surveys (both self- and other-reports), a battery of laboratory tasks
(e.g., Taylor Aggression Paradigm, trust games, emotional Stroop), physiological
measures, and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) tasks, we test our
ideas and overall conceptual model with matched samples of 100 employees who
have been exposed to supervisor hostility in the past and 100 employees who have
not. The project aims to contribute to research by: (1) providing a model of the
long-term consequences of supervisor hostility, grounded in social psychology,
human cognition, and neuroscience theory and research, (2) extending research on
supervisor hostility from the short-term to the long-term, providing an
important first examination of the phenomenon and fostering multiple avenues for
future research on this topic, and (3) illuminating potential positive
consequences of supervisor hostility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.