* 1951264
* SBIR Phase II:  Digital rehabilitation platform for higher education, mental health, and workforce readiness
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Noah Freedman, Nucleos Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2023
* USD 989,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will deliver safe and secure learning,
vocational training, and re-entry solutions to Americaâ€™s 2.2 million
incarcerated people and 70 million people with criminal records in order to
ensure they have the skills and confidence needed to re-enter the workforce.
Ensuring these marginalized and underrepresented populations has access to
robust education and rehabilitation opportunities is critical for American
public safety, stable communities, and workforce development. Recent studies
have concluded that every $1 spent on corrections education programs can yield
$4-$5 in savings to the state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to increase the capability of
online/offline application integration platforms which are customized for
incarcerated or formerly incarcerated individuals, including: application
integrations, security filtering, aggregated learner record keeping, usage
tracking, message-logging, and workforce opportunity matching. The ability to
deliver content in offline and online environments offers a technical advance in
the learning technology platforms available on the market. Additionally, the
platform is tackling the difficult issues of ingesting a wide range of learning
data from multiple applications and processing this data to determine student
performance and aptitude to align capabilities and interests with workforce
opportunities. This allows Nucleos to more easily integrate third-party
applications, provide a greater range of e-learning opportunities for
incarcerated learners at facilities with a wide variation in security
restrictions, and promote better learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.