* 1951767
* Collaborative Research: Coordination, Data Management and Enhancement of the International Arctic Buoy Programme (IABP), and  US Interagency Arctic Buoy Programme (USIABP)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Cy Keener, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 05/31/2025
* USD 164,840.00

The ability to predict weather across the globe, and sea ice conditions critical
for defense and maritime operations in the Arctic, requires observations of
surface meteorology and ice/ocean currents. The US Interagency Arctic Buoy
Program (USIABP) and International Arctic Buoy Programme (IABP) maintain this
fundamental Arctic Observing Network across the expanse of the Arctic Ocean.
Observations and data sets produced by Polar Science Center (PSC) and University
of Washington Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) for the IABP have led to
advancing scientific understanding of regional and global impacts influenced by
changes in the Arctic Ocean. Through diverse outreach efforts, the PIs will
disseminate their scientific findings in media interviews and participate in the
annual Polar Science Weekend and Climate Curiosity Days at Seattle's Pacific
Science Center. This project also provides opportunities to Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) based programs that work with high school
students to learn about, design and launch buoys, and support US Naval Academy
student buoy engineering projects. The researchers have developed a low-cost
open source Arctic buoy to gather more data, and are involved in producing a
range of data visualization art projects to engage the public with the Arctic
through exhibition venues in Canada, Norway, and the US including at the
National Academy of Sciences in Washington D.C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USIABP
will deploy buoys in the increasing areas of open water in the Arctic during
summer and has established a semi-permanent test site in Utqiagvik, Alaska, to
assess the quality of the instruments now used by the IABP to observe the Arctic
Ocean. This project intends to maintain a network of buoys with a spacing of
less than 250 km, or more than 200 buoys spread across the Arctic Ocean, and
with deployment logistics that include: 1) aircraft landing on the sea ice in
the spring; 2) icebreakers deploying buoys for the IABP as opportunities arise;
and 3) aircraft dropping buoys onto the sea ice. These observations are
assimilated into Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models that are used to
forecast weather on synoptic time scales, and into the many long-term
atmospheric reanalyses that are used for climate studies. Overall, the
observations from the IABP are essential for: 1) monitoring Arctic and global
climate change; 2) forcing, assimilation, and validation of global weather and
climate models; and 3) validation of satellite derived estimates of sea ice
motion, surface temperature, and sea ice thickness. Further, IABP Observations
are shared through the IABP server, the World Meteorological Organization and
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (WMO/IOC) Global Telecommunications
System (GTS), and stored in publicly accessible archives including the NSF
Arctic Data Center. These observations provide the longest continuing record for
the Arctic and have been one of the cornerstones of the Arctic Observing Network
for environmental forecasting and studies of climate and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.