* 1951636
* SCC-PG: Reducing the Vulnerability of Disadvantaged Communities to the Impacts of Cascading Hazards under a Changing Climate
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Roxane Silver, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 118,724.00

Community resilience is frequently defined as the ability of a community to
prepare, respond, and recover from natural and human-caused hazards.
Preparedness is a vital aspect of community resilience, but our existing
frameworks and emergency guidelines generally focus on response, rather than
seeking to understand the connection between events and preparing for subsequent
hazards. The majority of disasters involve a chain of events occurring in a
cascading manner. The importance of preparedness against cascading hazards has
been demonstrated by recent events, such as the Mendocino complex and Campfires
in California, where all reports suggest that the lack of an integrated
framework connecting decision-makers and residents exacerbated the devastating
consequences of the fires. There is an urgent need for evaluating the
vulnerability and preparedness of disadvantaged communities with access and
functional needs (AFN) against cascading hazards. This Smart &amp; Connected
Communities (SCC) planning grant aims to reduce the vulnerability of
disadvantaged communities to the impacts of cascading hazards in a changing
climate. We seek to develop an effective warning system by integrating
environmental-socio-technological monitoring and risk communications to serve
disadvantaged communities. The overarching goal is to bridge the gap between the
engineering, scientific, and social dimensions that have been striving to reduce
the consequences of extreme events but are commonly evaluated in isolation of
one another. The project will broaden the participation of local citizens in
participatory risk management, as well as advance participatory, multi-scenario,
multi-objective decision support that will make data and tradeoffs transparent
and accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cascading hazards place disadvantaged
communities at risk for disastrous outcomes, which are projected to worsen with
climate variability and change. This project supports a multidisciplinary
planning effort toward mitigating the impacts of cascading hazards from social
science, climate, engineering, and decision-making perspectives. This project
provides a capacity-building opportunity to better assess and quantify how the
sequence of drought, wildfires, landslides, and flooding may drive one another
and how the consequences of these cascading hazards may scale in both time and
space. This project will provide insights into: (1) the science of cascading
hazards and their tempo-spatial characteristics and impacts in a changing
climate, (2) social and physical vulnerability in disadvantaged communities
against the risk of cascading hazards, as opposed to a single hazard, and (3) an
efficient strategy to communicate the risks of cascading hazards, which are
inherently different in their devastation and scale. The project will also seek
to build the capacity for advancing crisis communications by demonstrating how
diverse sources of data (of disparate time scales, dimensionalities, and noise
levels) can be integrated to improve decision-making and community engagement in
remote and disconnected environments. The project involves collaboration with
California Office of Emergency Services (CalOES) and will focus on Lake County,
CA, a disadvantaged community with dwindling resources and growing multi-hazard
threats. While applied to a sequence of drought, wildfires, landslides, and
flooding, this framework is directly translatable to any set of cascading
hazards and will advance the state-of-knowledge to go beyond hazard evaluation
that typically focuses on a single event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.