* 1951952
* SCC-PG: Towards cybernetic buildings: integrated intelligent sensing to create responsive environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Shira Gabriel, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

The essential building blocks of a community are buildings. Like the larger
community, buildings have to accommodate all the needs of a diverse group of
people. Some "smart" systems are employed in the built environment, but they are
designed to facilitate operations and improve efficiency. Do these systems
benefit the inhabitants of the whole community, especially marginalized groups
who often do not have a say in shaping policy and practices related to building
management? In a democratic society, connected communities must be safe,
comfortable, healthy, easy to use, and support productivity, contributing to the
advancement of a just society for all. To meet these needs, a truly smart system
should be cybernetic: it can incorporate feedback for self-regulation toward
desirable goals. This research will develop and test an integrated platform to
collect feedback on building performance, communicate that information to all
building users, and create an online community through which members can
influence the operation of building services and facilities. A proactive
intelligent, or cybernetic system that engages the community of building users
will provide the data to evaluate connected community strategies from a social
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system will leverage smart phones and
commercial augmented reality equipment to develop an inexpensive system of
feedback and control that could be implemented in any building. It will include
a sensor array for innovative building performance measurement, a set of
dashboards for communicating and controlling the status of systems, and
automated participatory processes that assess and communicate outcomes like
satisfaction, comfort, and social engagement to facilities managers. The system
will combine technologies from sensing, artificial intelligence, psychophysical
research and social media. Implementing such systems on a large scale will
provide data to create benchmarks for performance, identify unknown health
threats, and understand the design features that contribute to productivity,
satisfaction and community building. Once a working system has been implemented
successfully for buildings, it can be scaled up for community wide
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.