* 1951847
* SCC-PG: Improving Low Income Households' Access to Energy in Washington, D.C.
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Wendy Ellis, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2022
* USD 149,946.00

Households at or below the poverty line can owe a significant portion of their
income for utility bills; in Washington D.C., this amount is 20% or more before
receiving assistance. During heat waves and cold snaps, some residents must
forgo expenditures on health, nutrition, or education to pay their air
conditioning and heating bills. Delivering innovative technology that utilizes
renewable sources to provide affordable, reliable, resilient, and clean power to
underserved communities will help reduce the burden on them. This planning grant
will develop best practices for engaging residents of urban communities in
decisions regarding their energy future while also developing new technologies
that address their needs. Taking into account financing and policy innovations
to implement the technology can position underserved communities to better take
advantage of opportunities in the growing information-based economy. In broader
terms, by rethinking the relationship between the built environment and
socioeconomic systems, this project seeks to address the inequalities that
define the status quo in low-income areas. The main innovation in terms of
fundamental research is to develop new methodologies for integrating meaningful
community participation, innovative technologies, supportive public policy, and
innovative business models to develop and implement affordable energy
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant aims to develop
multidisciplinary methodologies and best practices for engaging residents of
underserved urban communities in decisions regarding their energy future, while
also developing engineering solutions, specifically sensor-driven micro-grid
technologies, that offer such communities a practical option for accessing
electric service that is affordable, reliable, resilient, and clean. The project
brings together faculty and practitioners from engineering, law, business,
public health, and sustainability who will work to develop the necessary new
technology, but also have the ability to ensure that city policies facilitate
using the technology, that there is financing for it, that it meets community
needs, and increases resilience to natural hazards. While the community partners
are in Washington DC, this project will identify practices and technologies that
are replicable and scalable to other communities across the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.