* 1951646
* Cycle Representations of Receptor Complex Signal Transduction
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Gregory Conradi Smith, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The border of living cells is covered with sentry molecules that sense the
presence of chemical signals, assess the current situation, and initiate
decision processes that determine a cell’s response to its environment. These
“cell surface receptors” function like a car ignition switch: they accept a
specific chemical signal (the key) and then communicate the presence of this
chemical key to the interior of the cell. Because receptors have a profound
influence on cell behavior, it is crucial to understand the details of how they
function. The most important types of receptors are made up of several component
parts that work together as complex molecular machines. Because of this
complexity, mathematical models of cell surface receptors are integral to
understanding both natural signaling mechanisms of cells and the mode of action
of man-made therapeutic drugs. Mathematical and biophysical theory being
developed by the PI is revealing how receptor function may be understood in
terms of the properties of their parts (protein subunits) and the energetic
interactions between these parts (conformational coupling). This fundamental
scientific knowledge is the launching point for numerous applied endeavors that
directly impact human wellbeing, such as scientifically informed drug
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, the PI’s recent
mathematical work on cycle bases of product graphs provides a formalism for the
efficient enumeration the possible modes of conformational coupling in a
receptor dimer or high-order oligomer, beginning with arbitrary hypothesized
monomeric state-transition diagram. This novel quantitative pharmacology
modeling technique automatically satisfies the emergent thermodynamic
constraints that arise in the receptor oligomer, and provides an unambiguous
physical interpretation of each allosteric parameter. The PI is developing a
general mathematical formalism, based on product graphs, for analysis of
receptor complexes, with specific focus on dimeric G-protein-coupled receptors
and receptor tyrosine kinases. The formalism will be extended to accommodate
non-equilibrium phenomena mediated by nucleotide exchange. Software for the
analysis of receptor oligomers will be developed and shared with life
scientists. Because few mathematicians have the requisite biological background
to be of help to medical scientists, and few medical scientists have the
quantitative skills necessary to reverse engineer living cells, the PI is
committed to training Ph.D. scientists who will have an interdisciplinary
outlook, to exposing pre-medical undergraduates to the sophisticated
mathematics, and to pedagogical writing that clarifies how mathematics is
essential to progress in the life sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
co-funded with the Cellular Dynamics and Function program in Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and the Life Science Venture Fund in
DMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.