* 1951297
* 13th International Conference on the Technology of Plasticity (ICTP 2020); Columbus, Ohio; July 26-31, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This award supports up to 25 students and 15 postdoctoral researchers at US
institutions to participate in the Thirteenth International Conference on the
Technology of Plasticity (ICTP2020), to be held at The Ohio State University on
July 26-31, 2020. The ICTP 2020, sponsored by the Metallurgical Society (TMS).
will bring together researchers, professionals, and engineers from around the
world to discuss improvements and innovations in all major areas of the
technology and science of metal forming. The award provides young researchers
with opportunities to exchange ideas with leading researchers and engineers from
worldwide industrial and governmental facilities, as well as with students and
faculty from both domestic and international engineering schools. In addition to
nurturing a global manufacturing vision, participants will learn the latest
research areas and results in metal forming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topical areas
at the ICTP2020 will include sessions concerned with traditional fields, such
metal forming processes, joining by deformation, and microstructure
characterization and development by forming, and will also include a number of
sessions on innovative, forward-looking topics, such as the role of Big Data and
Artificial Intelligence in metal forming, and the emergence of agile metal
forming and high-speed impulse forming techniques and technologies to speed
innovations. Requested funds will be used to provide participant support for
young researchers. Underrepresented groups will be strongly encouraged to apply
and support will be provided to no more than three individuals from any one
university or organization to encourage diversity among the institutions
represented. In addition, assistance awards will be provided to some invited
keynote speakers, to procure supplies needed for the poster session, which is
anticipated to draw over 50 early career presenters, and to partially defray the
cost of producing and printing the conference proceedings. Attendees will
complete a survey to determine the most popular sessions and aspects of the
program that will allow future conferences to expand the topic focus or cover
new areas that were not explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.