* 1951865
* Doctoral Consortium Workshop at the Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference 2020
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Michael Brown, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2023
* USD 28,109.00

Data intensive research is becoming increasingly important across all scientific
disciplines. In particular, the field of education research is experiencing a
revolution in methodology due to the increasing digitization of the learning
process. The Society for Learning Analytics Research (SoLAR) is a key player in
effecting this change. This project will support a Doctoral Consortium at the
Learning Analytics and Knowledge (LAK) 2020 conference, run by SoLAR, to be held
in Frankfurt, Germany. Participating in the consortium will prepare current
doctoral students from diverse research backgrounds that make up the
interdisciplinary field of Learning Analytics (LA), including computer science,
information science, psychology, communication, education, artificial
intelligence, and cognitive science. It will also allow them to network with
each other and with professors and practitioners who are currently engaged in
learning analytics research and related work to ensure the continued development
of this community. These activities are critical and timely. The upcoming
generation of LA researchers will play a vital role in realizing the potential
of using data to improve outcomes for elementary, secondary, and post-secondary
students in learning, motivation, and perseverance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LA is
an interdisciplinary field whose goal is to advance and apply knowledge about
learning sciences and education to improve all aspects of learning. Learning
Analytics methods include data visualization, data mining, data science, and
mixed methods approaches combining qualitative and quantitative methods (e.g.,
interviews and back-end, clickstream data analysis). Capacity building is a
central concern within the LA community. SoLAR has historically addressed these
needs, in part, through specialized workshops held in conjunction with the
Society's major conference. The Doctoral Consortium workshops host PhD students
who are grappling with their dissertation research. This grant provides travel
support to US scholars selected through a competitive application process to
participate in this event. They present their work for feedback both in the
context of workshop, where they receive advice from a panel of expert mentors,
and in a poster session in which they interact with the full conference
audience. In addition, their work is published in the proceedings of the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.