* 1951488
* IRES Track I:Collaborative Research:Application-Specific Asynchronous Deep Learning IC Design for Ultra-Low Power
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Na Gong, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,996.00

This 3-year IRES Track I project recruits three cohorts of U.S. students to
conduct research in China, with the major research goal as developing,
fabricating, and testing an ultra-low power application-specific deep learning
integrated circuit, and evaluating its performance through the integration with
physical Internet-of-Things (IoT) edge computing devices. It brings together
three research groups with unique expertise from University of Arkansas (ultra-
low power asynchronous circuit design), University of South Alabama (context-
aware memory design), and Peking University, China (deep learning algorithm
development and optimization). The expected research outcomes will accelerate
edge computing for a large variety of IoT applications such as advanced medical
and elderly care systems, and self-driving vehicles. Each year six U.S. student
participants work onsite at Peking University for eight weeks, leveraging the
onsite research facilities. The multicultural, multidisciplinary nature of this
project provides a unique training and career preparation opportunity for the
participating students, including multidisciplinary discussion, teamwork,
effective communication, and technical writing. The PIs continue their prior
efforts in recruiting student participants from underrepresented and minority
groups, leveraging their contacts and the existing mechanisms at each
university. The research outcomes and the student experience will be
disseminated nation-wide for benefiting the research community and encouraging
more students to participate in similar programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep
learning is transforming many modern Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications,
in many of which deep learning has begun to exceed human performance. However,
the superior performance of deep learning comes at the cost of extremely high
computational complexity associated with large datasets. Therefore, deep
learning algorithms are traditionally implemented in software and executed on
powerful general-purpose cloud computing platforms. In contrast to the
prevailing research in general-purpose counterparts, the application-specific
deep learning IC has much lower power consumption, thereby ideal for integration
with power-constrained IoT devices. This IRES project is to develop, fabricate,
and test an ultra-low power deep learning integrated circuit (IC), and evaluate
its performance through the integration with physical IoT edge computing
devices. Technical innovations to be developed by the student participants
include: 1) optimization of application-specific deep learning algorithms for
alleviating the requirements of hardware implementation; 2) delay-insensitive
asynchronous circuit design for substantially improved energy efficiency; and 3)
context-aware memory development for power savings and low implementation cost.
This project uniquely connects deep learning algorithm optimization,
asynchronous circuit design, and memory optimization together to achieve a
highly optimized system, which will benefit the semiconductor and AI societies
at large by the revolutions in hardware-tailored deep learning algorithms and
specialized computing hardware. It is expected that this research will
demonstrate the advantages of application-specific deep learning hardware and
layout the foundation of a new and promising direction for both academic
research and industrial development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.