* 1951244
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: THE CRITICAL IMPORTANCE OF DIVERSE LEAF "HAIRSTYLES": INTEGRATIVE QUANTIFICATION OF ANATOMY, FUNCTION, EVOLUTION AND ECOLOGY OF TRICHOMES
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Lawren Sack, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2024
* USD 689,929.00

Humankind depends on domesticated and wild plants for food, fiber, fuel, and
fresh air. Understanding how plants work under current and future climates is
therefore critical to human welfare. Plant leaf hairs (trichomes) are among the
most complex, ubiquitous, important, and little understood biological traits.
Leaf trichomes are present in more than half of plant species, have diverse
structure and arrangements, and influence the environmental tolerances and
productivity of both crop and non-crop species. The effects of trichomes include
reflecting excessive light, preventing accumulation of surface water, reducing
infection by pathogens, enhancing water capture from saturated air, reducing
water loss to dry air, and fending off herbivores. Yet, leaf trichomes have been
studied in detail for very few species, and therefore have been typically
ignored in predictions of plant production, evolution and ecology. This study
will refine and develop state-of-the-art methods to micro-image trichomes in
diverse species, and use experiments and models to determine how their costs and
benefits affect whole-plant performance. Additionally, the project team will
analyze how trichomes vary across environments and through evolution for species
of grapevine, for the model species Arabidopsis thaliana, and for entire floras
of California and Hawaii. The project will train graduate students and post-
doctoral scientists in state of the art technology and approaches to plant
research, and will integrate general education, high school and undergraduate
education with public dissemination of research, thereby increasing public
awareness and fascination with plant structure and function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through its collaborative research team, this project
applies an innovative synthetic approach combining expertise in mathematics,
physics, physiology, ecology and evolution. By integrating greenhouse and lab
experimentation with state of the art 3D micro-imaging, herbarium work,
experimental measurements, mechanistic and statistical modeling and phylogenetic
analyses the research will quantify the anatomical diversity of leaf trichomes,
their contributions to light absorption, water relations (wettability and foliar
water uptake), gas exchange, and protection from herbivory, and their ecological
and evolutionary associations. The first aim of this project is to combine
cutting edge micro-visualization, experimentation and modeling to quantify the
structure and multiple functions of leaf hairs in diverse species from at least
17 genera of flowering plants. The second aim is to integrate these multiple
streams of data on the diversity of leaf trichomes and its influence on five
known functions to determine how the net benefits scale up to influence whole
plant performance. Third, an even wider perspective is necessary to determine
how leaf trichomes evolved with climate within lineages and across floras. The
project will leverage available data and herbarium material to focus on test
cases of large-scale evolutionary and ecological patterns in leaf trichomes. The
projectâ€™s Broader Impacts will provide curricula based on novel results via the
UCLA Botanical Garden, and online modules including 3D models that can be
accessed online and 3D printed. All data will be deposited in a publicly
available database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.