* 1951698
* Establishment and maintenance of repressive chromatin during development in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Joseph Ogas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/29/2024
* USD 917,686.00

This project will study how plants control expression of specific genes during
development by changing how the genes are packaged in the nucleus. In plants,
like in other eukaryotic organisms, the very large genome is packaged into the
small space of the cell's nucleus by winding the genomic DNA around proteins to
form a compacted DNA-protein complex called chromatin. Very tightly compacted
chromatin can prevent gene expression by mechanisms that are not fully
understood. Exploring these mechanisms is the focus of this proposal. A long-
term goal will be to use the research outcomes to manipulate development in
plants to increase their agricultural potential. The research will be carried
out by undergraduate and graduate students working together, providing an
authentic research experience for undergraduate students and mentoring
opportunities for the graduate students. In addition, analysis of the genomic
data generated in the project will be incorporated into a new computational
genomics course to teach students how to analyze large datasets using
computational approaches. All of the data generated by the project will be
deposited in public databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In eukaryotes, including the
model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3
(H3K27me3) in nucleosomal chromatin is associated with transcriptional
repression, but how this histone modification is imposed, maintained, and read
is poorly understood. The chromatin remodeler named PICKLE (PKL) has been shown
previously to promote tissue- and developmental-specific repressive chromatin,
defined by the presence of H3K27me3. Recent evidence suggests that PKL may
function as a pre-nucleosome maturation factor that acts with a histone
methyltransferase, a second remodeler, and a histone H2A variant to control
conditional expression from H3K27me3-enriched loci. This relationship will be
tested by combining genetic, genomic, and biochemical approaches to relate
chromatin-mediated changes in gene expression to whole-plant developmental
phenotypes. The results are expected to reveal the role of H3K27me3 homeostasis
in formation and maintenance of repressive chromatin
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.