* 1951027
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Exploring beyond visualization: Data sonification of bacterial chemotaxis patterns
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Maxwell Tfirn, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2022
* USD 51,472.00

In this Era of Big Data an unprecedented amount of information is being
collected at rates that are overwhelming researchers' capacity to process data
in meaningful ways. Converting streams of numbers into graphical representations
has proven to be useful over the past three decades to identify trends in
complex data sets such as weather patterns, stock market fluctuations, and flu
epidemics. While visualization is a powerful approach to data analysis, not all
data are amenable to visualization. Sonification, the mapping of information to
sound, is an alternative method for extracting useful information from visually
chaotic data. One familiar example of data sonification is a Geiger counter that
converts invisible gamma radiation to an audible frequency of clicks. This
project demonstrates the utility of sonification in a study of how microbes swim
toward nutrients that are critical for their survival. The goal is to promote
more widespread use of sonification to analyze big data within the biological
research community. Sonification of data can also increase public scientific
literacy and public engagement with science and technology. As demonstrated by
the catchy Higgs Boson tune, sonified data made the discovery of subatomic
particles more accessible to the public. Sound and music are used in this
project to provide a medium through which to engage elementary school-age
children in a welcoming manner about the excitement of science. Another notable
aspect is that data sonification provides a convenient platform to engage sight-
impaired individuals in research. The project brings together expertise in
biological systems engineering and digital music composition that provide
diverse perspectives for cross-training student research
assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project sonification is used to detect
changes in the swimming patterns of microorganisms upon exposure to a chemical
stimulus (i.e. chemotaxis). When examining a population of swimming microbes
through a microscope the movement appears chaotic, making subtle changes in the
paths of individual organisms impossible to discern in real time. By mapping
visual images to the frequency domain in real-time one can transform the chaotic
visual motion to discernible differences in auditory sounds. The specific
project objectives are to: (1) identify the features of bacterial swimming
motion that are detected in sonified data; (2) optimize video microscopy
settings and video filters to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio of the data
collected; (3) sonify data in real time to allow simultaneous audio and visual
input to an observer; (4) evaluate the robustness of data sonification
algorithms for bacteria that have different swimming behaviors; and (5) screen
microbes for chemotaxis beyond the training set to evaluate the success of the
sonification process. One outcome of this work will be a platform to generate
sonified data in real-time that is synchronous with visual observations to allow
high-throughput screening of chemotactic responses for various species to
different chemoeffectors over a range of concentrations. Another, and perhaps
more impactful outcome, will be to significantly expand the tools that
biological scientists have at their disposal to identify patterns in complex
data that they collect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the
Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster and the Cellular and Dynamics Cluster in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.