* 1951211
* SBIR Phase II:  Chemical Mechanical Planarization pad with controlled micro features for sub 7nm semiconductor technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Goo Youn Kim, SMART PAD LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2023
* USD 977,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to help semiconductor chipmakers overcome
manufacturing challenges in Chemical Mechanical Planarization/Polishing (CMP)
processes. CMP processes enable cutting-edge manufacturing; currently chipmakers
often face scaling difficulties as the size of the smallest features continues
to decrease, increasing the impact of CMP imperfections and resulting in higher
defect rates. The proposed polishing process enables chip fabricators to reduce
these CMP imperfections by 50% and improve performance, while reducing costs and
increasing process throughput. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will improve CMP processes with
innovative polishing pads. Conventional polishing pads have randomly distributed
micropores inside of the pads and typically generate around 1% real contact area
between the pad asperities and wafer during polishing. This leads to unwanted
polishing results, such as dishing/erosion and scratch defects on chip patterns
due to the stress concentration on asperities. Conventional pads require a pad
conditioning process to regenerate the asperities on the pad surface. The
polishing processes developed under this project use microfabrication
technologies to control micro-features on the pad surface. Therefore, the
contact area between the pad and wafer is customizable and controllable up to
30%. This will improve the polishing performance precision and consistency,
leading to fewer defects. As the micro-features on the soft sub-pad are
independent, the conformity of the pad increases and the pressure on the wafer
is evenly distributed across the wafer surface. This will significantly improve
the chip-level planarization and wafer-level uniformity, and reduce the pad
wear. As a result, the pad conditioning process can be minimized or even
eliminated from the CMP process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.