* 1951225
* SBIR Phase II:  Lowering Wind Power Costs Through Robust Vertical-Axis Turbines
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Benjamin Strom, XFlow Energy Company
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is a reduction in consumer electricity costs,
reduced stress on the electricity grid, and increased energy security.
Technological advances in large wind turbines will enable power generation for
communities and businesses at less than the average cost of utility generation
and roof-top solar, and half the average cost of competing small wind turbines.
This process would not fluctuate in time as much as solar installations,
decreasing stress on grid infrastructure. Locally-owned generation will
alleviate fluctuating energy prices and protect against grid failure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project proposes to reduce the cost of wind energy from small wind turbines by
at least 60%, making low-cost distributed renewable energy an affordable reality
for communities and businesses. Vertical-axis wind turbines (VAWTs) have the
potential for lower capital and maintenance costs than traditional horizontal-
axis machines due to their mechanical simplicity. However, low efficiency and
structural failure have plagued previous VAWT commercialization efforts. This
SBIR Phase II project will optimize several subsystems and components of the
drivetrain and rotor for efficiency, cost, and robustness in extreme
environmental conditions through analysis, bench-top testing, and field
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.