* 1951238
* Addiction, Mutual Aid Networks, and the Navigation of Care Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Sheryl McCurdy, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/29/2024
* USD 316,205.00

The opioid epidemic exposes how opioid misuse undermines family and community
coherence. Family members tasked with supporting and caring for individuals
affected by opioid addiction are often unable to provide the necessary support,
contributing to precarity for affected individuals. How do individuals with a
history of opioid addiction navigate and create webs of social support when
families are unable to step in? This study focuses on the roles of different
forms of social networks and formal programs in supporting people with a history
of opioid addiction. Specifically, the research investigates how people affected
by opioids create new ways of caring and relating to one another in opioid-
affected communities that have access to mutual aid groups to provide support
that is otherwise lacking. The project will reveal priorities of opioid-affected
individuals in seeking care and support, thus informing attempts to aid in their
recovery. Specifically, leveraging lessons learned via observing how users care
for each other will provide insights into ways to model interventions for
supportive care networks for recovery in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is informed by and advances kinship theory
and medical anthropology by considering two research questions: (1) How do the
dynamics of shifting family support influence the decisions and behavior of
individuals affected by opioid addiction? (2) What differences are seen in
mutual aid associations compared with other networks in care practices,
relationships, and experiences? To address these questions the study employs
systematic observations and interviews with care practices in network
interactions, analyzes the affective flows and discourses within and between
care subnetworks, and uses personal-network questionnaires that characterize
relationships among individuals affected by opioid addiction as part of their
broader social networks. Results from the project will provide insights into the
operation of mutual aid organizations through offering new strategies of harm
reduction and their deployment that can have an influence on opioid policy and
caregiving. The multi-level characterization of networks of kin and non-kin will
refine anthropological understandings of the contexts that give rise to support
versus divestment in kin, and how networks are broken and rebuilt as allegiances
shift due to opioid addiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.