* 1951748
* Build and Broaden: Positioning Geography at Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Minority-Serving Institutions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Mark Barnes, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2022
* USD 76,323.00

This grant supports the 2020 Race, Ethnicity, and Place Conference (REP) and its
pre-conference workshop. REPâ€™s biennial meetings explicitly bring together
diverse groups of scholars to facilitate research in geography and related STEM
disciplines that involve underrepresented communities. The 2020 REP Conference
is unique because it links geographical, racial, and ethnic dimensions of social
science research to the mentoring, networking, and program development that
advance geography instruction at Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and other Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs). REP 2020 advances
geography learning in these institutions through the recruitment of new scholars
comprised of graduate students and young faculty members who are current or
prospective instructors at HBCUs and MSIs. These young scholars participate in a
broad range of activities in geospatial science research that promotes strategic
research networks enhancing future research endeavors. REP promotes more
effective research on racial and ethnic dimensions of social science research in
geography and related fields, and encourages program development in geography at
HBCUs and MSIs increasing geography education that responds to increasing
national needs for well trained geographers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing
involvement of diverse and underrepresented groups of individuals able to engage
in all types of work and activity remains a major challenge in higher education.
To directly address this challenge in geography, the 2020 REP Conference
integrates new participants through active recruitment and engagement by
designing strategic panels and keynotes to attract a broader audience. Special
emphasis will be given to examining complex issues of race and ethnicity through
cross-disciplinary collaborations to complement the scholarly interests of REP
attendees. The REP conference and pre-conference workshop will specifically
develop new collaborative relationships and sustainable networks among
participants across HBCUs and MSIs, with graduate programs in non-HBCUs and non-
MSIs, and with professional organizations that include prospective employers and
government users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.