* 1951005
* Methods and Applications for Massive One-mode and Bipartite Social Networks
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Lingxin Hao, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 549,592.00

This research project will advance methods of estimation and inference for
large-scale network models. The modeling of network data has important
applications in many areas, including sociology, economics, marketing, and
public health. The project will extend methods from the one-mode network setting
(such as social media networks) to the bipartite network setting (such as
worker-employer networks). Using data from the U.S. Census Bureau and the newly
developed methods, the project will examine the impact of immigration on the
U.S. job market over time. Theoretical and empirical analyses will be
complemented by the development and dissemination of open source software that
implements the new methods and enables analyses of large-scale social and
economic networks. The project's interdisciplinary team of researchers will
train and mentor graduate students in the social sciences and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop new modeling
capabilities and statistical inference for latent space network models,
specifically generalized random dot product graphs. An overarching goal of the
project will be to disentangle the effect of observable and unobservable node
characteristics on the process of link formation in a manner that is both
statistically principled and computationally feasible. Project results will
include methods for both one-mode networks and bipartite networks, as well as
for both static and dynamic networks. Asymptotic spectral theory and
computationally efficient procedures for understanding bipartite networks will
be developed. Spectral estimates for bipartite networks will be used to correct
for network endogeneity in regression models. Combining spectral approaches with
classical regression procedures from network econometrics will facilitate the
development of effective alternatives to existing methods in the analysis of how
networks impact socioeconomic outcomes. Using these new methods, the project
will examine the impact of immigration on the U.S. job market with data from the
Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.