* 1951626
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the opiod and HIV epidemics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Necibe Tuncer, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,997.00

In the last 15 years, US deaths due to the opioid epidemic have quadrupled. The
increase in opioid use, and in particular, in injection drug use, has both
directly and indirectly contributed to the spread of infectious diseases such as
HIV. Drug use also lowers inhibitions, which in turn facilitates more HIV
transmission. This has resulted in a leveling off of the decrease of HIV cases
in the US. The goal of this project is to develop novel, data-driven, multi-
scale models of the intertwined opioid and HIV epidemics. Such models will lead
to a better understanding of the interplay of the epidemics and can be used to
guide public health policy, for instance to reverse the recent trends in HIV
cases. The models will use data on HIV and opioid use in the US as well as
viremia data for individuals who both have HIV and use drugs. Considering the
dynamic interplay of the two epidemics will provide insights that are missing
when one focuses on either alone, including how processes within individuals
bear on dynamics at the population scale. Our preliminary results have already
identified promising methods of control that targeting the drug abuse epidemic
could reduce HIV risk among drug users. The PIs will test the robustness of
these control strategies in multiple modeling scenarios. This research will help
identify improved strategies to control these two intertwined
epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the two epidemics, a multi-scale
immuno-epidemiological model of the opioid and HIV epidemics will be developed,
analyzed and used for simulations. This model explicitly includes the dynamics
of HIV within hosts and the effect of such dynamics on transmission of HIV
between hosts, as well as the effect of opioid use on each level of infectious
disease dynamics. The model will be linked to multi-scale data, and
identifiability analyses will be performed. A novel network version of the
multi-scale model will be developed that allows modeling of individuals with
varying number of contacts. The impact of the combined effects of contact
network structure and within-host dynamics on the two linked epidemics will be
investigated both analytically and numerically, using novel analytical
techniques that will be developed. Finally, optimal control approaches will be
applied to the multi-scale immuno-epidemiological network model in order to
characterize effect of control strategies. To study the robustness of the two
control methods identified in the preliminary results (targeting drug abuse and
reducing HIV risk among drug users), a comparison of these methods with results
of the optimal control models will be made. Rigorous incorporation of multi-
scale data and simulations will uncover any dependence of the best control
strategy on which modeling framework is employed. All these results will be
synthesized in a book on immuno-epidemiological modeling that incorporates
elements of this research, in the context of a broad perspective on this rapidly
developing field. The book will be useful to graduate students, academics, and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.