* 1951896
* SCC-PG: Improving Service Delivery for the Homeless with Analytics and Process Modeling - Community Engagement and Capacity Building
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Sandeep Purao, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 140,421.00

This project lays the groundwork for developing predictive models and improving
work processes in social agencies that serve underserved populations. The
specific targets of the work are long term homelessness and recidivism (tendency
to relapse), with a primary focus on the city of Boston, Massachusetts in
collaboration with a community partner (Pine Street Inn). The planned
integrative research includes: predictive modeling to assess needs of the
homeless guests to improve the match against the right services, and process
modeling to improve triage work at the homeless shelter. The project will
identify data necessary for the modeling efforts and resolve data-related
problems such as data quality and completeness; and assess current triage
practice to develop and experiment with new versions of work processes at a
homeless shelter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance current
knowledge about work practices and service matching at homeless shelters, and
improve understanding of data availability and quality to support these
outcomes. The work will develop ways to better serve the homeless population as
well as lay the foundations to roll out the models and results to other
communities in Massachusetts as well as other states and other underserved
populations, such as at-risk families, populations suffering from disabilities,
and those experiencing substance abuse or addiction. Significant societal
benefits can accrue through improved and efficient support for the homeless,
either directly through services or indirectly through better use of federal and
local taxes. Providing services that match the needs of the homeless, and
improving the work practices at the shelter can reduce both the length of stay
and recidivism, contributing to the overall quality of life within
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.