* 1951942
* CBET-EPSRC: Grown Engineered Materials (GEMs): synthetic consortia for biomanufacturing tunable composites
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Justin Chartron, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 350,000.00

This project was awarded through the "Special Guidelines for Submitting
Collaborative Proposals under the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems, the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation, and the Division of Electrical, Communications, and
Cyber Systems - the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (ENG-
EPSRC) Lead Agency Activity" opportunity. This project is performed in
collaboration with Imperial College, London, an institution in the
UK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical description: Nature is a rich source of
strong, sustainable, and biodegradable materials. These are difficult to
recreate and re-engineer at the molecular scale. Recent achievements in
synthetic biology open the door to a new manufacturing paradigm, Grown
Engineered Materials (GEMs). GEMs will be produced in the same way that
materials are made in nature: by different types of living cells working
together, with each cell type producing a unique polymer. This material can be
used with little additional processing. GEMs offer a route to make new products,
offer sustainable alternatives to existing industries (filtration, textiles,
advanced composites) or yield entirely new sectors (sensing and responsive
materials).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project will use
synthetic biology approaches to develop the first generation of GEMs. These will
be produced by co-cultivating a set of engineered microbes. These microbes will
produce Bacterial nanoCellulose (BC) fibers and Elastin-Like Polypeptides (ELPs)
fused to carbohydrate-binding domains. These are both repetitive biopolymers,
and each has industrially-attractive properties on its own. Bacterial-made
nanocellulose is exceptionally pure, biocompatible, and possesses a high
mechanical load capability. Yeast-made ELPs are environment-responsive and can
be designed to collapse or extend due to changes in levels of salt, pH, or
temperature. The project consists of four objectives to be run in parallel by
the UK and US teams. These are designed to tackle the two key hurdles to
realizing GEMs: rational protein polymer design and optimizing high-level
secretion of proteins. The team at Imperial College, London will construct and
characterize an ELP library, as well as establish initial co-culturing of ELP
secreting yeast and BC producing bacteria. The team at University of California,
Riverside will apply systems biology (subcellular RNA-seq, Ribo-seq, and
computational modeling) and directed evolution to generate hypersecreting yeast
strains, as well as assess and optimize their performance under co-culturing
conditions. A fifth objective will showcase how novel properties can be
programmed into GEMs by engineering at the DNA level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.