* 1951204
* SBIR Phase II:  Non-Thermal Plasma Source for Functional Metal-Oxide Nanoparticle Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Peter Firth, Swift Coat
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2023
* USD 928,101.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to advance the development of a self-
cleaning window glass coating with the same appearance as bare glass. The
improved performance and decreased cost will enable its use in applications
beyond residential and commercial windows, such as outdoor displays and solar
modules, dramatically increasing the potential overall market opportunity. More
broadly, the project will validate and scale a new coating technology that may
potentially improve many properties of surfaces used in wide-ranging
applications from computer chips to clothing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop a high-
performance photocatalytic self-cleaning coating on glass. Present
photocatalytic coatings typically utilize dense titanium dioxide, that increases
the reflectance of the glass because of its high refractive index. Initial work
has demonstrated coatings of controllable refractive index deposited with a new
coating technology, Aerosol Impact-Driven Assembly (AIDA). This project will
scale a multilayered, multicomponent coating that addresses the photocatalytic
activity/transmittance trade-off. The coating will have industry-leading
photocatalytic activity and transmittance higher than the current state-of-the-
art at lower costs. More broadly, the project will validate and scale a new
coating technology that may potentially improve the optical, thermal,
electronic, chemical, and adhesive properties of surfaces for many applications.
Research objectives include optimization of the durability and outdoor
performance of this coating by refining the deposition hardware and the coating
structure, demonstration of the scalability of the AIDA process by depositing
coatings on larger substrates, and quantification of the performance metrics
required for infusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.