* 1951165
* Collaborative Research: Emergent Sequences in Inhibition-Dominated Recurrent Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Carina Curto, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 149,926.00

Sequences of neural activity arise in many brain areas, including cortex,
hippocampus, and central pattern generator circuits that underlie rhythmic
behaviors like locomotion. Moreover, sequences that occur in hippocampus while
the animal is at rest or asleep are believed to be critical for memory
processing and consolidation. These sequences are examples of internally
generated activity: that is, neural activity that is shaped primarily by the
structure of recurrent connections between neurons. The goal of this research is
to advance the mathematical theory of sequence generation. A fundamental
question is what types of network architectures underlie emergent sequences.
This work will investigate the mechanisms for sequence generation in recurrently
connected networks with complex patterns of connectivity and inhibition-
dominated dynamics. The theory will then be used to understand and model neural
sequences, with a focus on hippocampal sequences. Although this work is
motivated by neuroscience, the phenomenon of sequential activity emerging from
competition between units is sufficiently common that the mathematical results
derived here are likely to be useful in a variety of broader contexts in the
biological and social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
research is to understand, and be able to predict, the set of neural activity
sequences in a recurrent network from the underlying structure of connectivity.
In addition to providing new insights about sequence generation in the brain,
this study will elucidate structure-function relationships in recurrent networks
and provide tools for analyzing networks to identify dynamically relevant
motifs. This research will be carried out in the context of a special family of
inhibition-dominated threshold-linear networks, which are a commonly used firing
rate model of recurrent network dynamics. These networks naturally give rise to
an abundance of sequences, and the dynamics are tightly connected to the
underlying connectivity graph. Moreover, they are mathematically tractable and
thus amenable to a mathematical theory of sequence generation. Project 1 focuses
on network architectures built from directional graphs, a new type of graph
exhibiting directional dynamics without necessarily having a feedforward
architecture, thus providing an important generalization of synfire chains.
Project 2 addresses the anatomy of a sequence and its decomposition into “core”
and “peripheral” components, with the core being a network motif that supports a
sequential attractor, and the periphery consisting of additional neurons that
are recruited by the attractor. Finally, Project 3 uses the theory developed in
earlier projects to analyze and model various phenomena observed in hippocampal
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.