* 1951231
* SBIR Phase II:  Microbial Fermentation Bioprocess to Produce and Extract Platform Chemicals from the Dairy Industry Acid Whey Waste Stream.
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Juan Guzman, Capro-X
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2022
* USD 782,052.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to commercialize a novel fermentation technology
offering a sustainable solution for dairy industry waste issues. The system is
initially focused on upcycling acid whey waste from Greek yogurt production into
treated water and natural food-grade bio-oils that are sustainable alternatives
for chemicals sourced from palm oil. These systems will be installed on-site at
yogurt plants and are expected to lower customer expenses by at least 20%, while
also reducing greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption by 90%. This pilot
project will inform treatment of other problematic wastes, such as process line
cleaning water and manure, as well as milk and cheese processing byproducts. The
bio-oils produced this way could serve as animal feed and as drop-in
alternatives for biofuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project
proposes to optimize the system design of a novel fermentation technology.
Evaluations are focused on upcycling acid whey waste from Greek yogurt
production into treated water and bio-oil. Project objectives include: 1) bench-
scale evaluations on bioreactor architecture and operating parameters, such as
internal packing materials, gas dosing flowrates, and pH control; 2) bench-scale
mass transfer optimizations performed on the current bio-oil extraction
architecture, as well as on a novel membrane-less alternative. Results from
bench-scale studies will inform process design and construction of a
2,000-gallon demonstration system installed at a Greek yogurt plant, where
parallel bioprocesses will systematically evaluate operational parameters
(temperature, pH, flow) at a larger scale to explore the trade space of acid
whey treatment, production of bio-oil, and operating cost and optimize the
operating parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.