* 1951483
* ICE-TI:  Forging Pathways to Tribal College Graduate Education in Natural Resources
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Jerry McMurtry, Salish Kootenai College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will increase the economic strength of the
institution’s region by producing a significant number of graduate degree
holders in an in-demand STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salish Kootenai College
(SKC) collaborates with the University of Idaho to develop and achieve
accreditation for a Masters degree in natural resources. This effort will
increase the number of qualified professionals in that discipline, diversify the
STEM professional workforce, and expand the number of TCUs that provide post-
baccalaureate studies for their students. The timeline for completion and
accreditation of SKC’s independent degree is five years, during which time SKC
students will participate in on-site and on-line courses offered by UI’s
program. Moreover, current and anticipated SKC faculty will benefit from the
professional development and mentoring provided by UI
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.