* 1951411
* SCC-PG: Utilizing Sharing Economy to Foster Social Capital and Economic Growth in Baton Rouge
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Michelle Livermore, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 148,687.00

The recent decade has witnessed a major shift in the way people deal services
and goods. This shift has been enabled by the emergence of a new form of Peer-
to-Peer (P2P) business exchange, known as Sharing Economy (SE). This on-demand,
convenient, and sustainable form of resource consumption has attracted consumers
and investors around the globe, providing unprecedented opportunities for
individuals in low-income and marginalized communities to find employment,
generate extra income, increase reciprocity, and access resources that are
unattainable otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize SE as a
vehicle for fostering economic growth, promoting ecological sustainability, and
building social capital among disadvantaged communities in the city of Baton
Rouge, the political capital of the State of Louisiana. According to the U.S.
Census Bureau, the economic gap between rich and poor in Baton Rouge is the
fourth-highest in the country, with close to 25% of Baton Rouge population
living below the poverty line. To achieve our goals, we propose an integrative
research and community engagement plan that will use methods of quantitative and
qualitative research to, a) identify success factors of SE in our target
communities, b) explore the landscape of underutilized services and assets, c)
identify fundamental shortcomings and socio-technical barriers to adaptation,
and d) investigate mitigation strategies for these problems. Based on this
foundational information, the project will deliver novel systematic solutions to
fundamental requirements engineering and software design problems in the context
of SE. These solutions will enable software engineers to design SE systems that
are optimized to help individuals in resource-constrained communities to
overcome social barriers and move up the economic ladder.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will further facilitate interdisciplinary
research by providing researchers, across a broad range of disciplines (e.g.,
social, technical, economic, and legal), with automated frameworks for analyzing
the complex and increasingly coupled relations between the human, market, and
technology components of SE. The project will also foster community engagement
by establishing partnerships between stakeholders from local communities, local
organizations of social work, researchers from local minority-serving
institutions (MSI), K-12, and undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.