* 1951707
* Long, Coiled, Actuated: Complex Flagella Moving Through Heterogeneous Fluid Environments
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Lisa Fauci, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2024
* USD 359,999.00

The study of how natural and robotic microorganisms propel themselves in a fluid
through the beating of flagella has enjoyed much success through advances in
imaging technologies, computational methods, microfluidic devices, and materials
science. However, in biological systems, rarely does an undulating flagellum
beat freely, but may beat in close proximity to (or through) passive elastic
structures such as mucosal strands embedded in the fluid environment or walls of
tubular ducts. This project will investigate the motility of microorganisms
through fluids with suspended polymeric networks where the gaps between polymer
filaments are comparable to the size of the organism. The study is relevant to
mammalian sperm-egg penetration and spirochete motility through mucosal tissues.
The project will also investigate the journey of insect sperm through narrow
sperm storage organs in the female reproductive tract. These systems require the
development of novel mathematical models and computational methods that move
beyond simple representations of sperm flagella, that allow remodeling of
discrete viscoelastic networks, and that capture the geometry of confining
structures. The project includes training of a postdoctoral researcher, graduate
students, and undergraduates through involvement in the research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The mechanics of a compliant, viscoelastic network embedded in a
viscous fluid and the motility of long, actuated fibers moving in confined
environments present rich systems in elastohydrodyamics. The project will
leverage the method of regularized Stokeslets and recent extensions of it. This
methodology will be further advanced through deriving kernels for regularized
flow inside a sphere. By choosing a discrete network rather than a continuum
description of a non-Newtonian fluid, a heterogeneous environment is easily
represented. For instance, the power required for an organism to first penetrate
the viscoelastic network (as in mammalian fertilization) and how its form
evolves as it moves through these regions can be studied. In particular, the
energetics of the Lyme disease spirochete as it migrates through such a
viscoelastic network will be investigated. In addition, the dynamics of insect
sperm motility in the female reproductive tract will be modeled. Their extreme
length and their ability to move into confined spaces present mathematical and
computational challenges. The project will use recent advances in modeling the
shape deformations and buckling of long, flexible fibers in background flows,
coupled with modeling of actuated flagella, to investigate this
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.