* 1951076
* SBIR Phase II:  Multiplex Expansion of the Chiral Carbon Catalog Platform towards Stereo-enriched Non-propionate Chemical Classes and Industrial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Mohammad Noshi, Akanocure Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2023
* USD 949,999.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase II project is to develop tools
and platforms to produce valuable chemical building blocks for synthetically
challenging compounds, known as polyketides, on large scales. These compounds
have diverse and powerful biological activities across multiple indications
within the pharmaceutical, agrochemical, and veterinary industries. The high
impact of this class is hampered by the inefficiencies of current chemical
processes to fully tackle their complex structures. To fully unlock the
potential of this class of compounds, improved chemistries with greater
efficiencies are required to successfully identify high impact candidates for
further development. This project will enable the development of a novel class
of compounds as antimicrobials and anticancer agents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Phase II SBIR project will expanding a synthetic toolbox to produce non-
classical polypropionate polyketide building blocks, which currently cannot be
synthesized at scale. The proposed platform is a synthetic toolbox that allows
stereoselective large-scale economic synthesis of various complex polypropionate
building blocks from simple starting materials, allowing large-scale production
without tedious/expensive purifications and using industrial-friendly
crystallization instead. The platform allows easy monitoring of reaction
progress, enables smooth process production, and avoids using the cost
prohibitive chiral auxiliaries. This project will expand on previous work
demonstrating one set of enantiopure polypropionate polyketide natural products
(PPNP) precursors for broad applications; these precursors were used to design
and synthesize potential lead compounds for anti-microbial crop protection
applications. In the proposed work, we will expand our chemistry platform to a
more diverse collection of precursors enabling enhanced lead design capabilities
and optimization. If computational analysis and rational design call for
synthesis of new compounds, these targets will be prepared with our building
blocks, which include all possible arrays and are not restricted to naturally
occurring compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.