* 1951850
* SCC-PG:JST: Green Mobility for Aging Society
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Miguel Perez, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 74,975.00

Transportation is crucial to seniors being able to access needed services and
maintain overall independence. Rural seniors, particularly, may not always have
ready access to good transportation options, and they are often required to
travel longer or further to access critical services such as hospitals, medical
and dental care, and supermarkets. Some seniors may also be exposed to increased
crash risk which can lead to shifts in driving patterns and habits that can
limit overall mobility. These problems are not exclusive to seniors in the
United States. For that reason, the research team has partnered with colleagues
at Nagoya University in Japan, with the goal of examining the needs of seniors,
particularly those living in rural areas in both Japan and the United States,
which could benefit from current as well as near future vehicle automation
features. The goal for these automated vehicle features would be to mitigate the
effects of the aforementioned issues by seamlessly aiding rural seniors in their
driving tasks, especially in negotiating the traffic scenarios and conditions
that may have become increasingly troublesome for them. The Japan and United
States project teams will explore similar aspects of this problem, recognizing
and adapting to cultural and societal differences between the two
countries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will advance knowledge in two
main areas. First, how could vehicle automation that is environmentally
friendly, assistive, and adaptive be helpful to senior drivers, particularly
those living in rural areas? System requirements with empirical bases can then
emerge from this knowledge to provide a foundation for associated social work
and community engagement. Second, what technological advancements will be
necessary to develop these driver-assistive systems? The knowledge emerging from
such an understanding could be used to emphasize and/or incentivize development
in the areas found to be most crucial for these individuals, who may be
vulnerable in several ways (i.e., due to age-related disability, lack of sound
transportation infrastructure, and socio-economic status). In undertaking these
research goals, the team will use a community-based participatory research
approach and leverage its strong partnerships with vehicle manufacturers,
automated system providers, senior citizen advocates, deployment communities
(e.g., senior-living centers), and consumers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
systems are expected to have significant impacts on the mobility of senior
drivers by allowing the retention of mobility and independence for longer than
is possible with current vehicles. A general understanding of the usefulness and
technological state of these systems will afford an empirical basis to solicit
support from industry partners for further human-centered development and
deployment of the identified technologies in support of this transportation-
impoverished subset of our population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.