* 1951826
* NSF-BSF: Live Cellular Immune Mechanisms In Corals Under Heat Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Nikki Traylor-Knowles, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 437,894.00

Coral reefs are one of the most important marine habitats in the world. They are
important for human health because they protect shorelines, and provide food and
economic security for many coastal and island communities. Despite this great
importance, coral reefs are under threat due to warming ocean waters. The coral
animal consists of many cells including immune cells and gastrodermal cells.
Gastrodermal cells have algae that live within them, and this symbiotic
relationship is important to maintain coral health. When water temperature
increases, coral bleaching occurs. The coral and algae stop living together.
During bleaching the coral’s immune system is compromised making it more likely
for it to get sick and die. Thus, this research aims to understand how the
immune system of corals responds to heat. This research is important for the
bioeconomy: if it is known how corals defend against disease, then this
information could be used to make diagnostic tools to identify sick corals. We
could also create therapeutics to help save corals. These tools would protect
coral reefs, which would protect shorelines, and provide food and economic
security for coastal communities in the USA. The research uses funding to train
graduate and undergraduate students, including under-represented students. As
such this funding is training the next generation of leaders in science. The
research uses funding to educate families about coral through a partnership with
the Miami, Florida Frost Science Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innate immunity
and mutualistic symbiosis are two fundamentally important processes that are
connected but also opposing mechanisms for survival. An ecologically important
example of this exists in stony corals. While also maintaining a beneficial
relationship with an endosymbiotic alga, Symbiodiniaceae, stony coral innate
immune system must also identify potential pathogens. The scientific community
lacks information on the plasticity and function of the coral cells responsible
for the innate immune reaction, and/or the cells responsible for symbiosis. The
overall goal of this grant is to apply a unique approach, fluorescent activated
cell sorting (FACS) to determine the function of immune cells and
Symbiodiniaceae-interacting cell populations in heat stressed and control
conditions. The overall hypothesis of this proposal is that corals possess
specialized populations of immune cells unique from the cells which engulf the
Symbiodiniaceae. Using FACS and RNA sequencing, this international team will
determine the morphology and gene expression of isolated coral cell populations
under control and heat stress conditions. Determine what the function of immune
cells during control and heat stress conditions and determine the source of the
immune signal during heat stress induced bleaching. By understanding these
cellular interactions, a better understand the cellular mechanisms of the coral
immune system, especially during heat stress will be gained. The research uses
funding to train graduate and undergraduate students, including under-
represented students. As such this funding is training the next generation of
leaders in science. The research uses funding to educate families about coral
through a partnership with the Miami, Florida Frost Science
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.