* 1951214
* SBIR Phase II:  Atom-based magnetic field monitor for turbo-generator fault protection
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* David Anderson, Rydberg Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2023
* USD 799,362.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to improve the reliability of electric power generation. Steady,
uninterrupted service of power plants is often taken for granted in the economy,
national security, and private use. The proposed product improves electric-power
reliability by detecting a source of potential catastrophic failure of generator
overload or startup, where a single event can cause damage of $10 million in
repair costs and revenue losses from operational downtime. The innovation will
help mitigate specific risks in the electric-power
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop a
portable magnetic-field monitoring device measuring Tesla-strength magnetic
fields at a 100 ppm-level or better, with measurement times of 1 ms or less, and
over a temperature range from 10 °C to 100 °C through spectroscopic techniques.
The proposed atomic probe will naturally be resilient against electromagnetic
interference. The project addresses a need for sensors capable of monitoring the
amplitude and direction of magnetic fields in large generators to avoid
generator over-fluxing, which can lead to catastrophic failure and downtimes.
The project will develop the probe head and control unit, and will further
conduct verification and validation tests of the
prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.