* 1951072
* Examining Shifting Geographies of Historically Underrepresented Groups
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Bo Zhao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 395,839.00

This project examines the shifting geographies of an historically marginalized
population. Such a population, though historically invisible, has had a profound
impact on shaping local landscapes. The investigators will develop a set of
novel methods to create a large-scale, publicly accessible and interactive
database of locations pertinent to a diverse, underrepresented community over
time. Using a variety of quantitative, qualitative, and technical methods, the
investigators then plan to analyze the database to evaluate hypotheses about
where, how, and why historically invisible communities grow and change. The
project’s results will improve the understanding of these processes while also
demonstrating the utility of its innovative methods, while the creation of a new
publicly accessible Historical Geographic Information System (HGIS) database is
a future resource for the community. In addition, the project will train and
mentor graduate and undergraduate students in STEM methods and facilitate
bridge-building between different theoretical and methodological traditions in
the social sciences. Finally, the project will broaden opportunities for
participation by the general public in social science research and serve as a
model for how HGIS can be used to improve understanding of diverse communities’
invisible histories and shifting geographies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is relevant because little is known or understood about where, how, and why
historically underrepresented communities grow and change, or about how to study
these processes across broader scales in a scientific way. Often, most of what
is known about such populations is based on a small number of localized
historical case studies, which limit their potential for generalizability and
the generation of new knowledge. This project is a comparative study over time
as it collects data about the locations and key characteristics of an
historically underrepresented group in a large national sample. Methods include
the integration of an extensive variety of archival sources and an interactive
online geospatial platform. Results will be analyzed systematically, using a
variety of quantitative, qualitative, and technical methods, to test key
hypotheses from urban and cultural geography, such as gentrification. The
results will improve understanding not only of where and how historically
underrepresented communities grow and change but will also lead to the
development of innovative methods about how such changes might be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.