* 1951673
* Collaborative Research: Microbial hydrogen oxidation at high pressure: Role of hydrogenases and interspecies hydrogen transfer
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Dionysios Foustoukos, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 04/30/2024
* USD 228,604.00

A large fraction of Earth’s microbial biosphere lives in the deep ocean and
below the oceanic crust, under conditions of high hydrostatic pressures.
However, very little is known about the contribution of these high-pressure
adapted microbial communities to the Earth’s microbiome, their role in
biogeochemical cycles, and their relevance for the evolution of early life on
Earth. This project will investigate the adaptation mechanisms of high-pressure
and high-temperature bacteria that use hydrogen as an energy source to different
pressures and hydrogen concentration regimes. An innovative instrument for
bacterial cultures at high pressure and temperature will be used to simulate the
deep-sea physical (temperature, pressure) and chemical (hydrogen concentration)
conditions. This experimental approach provides a unique opportunity to study
microbial activity and functions by adjusting pressure conditions dynamically.
Gene expression under different pressures and temperatures will also be
monitored. Finally, since hydrogen oxidation is considered an ancient metabolic
pathway, understanding hydrogen catabolism in these organisms may help to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of early metabolism. The researchers will
develop lessons and activities to translate the science for middle and high
school aged learners. Lectures and lab demonstrations/tours will be delivered at
George Mason University and Rutgers University to undergraduate/graduate
students as part of graduate-level seminar series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Culture-
based studies of the physiological and metabolic adaptations of high-pressure
adapted bacteria are critical to advance understanding of microbial activity and
bioenergetic adaptation strategies in deep-sea ecosystems. The main objective of
this study is to explore the physiology and gene expression in high-pressure and
high-temperature adapted bacteria (thermopiezophiles) that have been isolated
from deep-sea hydrothermal vents. One of these bacteria, Nautilia strain PV-1,
thrives at elevated pressure and at a temperature of 55°C, and can live off
hydrogen gas and carbon dioxide. Experiments aimed at measuring gene and protein
expression will be integrated with measurements of stable hydrogen isotope
compositions to understand the combined effects of pressure and hydrogen
concentration of the growth of thermopiezophiles. More specifically, this
project will investigate the expression of the different hydrogenases of strain
PV-1 in response to pressures up to 400 atmospheres, and to limiting and non-
limiting concentration of hydrogen. Further, this project will investigate how
elevated pressures affect the membrane structure of strain PV-1, which is
important to maintain cellular integrity and to facilitate membrane trafficking.
Finally, this project will investigate the transfer of hydrogen gas from a
hydrogen-producing bacterium, Marinitoga piezophila, and the hydrogen consuming
Nautilia strain PV-1.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.