* 1951500
* NSFGEO-NERC: Integrating Individual Personality Differences in the Evolutionary Ecology of a Seabird in the Rapidly Changing Polar Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Stephanie Jenouvrier, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2023
* USD 630,998.00

Part I: Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;This award represents a
collaborative geoscience research effort between US NSF and UK Natural
Environment Research Council (NERC) researchers with efforts in each nation
funded by their respective countries (Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-132). The
research will focus on understanding the links between behavior, ecology, and
evolution in a Southern Ocean wandering albatross population in response to
global changes in climate and in exploitation of natural resources. The most
immediate response of animals to global change typically is behavioral, and this
work will provide a more comprehensive understanding of how differences
individual bird behavior affect evolution and adaptation for the population
under changing environments. Characterization of albatross personality, life-
history traits, and population dynamics collected over long time scales will be
used to develop robust forecasting of species persistence in the face of future
global changes. The results of this project will feed into conservation and
management decisions for endangered Southern Ocean species. The work will also
be used to provide specific research training at all levels, including a
postdoctoral scholar, graduate students and K-12 students. It will also support
education for the public about impacts from human-induced activities on our
polar ecosystems using animations, public lectures, printed and web media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical description &lt;br/&gt;Past research
has shown that individual animal personalities range over a continuum of
behavior, such that some individuals are consistently more aggressive, more
explorative, and bolder than others. How the phenotypic distributions of
personality and foraging behavior types within a population is created and
maintained by ecological (demographic and phenotypic plasticity) and
evolutionary (heritability) processes remain an open question. Differences in
personality traits determine how individuals acquire resources and how they
allocate these to reproduction and survival. Although some studies have found
different foraging behaviors or breeding performances between personality types,
none have established the link between personality differences in foraging
behaviors and life histories (both reproduction and survival, and their
covariations) in the context of global change. Furthermore, plasticity in
foraging behaviors is not considered in the pace-of-life syndrome, which has
potentially hampered our ability to find covariation between personality and
life history trade-off. This project will fill these knowledge gaps and develop
an eco-evolutionary model of the complex interactions among individual
personality and foraging plasticity, heritability of personality and foraging
behaviors, life history strategies, population dynamics in a changing
environment (fisheries and climate) using a long-term database consisting of
~1,800 tagged wandering albatross seabirds (Diomedea exulans) with defined
individual personalities and life history traits breeding in the Southern Ocean.
Climate projections from IPCC atmospheric-oceanic global circulation models will
be used to provide projections of population structure under future global
change conditions. Specifically, the team will (1) characterize the differences
in life history strategies along the shy-bold continuum of personalities and
across environmental conditions; (2) develop the link between phenotypic
plasticity in foraging effort and personality; (3) characterize the heritability
of personality and foraging behaviors; (4) develop a stochastic eco-evolutionary
model to predict population growth rates in a changing
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.