* 1951257
* RUI: Investigating tardigrade development to unravel the evolution of animal body plans
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Frank Smith, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 332,404.00

The evolution of animal body plans has traditionally been difficult to study
because their origins lie in an ancient period for which fossils are extremely
rare. Recent advances in developmental biology and genomics techniques now
provide alternative methods to reconstruct the evolutionary steps that gave rise
to animal body plans. Studies of water bear (Tardigrade) development may be
especially informative for investigating two important themes of body plan
evolutionâ€”segmentation and miniaturization. Segmentation is a common
characteristic of animals. This project will investigate tardigrade development
in order to reconstruct the evolutionary steps that underlie the origins of the
segmentation mechanisms that are present in modern animals. Miniaturization has
evolved independently in several animal lineages, including in the tardigrade
lineage, but very little is known about the developmental underpinnings of
miniaturization. This project aims to identify the developmental origins of the
compact tardigrade body plan, and to determine the consequences of
miniaturization on the developmental mechanisms that control development of the
tardigrade gut. Results of this work may reveal general developmental principles
that underlie miniaturization. This project will provide training to eleven
undergraduate students. A key aim is to provide training to students from
underrepresented groups in biology. Research on tardigrades also provides an
excellent opportunity to foster public science outreach. This project uses
research activities to enhance public science literacy in Jacksonville, FL.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent study of Hox genes revealed that the tardigrade
body plan evolved by the loss of mid-trunk segments. This result raises several
questions. (1) What is the developmental basis for the loss of mid-trunk
segments? In many bilaterians, before growth of a mid-trunk region, antagonistic
interactions between the canonical Wnt signaling pathway and inhibitors of this
pathway specify anterior and posterior regions of the body axis. This work will
test whether this mechanism specifies the entire body axis of a tardigrade, as
predicted if tardigrades simply lost the ability to grow a mid-trunk region. (2)
Do the remaining segments in tardigrades develop by the same segmentation
mechanisms that have been identified in arthropods? To address this question,
experiments will test whether the segment polarity gene network that specifies
segment boundaries in arthropods also specifies segment boundaries in
tardigrades. Results of this study will illuminate where in panarthropod
phylogeny this network evolved a role in specifying segment boundaries. (3) What
was the impact of the loss of mid-trunk segments on the gut, an unsegmented part
of the body axis? To address this question, this work will determine the extent
to which mechanisms that pattern the gut during development in other bilaterians
have diverged in tardigrades. Experiments will utilize RNA interference to
disrupt gene function and situ hybridization to characterize gene expression
patterns during development of the tardigrade Hypsibius exemplaris. This
research will provide insight into developmental underpinnings of the evolution
of segmentation and secondary simplification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.