* 1951532
* Life on the Rocks:  Chronic Subaerial Microbial Biofilms on Stone Monuments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Isaac Klapper, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Microbes, and maybe more correctly, microbial communities, are remarkable for
their metabolic diversity, far exceeding that of multicellular organisms. Where
there is a source of free energy and essential elements for life, there is
likely a microbial community to be found, regardless of any environmental
stresses that might be present. Such environmental communities are essential to
all geochemical cycles and hence to all life on earth. They are also directly
essential to function of multicellular life due to their ability to effectively
recycle almost all natural polymers and other products from multicellular
organisms. This project will focus on the development of methods for modeling
microbial communities within the context of air-exposed stone environments. The
goal is to characterize the form and function of such communities and their
metabolic activity based on knowledge of their stark physical and chemical
environments, and of their metabolic capability through genomic techniques. We
will gather data from microbial communities growing on marble surfaces at
Arlington National Cemetery and Cimitero Monumentale (Milan, Italy), and
incorporate the resulting data into physics-based mathematical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subaerial stone surfaces are generally hostile
platforms for life with the consequence that any microbial community metabolism
is likely relatively simple (as compared, for example, to a gut microbial
metabolism), and is likely fairly isolated, as it is difficult for other
organisms to survive. On the other hand, this very tenuousness likely means that
the community is tightly tuned to its physical environment, so that
understanding their interactions with each other and with their environment is
necessary for understanding community function. Within the community, consortial
associations are probably important for survival. All of these things make them
likely candidates for modeling study. The project team will combine 24 hour
study of a field site (the Arlington National Cemetery amphitheater) with a
physical biofilm model to qualitatively characterize such a system. Detailed
modeling and characterization of a chronic, multispecies environmental microbial
community, and its interaction with its surroundings, has not been carried out.
This is a significant task because of its non-trivial and strongly coupled
physical, chemical, and biological aspects. The core of this project is to
address these issues in an example natural community. The PI's aim is to combine
and integrate comprehensive data gathering into a multiscale model that provides
a quantitative characterization of an environmental microbial
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.