* 1951068
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel platform for the preparation of samples for cryo-TEM imaging: capturing biomacromolecules repeatably in vitreous ice without artifacts
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Michael Godfrin, NanoSoft, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2022
* USD 793,865.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is a new way to prepare samples for life sciences research by addressing
the major bottleneck in the associated workflow. The proposed work advances a
new method to prepare biological samples for analysis to develop crisp, high-
resolution 3D models of molecules. This will result faster acquisition of higher
quality data and better 3D models of proteins and other cellular components,
providing new insight into human biology and improvements to human health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to solve the largest issues
currently experienced in cryogenic Transmission Electron Microscopy (cryo-EM)
sample preparation. Current sample preparation technologies are unreliable and
require preparation of excess grids to acquire enough quality data for a 3D
model of a biomacromolecule. Many grids are of poor quality and generate
insufficient data for a high-resolution protein model; or samples may contain
artifacts from interaction at the air/water interface, reducing the ultimate
resolution. This Phase II project will advance an innovative design concept to
repeatably prepare high quality samples with a blotless sample preparation
technique. The proposed work will explore the trade space and optimize process
parameters for image resolution, leading to an advanced
prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.