* 1951328
* D3SC: Theoretical Studies of Surface Reaction Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Hua Guo, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Dr. Hua Guo of University of New Mexico is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to study elementary steps in chemistry at gas-metal interfaces, such
as adsorption, desorption, scattering, trapping and diffusion, energy transfer,
and reactions, using state-of-the-art computational models. Despite a large
number of chemical processes, such as corrosion and heterogeneous catalysis,
occurring at the interfaces between difference phases, our understanding of
these reactive processes is still quite limited, due to complexity of the
interaction and dynamics. The knowledge gained from such fundamental studies can
help to design predictive models of interfacial phenomena, thus allowing more
efficient use of energy and materials and the ultimate control of chemical
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, Dr. Guo plans to
develop and apply novel theoretical and computational models to understand some
key issues in surface dynamics, such as the relative efficacy of different
energies in the impinging molecule, dependence of reactivity on surface sites,
and role of metal electron-hole pairs. He focuses on the accurate determination
of high-dimensional Born-Oppenheimer potential energy surfaces for the
interaction of gas phase species with metal surfaces, as well as other
properties such as friction tensors, using machine learning tools. These high-
dimensional properties enable dynamical investigations of these surface
processes with high efficiency and accuracy. He will pay particular attention to
dissipative channels due to phonons and electron-hole pairs of the metal
surfaces on how they affect energy flow and bond forming/breaking events.
Building on strong collaborations with leading experimental groups around the
world, his theoretical studies will help to advance a systematic and
comprehensive understanding of surface reaction dynamics by establishing and
testing key principles and theories for interfacial
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.