* 1951106
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Exceptional Points for Sound Control with Non-Hermitian Acoustic Metasurfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Steven Cummer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 347,748.00

This project focuses on creating a new class of non-Hermitian diffractive
acoustic metasurfaces. Acoustic metasurfaces are thin artificial materials that
can control sound waves. These two-dimensional materials are empowered with
extraordinary control over the reflected and transmitted sound. This research
will establish analogies between non-Hermitian quantum mechanics and acoustics,
resulting in a paradigm shift in the design strategies for acoustic
metasurfaces. The project will broadly advance the field of acoustic
metasurfaces through discovering new mechanisms for designing materials with
novel functionalities, which will have applications in noise control,
architectural acoustics, and communication. The outcome of this research will
also encourage future fundamental research where acoustics could serve as a
platform to materialize quantum mechanics concepts. The research activities will
involve undergraduate students, as well as students from under-represented
groups, and will enable innovative educational activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Hermitian systems possess entirely real-valued energy
spectra below a parity-time symmetry breaking threshold, which is referred to as
its exceptional point. Here, the system undergoes a dramatic phase change with
two or more eigenvalues and their corresponding eigenvectors coalescing. While
physically this implies that the system would exhibit exotic wave
functionalities, attaining an exceptional point requires the judicious tailoring
of the system’s imaginary parts. The research team here, marries non-Hermitian
physics with acoustic metasurfaces and seeks to develop fundamentally new
designs that exploit the ubiquitous dissipation in the metasurface micro-
structure. The project will examine the scattering matrices of non-Hermitian
diffractive metasurfaces in order to establish frameworks that link exceptional
points of a certain number and order to their corresponding scattering matrices.
Methods for tailoring the loss in metasurface building blocks in a controllable
manner will be theoretically investigated and mechanisms behind the overall
diffraction behavior will be studied via classical acoustic theories. At last,
the team will design, fabricate and experimentally demonstrate new acoustic
devices that harness intrinsic losses, such as unidirectional sound diffusers.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.