* 1951924
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Inclusive Public Transit Toolkit to Assess Quality of Service Across Socioeconomic Status in Baltimore City
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Celeste Chavis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,396,350.00

Most American cities with substantial public transit ridership share a stark
statistic: commuters on public transportation have disproportionately lower
incomes than commuters who use automobiles. Previous research has also shown
that higher income residents who use public transit typically rely on single-
boarding trips, while lower-income individuals endure complex, lengthy trips,
requiring several modes or transfers. Traditionally, transit agencies use
quality of service (QoS) surveys to gauge passenger perceptions of performance.
However, these surveys suffer important limitations that more often mask
challenges faced by low-income residents with complex mobility experiences. In
an attempt to address these gaps, several smartphone applications that allow
residents to collect GPS-tagged, QoS data have been developed. While promising,
these apps not only fail to collect critical information to characterize complex
trips, but also lack privacy, transparency and decision support systems. This
project will create novel methods, answer open empirical questions and provide
research-based guidelines for the design, development, deployment and evaluation
of a privacy-respectful toolkit to identify and characterize the multi-factorial
challenges typical of complex trips often times endured by low-income residents;
and to drive bottom-up, crowdsourced-informed actionable solutions via community
conversations and a decision support system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research effort will advance the state of the art in privacy,
survey design, data analytics, transit equity, data-driven civic engagement, and
transit simulations; and will create a unique opportunity to understand the
interdependencies between these research areas generating new knowledge
necessary to ultimately drive QoS transit improvements. By involving all
relevant stakeholders in the project, and putting residents and transit equity
at the center, this project propounds a more equitable and human-centered
approach to smart cities, one in which technologies are not presented to
residents, but rather designed with them to address articulated needs. To
achieve this goal, this project will need to answer research questions organized
along four research thrusts: (1) Understanding Participation: analysis of the
privacy barriers that might prevent low-income residents from participating in
mobility experience data collection efforts, how to lower them to sustain
participation, and the QoS survey strategies that might provide a good balance
between resident participation and quality data; (2) Mobility Experience Data
Analysis: creation of novel, interpretable machine learning and statistical
methods to identify and characterize transit challenges and equity from large-
scale, high-dimensional, door-to-door mobility experiential data, and to do so
in a way that is interpretable to all stakeholders; (3) Transparency for Civic
Engagement and Solution Ideation: identification of the conditions, processes,
tools and data needed to create democratic spaces where solutions to public
transit challenges can be identified via transparent, data-driven, neighborhood
conversations among all stakeholders involved: residents, advocacy groups and
decision makers; and (4) Simulation-based Decision Support Systems based on
transit QoS: creation of novel, interpretable simulations to identify the impact
on city-scale transportation by incorporating local solutions to address
specific community-identified-needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.