* 1951657
* Contrasting Saltcedar Dynamics in Native and Non-Native Habitats through Integration of Remote Sensing and Population Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Chunyuan Diao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2023
* USD 354,950.00

This project addresses the pressing problem of saltcedar invasion from a
perspective that overcomes the spatial scale disparities between remote sensing
and ground-based ecological studies. The overarching goal of this project is to
develop an integrated remotely sensed population modeling framework to
investigate the invasion mechanism based on the contrast of saltcedar dynamics
in its native and non-native habitats. Through shedding light on the underlying
mechanisms of saltcedar invasion across scales, the framework will contribute to
the large-scale riparian restoration practices. Research findings will be
broadly disseminated to conservation agencies to help predict and address the
threat of invasive saltcedar. The synergistic educational and research
activities will offer learning and research opportunities to students from
secondary to graduate levels. Lastly, outreach activities will broaden the
participation of traditionally underrepresented student communities in STEM
related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Saltcedar invasion remains a severe
ecological problem, negatively impacting riparian areas, with broad implications
on society, the economy, and, ultimately, human health and wellbeing. Developing
a comprehensive understanding of its spatial expansion and spread mechanisms is
essential for proactive ecosystem management. The key research question of the
project is: what are the contrasting dynamics of saltcedar in response to
varying hydroclimatic factors across its native and non-native habitats? To
answer this question, the investigators will develop an integrated remotely
sensed population modeling multi-component framework. The integrated framework
will form the basis for a contrasting saltcedar dynamic analysis across scales,
and foster insights into the hydroclimatic regimes driving the vastly disparate
dynamics of saltcedar across its native and non-native habitats. This multi-
scalar framework will be transferable to other types of competing vegetation
species, enhancing its utility widely, and contributing to more effective land
management practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.