* 1951305
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel microalgae for high yield hydrogen production
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Svetlana Oard, AL-POWER, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 965,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is the development of a microalgae-based commercial hydrogen production
process that will surpass current or developing technologies. A technology for
low-cost, high purity, renewable, scalable hydrogen production can facilitate
greater domestic energy independence. Many industries, such as the petro-
chemical, chemical, and electronics sectors, would benefit from low-cost
industrial hydrogen. Transportation and electric power generation industries
would benefit from increased fuel efficiency. Environmental benefits include
replacement of fossil fuels, switching hydrogen production from natural gas to
sunlight and water, substantial emissions reduction. and reduction of airborne
pollutants generated by coal- and natural gas-powered power plants. The goal of
this project is to advance the use of engineered algae, in combination with
recent advances in bioprocessing and hardware engineering, to manufacture clean,
renewable hydrogen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop
microalgae strains that generate high hydrogen yields using a novel metabolic
engineering strategy. Hydrogen production rates are challenging to improve due
to complicated metabolic pathways and gene regulation guarding hydrogen
production. The proposed project will create advanced algal strains combining
increased hydrogen production rates with robust growth under the target process
conditions. The objectives are: 1) engineer the chimeric genes to implement the
metabolic engineering strategy, 2) validate the engineered genes in algae
overexpressing a proprietary hydrogenase gene cHYD1, 3) determine effects of
genotypes of parental strains on the chimeric genes, 4) combine the best
selected genes in the developed parental genotypes and generate new production
strains; and 5) demonstrate adequate H2 production rates in the production
strains under controlled testing conditions. This project will produce the
desired production strain with greatly increased hydrogen rates in the target
commercial process environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.