* 1951420
* Collaborative Research: Uncovering Principles Underlying Rod Photoreceptor Outer Segment Renewal and Size
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Abigail Jensen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 833,912.00

Photoreceptors are neuronal cells that form before and soon after birth, and
cannot be replaced if they degenerate. The light-sensing antenna of
photoreceptor cells is an essential feature of the cells and must be
continuously refreshed (or regenerated) in order to optimally capture light.
Without this antenna, photoreceptor cells cannot sense light, and the
photoreceptor cells die, resulting in blindness. This continuous regeneration
occurs by the addition of newly produced proteins and membranes at its base and
by the shedding of the oldest proteins and membranes from its tip. Remarkably,
the photoreceptor cell is capable of keeping its antenna at a constant length,
as the dynamic processes of growth and shedding occur. The goal of this project
is to discover the rules used by photoreceptor cells in the eye to determine the
length of their antenna. In addition to understanding this vital regeneration
process, this proposal will allow a new generation of STEM scholars to learn the
skills that are vital to thrive in STEM disciplines. In particular, a cohort of
students, undergraduates and graduate students, will participate in the research
and gain vital training and mentoring in mathematical/computer modeling and life
science. This project also incorporates activities to increase current and
future participation of underrepresented groups in STEM education and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to discover the rules used by
photoreceptor cells to calculate and balance rates of growth and shedding of
proteins and membranes in their light-sensing antenna to maintain a constant
length of their cellular antennas. Rules will be discovered using genetically
manipulated zebrafish that reveal the dynamic regenerative process in the
photoreceptor's antenna. One set of experiments is designed to stimulate extra
growth at the base, and results will reveal whether antenna length increases or
whether shedding increases to balance the extra growth rate to maintain a length
constant. Another set of experiments is designed in which shedding from the tip
will be blocked, and results will reveal whether antenna length will increase
due to blocked shedding or whether growth at the base slows to balance the extra
length at the tip to maintain a length constant. Finally, mathematical models
will be developed to predict the length of photoreceptor antenna following
experimental manipulation. Such models are based on our current understanding of
growth and shedding, where model output will be fit/compared to experimental
data of antenna length. The beauty of such a model is that it can be used to
help reveal (and even predict, alongside with future experiments) the regulatory
mechanisms that photoreceptors use to maintain the constant length of their
sensory antennas. The outcomes of this proposal will serve as an important
foundation for future efforts to define the cellular machinery in photoreceptors
that contribute to the critical regenerative process of their light-sensing
antenna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.