* 1951007
* Proteomic approaches and live cell imaging reveal unique aspects of delivery of cellulose synthase complexes to the plasma membrane
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Ying Gu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 01/31/2025
* USD 956,288.00

An understanding of how plant cells make cellulose will not only provide
scientific foundations for using genetic tools to coax plants into making
modified cell walls for significant advances in sustainable energy, but also
provide valuable insights for important and basic scientific questions of how a
plant cell determines cell expansion and the final shape of the cell. This
project will also provide research opportunities to undergraduate students,
especially women and underrepresented minorities. Individual research projects
will be tailored to various undergraduate research programs to attract talented
women and underrepresented students and to enhance their preparation for
graduate school and academic careers. This project will also include
participation in an outreach event to local high school girls and their teachers
in the form of a hands-on research workshop at Pennsylvania State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellulose microfibrils are synthesized at the plasma
membrane by a large protein complex called cellulose synthase complex (CSC). The
CSC uptakes sugar monomers and assembles a linear polymer, crystalline cellulose
microfibrils, which are the most abundant biopolymer on earth. Because cellulose
synthesis occurs at the plasma membrane, understanding the mechanisms by which
cellulose synthase is trafficked to the cell surface becomes very important. A
robust combination of live cell imaging, functional genetics, and proteomics
approaches will be used to study how plant cells use exocytosis to deliver CSC
to the cell surface. Specifically, the following three objectives will be
addressed: 1) Determine the role of plant-specific protein PATROL1 and the
conserved exocyst complex in cellulose biosynthesis. 2) Determine how CSCs are
associated with PATROL1 and the exocyst complex. 3) Define the role of PATROL1
in CSC secretion through functional characterization of its partners. Together,
these experiments will provide unprecedented insights into the evolution of
trafficking machinery of eukaryotic cells. The project will be a vehicle for
training undergraduate students, high school students and teachers, especially
women and underrepresented minorities, in the context of experimental scientific
enquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.