* 1951169
* SBIR Phase II:  Natural Language Voice Controlled Science Equipment
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Clifton Roozeboom, Myriad Sensors
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,270,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research SBIR Phase II project is the development of a natural language voice-
controlled lab assistant technology to enable hands-on science learning by
students that are blind or have low vision, as well as the general student
population. The Lab Assistant application will use state-of-the-art voice
recognition technology for educational science experiments. The Lab Assistant
will integrate with sensor hardware and mobile apps to enable hands-on
experiments in physics, biology, chemistry, and engineering. The impacts of the
Lab Assistant are anticipated to include the development of software that can
respond to a wide spectrum of natural language questions and the systems
integration of many cutting-edge technologies (wireless sensors, mobile apps,
voice recognition software, and assistive technology) into a simple user
interface for science education. The voice interactions will help students
overcome disabilities with traditional touch and visual technologies, work more
independently due to the presence of auditory help, and gain confidence in their
STEM abilities. For teachers, the Lab Assistant will provide an "expert in the
room" to help guide the hands-on activities. The Lab Assistant will be
especially useful to teachers without formal science training, that nevertheless
need to lead hands-on STEM activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research SBIR Phase II project will develop a natural
language voice-controlled lab assistant technology that will enable students to
control and interact with hands-on science lab equipment using natural language
dialog. The research objective is to enable any student to conduct hands-on
experiments and receive audible responses based on their own experimental
measurements. Researchers will measure the change in student mastery of the
Science and Engineering Practices required in the Next Generation Science
Standards and the impact on student attitudes and confidence in science,
technology, engineering, and math disciplines. Researchers will also measure the
teachersâ€™ abilities to facilitate authentic science activities for students with
disabilities and the general student population while using the lab assistant.
The technology may enable students that are blind or low vision to be able to
work more independently and gain higher level mastery of the Science and
Engineering Practices. The general student population will also be able to use
the lab assistant for increased engagement in science
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.