* 1951215
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultrathin Polymer Electrolyte Composites with Exceptional Conductivity, Mechanical Strength and Chemical Durability
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Kristina Hugar, Ecolectro, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2023
* USD 747,653.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a new class of reinforced polymers that
advance renewable hydrogen and clean energy devices, such as electrolyzers and
fuel cells. The proposed materials will address the high materials costs,
toxicity, and modest performance of current state-of-practice solutions. The
support and fabrication innovations enhance mechanical performance and
durability and reduce materials costs by engineering specifically for the
intended applications. The proposed device will generate capital expenditure
reductions of 40% and improve durability by 3x. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase II project will address performance, durability and scale issues of
reinforced Alkaline Exchange Membranes (rAEMs). The project will advance the
development of rAEMs with high mechanical performance and durability; the
project will develop mesoporous supports to achieve higher quality. Proposed
chemical innovations will improve electrochemical performance by boosting ion
mobility and exploiting hydrophilic/hydrophobic phase separation dynamics in the
polymer electrolyte. The project will advance innovations of Membrane Electrode
Assemblies (MEA) with non-platinum catalysts to further reduce device cost.
Technical goals include performance and durability of the rAEM (stability for
1,000h, ASR &lt; 0.08 Ohm-cm2, hydroxide conductivity &gt; 25 mS/cm, Stress @
break &gt; 30 MPa, &lt; 15% swelling), MEAs in fuel cells (current density &gt;
800 mA/cm2 at 0.65V @ 60 degrees C over 50h) MEAs in electrolyzers (current
density &gt; 750 mA/cm2 at 1.8V @ 60 degrees C over 100h), and successful
incorporation of non-platinum electrodes into MEAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.