* 1951872
* I-Corps: Heat-stable binding proteins for diverse diagnostic applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
enable the rapid development of novel diagnostic tests that are accurate,
thermally stable, and affordable, thereby expanding access to medical care
within underserved patient populations. Diagnostic immunoassays have
traditionally relied upon binding proteins called antibodies for the capture and
detection of biomarkers of disease in patient samples. The development and
production of high-quality diagnostic antibodies is slow and expensive, and this
class of reagents is frequently subject to thermal instability and off-target
binding, resulting in inaccurate test results. This project focuses on the
development of a novel class of low-cost, heat-stable binding proteins that can
be rapidly developed and readily integrated into various diagnostic formats.
These binding proteins can be engineered to target diverse disease biomarkers,
making this platform suitable for the development of novel assays addressing
many different medical conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
will explore the commercial potential of using binding proteins in a broad range
of diagnostic applications. The proposed modular binding proteins have been
validated for a range of standard diagnostic formats and numerous disease
targets. The in vitro processes used to develop these new binding proteins can
be finely controlled in order to ensure that selected reagents are highly
target-specific, and bind to the biomarker of interest with high affinity. In
addition, selected reagents can be subjected to further engineering in order to
produce multi-functional protein constructs, enabling facile device
manufacturing, high-gain signal amplification, and highly efficient target
capture. Low-cost diagnostic devices incorporating these heat-stable reagents
will enable the cost-efficient detection of disease cases at the point-of-care,
and novel diagnostic capabilities enabled by this platform will address unmet
public health needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.