* 1951821
* SCC-PG: Toward Smart Resilience: Smart Systems for Situational Awareness of Flood Impacts and Transportation Access (SSSAFT) in Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Philip Bedient, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This Smart &amp; Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) planning grant will lay the
foundation for a new paradigm of “Smart Resilience” in which data emerging from
smart systems is leveraged to improve the hazard resilience of communities. As
modern cities are becoming increasingly smart and interconnected, a wealth of
emerging data (e.g. camera, sensors, crowdsourced reports) poses both challenges
and opportunities for enhancing resilience to natural hazards, such as flooding,
which threaten the safety, prosperity and wellbeing of communities. In this
planning grant the focus is on the short-term response phase of the “Smart
Resilience” paradigm (during and immediately following a hazard event) and
emphasize organizational impacts. A new framework will be advanced, SSSAFT
(Smart Systems for Situational Awareness of Flood Impacts and Transportation
Access). This framework leverages data from smart systems to support situational
awareness of community organizations responsible for flood resilience decision-
making. Target organizations are those responsible for emergency response, flood
risk communication surrounding transportation safety, and healthcare services.
Through a convergent project design, this planning grant will lay a foundation
for disciplinary integration, offer the opportunity for data collection and data
fusion, launch testbeds, and provide the community context and opportunity for
knowledge co-production with stakeholders. Integration with local partners, new
knowledge shared with the research community, and submission of an award that
builds off this planning grant are expected by the end of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project harnesses expertise from Hydrology,
Infrastructure Risk Modeling, Data Science and Machine Learning, and
Organizational Psychology to derive methods for transforming situational
awareness tools and understanding how this awareness can facilitate
organizational functioning toward improved community resilience. Three key
research questions are examined in this planning grant. First, data sources and
technologies are explored that underpin future situational awareness tools to
support smart resilience in flood prone communities. In question two the need
for a probabilistic approach to generate intelligent information on flood
condition and transportation access across communities is probed. Methods for
information fusion are tested, forming the basis of a SSSAFT framework that can
evaluate, for example, access to critical facilities or travel times to
vulnerable populations. Finally, quantitative and qualitative information is
collected via interviews and surveys to uncover the psychological and physical
effects of incorporating SSSAFT into resilience-related decision processes and
communications. This work will reveal how timely situational awareness affects
organizational psychological resilience and the subsequent well-being of
community members who depend on these first-response
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.