* 1951345
* Deterministic Models for Waterborne Infections
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jin Wang, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This project will conduct mathematical modeling, analysis and simulation for
waterborne infections, which remain a significant public health burden despite
tremendous efforts on prevention and intervention programs and a large body of
theoretical, experimental, and clinical studies. A particular challenge
associated with waterborne infections is to accurately predict the epidemic
development and effectively manage the disease outbreaks in populations and
environments with strong heterogeneity. The project will develop innovative
mathematical models for a deep investigation into the complex, heterogeneous
dynamics of waterborne diseases. The project outcome will not only build a solid
knowledge base to better understand the transmission and spread of waterborne
infections, but also provide useful public health guidelines for disease
management and policy-making. Graduate and undergraduate students are involved
in the funded research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish a new
mathematical framework for waterborne infections based on deterministic
differential equations. A novel, adaptive cluster modeling approach will be
introduced that will integrate and extend the classical Lagrangian and Eulerian
approaches. This cluster modeling technique will optimize the balance between
the homogeneity and heterogeneity in the quantification of disease dynamics as
well as the balance between the individual needs and available resources in the
management of disease outbreaks. Using this technique, the project will perform
an accurate and efficient study on the dynamics of waterborne infections across
a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. The project will also employ
realistic epidemic and demographic data, particularly those related to cholera
outbreaks, to validate model predictions and inform model refinement. Successful
completion of this project will lead to a potentially transformative progress in
the quantitative study of waterborne infections and related disease control
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being funded jointly by the MPS
Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the Mathematical Biology Program
and BIO/IOS through the Behavioral Systems Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.