* 1951099
* Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Nonlocally Connected Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Bard Ermentrout, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2024
* USD 389,999.00

The perception of the world by the brain is governed both by the external
stimuli that it receives, by its constant ongoing activity, and by its prior
experience. The ongoing activity is formed by the interaction of the millions of
cells that comprise the brain and that sit in a delicately balanced state in
order to respond quickly and sensitively to the rapidly changing world. These
cells do not form random patterns, but rather produce patterned activity such as
waves and rhythms that can form the precursors to complex behaviors such as
speaking and walking. This ongoing and evoked behavior is carefully controlled
by a balance of positive (excitatory) and negative (inhibitory) influences. The
loss of this balance can disrupt normal behavior and lead to diseases such as
epilepsy and schizophrenia. This research project uses mathematical models of
the nervous system to provide a way to test hypotheses about brain activity put
forth by experimentalists and to suggest new experiments based on the
predictions of these models. In addition the project will also provide research
training opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Ongoing
activity in the nervous system and how it impacts sensory and other inputs is
the subject of much recent experimental activity. In particular, it is clear
that the intrinsic interactions between neuronal circuits in absence of inputs
can have a strong impact on how the system responds to incoming stimuli even at
the large-scale cognitive level. This project will apply nonlinear dynamics
methods to problems in theoretical neuroscience dealing with this question.
Various forms of spatiotemporal activity, including spatially localized
activity, oscillations, and propagating waves, are observed experimentally.
There is now a good deal of evidence that the oscillatory activity that is
ubiquitously found in the brain is not synchronized, but, rather, takes the
forms of propagating waves and other types of spatiotemporal dynamics. The
research will use mathematical models to study neurons that are connected to
each other through nonlocal, spatially extended connections. The models of these
networks involve nonlocal interactions leading to integro-differential
equations. The project aims to develop new techniques for the analysis of such
nonlocal equations, including novel perturbation methods, dimension reduction
methods, and techniques for localizing the operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.