* 1951184
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Scale Modeling and Experimental Study of Hair Follicle Growth Control Mechanisms and Stem Cell Lineage Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Qixuan Wang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 179,924.00

Hair follicles are stem cell-rich skin mini-organs that can undergo oscillation-
like cycles of regeneration throughout their lifetimes. In mammals, hairs have
evolved for thermoregulation, camouflage, display, and mechanical protection.
Importantly, hair follicle has emerged as a leading model system for studying
general mechanisms of stem cell control, tissue patterning during morphogenesis,
regeneration and aging. Though powerful, traditional reductionist research
approaches are limited by technological barriers and high experiment costs. This
project aims to develop an interdisciplinary approach between computational
modeling and experimentations to understand crucial questions that arise from
the growth control of the follicle and stem cell lineage dynamics. It is
anticipated that the new mathematical model can be generalized to study multiple
aspects of skin biology, beyond hair growth. The new theory on the role of
cellular response to dynamic growth regulation will have wide applications to
other biological growth systems. This project will also provide students with
the opportunities to get exposed to state-of-the-art interdisciplinary research
and will greatly promote diversity in mathematics and biological sciences by
recruiting students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study the control mechanisms of hair follicle growth dynamics both
at spatial and temporal levels by adopting an interdisciplinary research
approach between computational multiscale modeling and single-cell RNA-
sequencing experiments. On the modeling side, a coupled stochastic partial
differential equation sub-model for signaling dynamics and a discrete off-
lattice sub-model using Voronoi tessellation technique for inter-cellular
interactions will be developed. Several numerical coupling algorithms between
the continuum and discrete sub-models will be evaluated, which will greatly
benefit broader multiscale modeling research in biological developmental
systems. On the experiment side, new single-cell RNA-sequencing data will be
collected to calibrate the model and validate model predictions. Using this
interdisciplinary approach, a novel growth control mechanism will be verified,
which states that cellsâ€™ heterogeneous responses to signals play a critical
regulatory role in the follicle growth dynamics. This project will provide
significant insight into the biological problems, including spatially defining
the maximum length of a follicle, temporally regulating the periodic follicle
growth dynamics and mechano-chemical coupling in biological growth. Finally, by
merging multiscale modeling with single-cell RNA-sequencing results, this
project will also demonstrate a new path for synthesizing modeling and
biological data in broader interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.