* 1951880
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Smart Aging: Connecting Communities Using Low-Cost and Secure Sensing Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Erez Zadok, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,724,126.00

The rapid growth of our aging population, nicknamed the "silver tsunami", causes
both social and economic challenges. Without the appropriate tools to support
independence, individuals age 65+ will overwhelm the limited resources of
families, providers, and other supporting stakeholders nationwide. This project
will engage diverse stakeholder groups to develop holistic technological and
social solutions to address these challenges and promote the welfare, quality of
life, autonomy, and dignity of older adults aging at home. The project develops
technologies that can detect emergency, emergent, transitional and long-term
changes in individualsâ€™ physical, social and cognitive states at times where
prevention/early intervention can have the greatest benefits. These technologies
will be paired novel social approaches that foster technology adoption by
diverse populations. Overall, the approach will bring effective, cost-saving
solutions at scale to many communities. The team will train students for
interdisciplinary careers, cultivate the next generation of technology-savvy
healthcare workers, and transfer the project findings to communities across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: (1) engage older adults, family
and non-family caregivers, supporting institutions, and professionals within
Suffolk County, Long Island, New York to identify health and social challenges
that aging adults face; (2) design, develop, pilot test, and evaluate robust,
secure, and affordable continuous health data collection and analysis solutions
to automate health change detection, classification, and prediction (e.g.,
disease onset/progression/resolution); (3) develop social solutions and best
practices that foster greater adoption of sensing technologies, share data
effectively with stakeholders, and measure social determinants of health using a
quantitative, data-driven approach; and (4) co-develop and co-evaluate the
technical and social solutions with diverse community stakeholders---and
educate/train students, residents, and providers end-to-end for technology
assisted aging in place. The results will include novel technologies targeting
challenges of older adults and best social practices in technology adoption to
maximize the benefits for all stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.