* 1951282
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a novel bioprotectant with fungicidal and biostimulant properties
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Jose Antonio de Cote, IQ BIOTECH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2021
* USD 219,075.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project will be in developing a crop
protective agent that reduces negative environmental impacts and improves
overall crop yield. Many common food crops, including tomatoes and peppers, are
highly susceptible to fungal contamination; these organisms are rapidly
developing resistance to the chemical pesticides widely used today. The
objective of this project is to develop and test a new biofungicide consisting
of beneficial fungi to protect plants from variety of diseases and plagues. This
solution does not cause harm to the environment and offers a way to manage
pesticide-resistant pathogens, which cost approximately $10 billion in the
farming market. The proposed project will optimize the biofungicide for the many
types of soils, crops and pathogens common across the country. A series of
laboratory tests will be conducted to determine the optimal composition of the
solution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project involves designing an
effective bioprotectant and biostimulant, consisting of two different
Trichoderma strains, to provide enhanced protective effects against harmful
fungi and bacteria, with the added benefit of boosting plant health and
improving overall crop yield. This project will develop new formulations of the
blended strain biofungicide to provide maximum flexibility in their application,
stability for storage and delivery, as well as testing and optimizing their
efficacy in new and unproven combinations of plants, soils and growing
conditions. The merits of the bioprotectant anti-fungal have already been
demonstrated in preliminary experiments, but only for limited combinations of
crops and soils. Relevant environments will be tested in this project.
Additionally, previous tests have been conducted with dry formulations of
Trichoderma, and thus the proposed research will focus on the two key objectives
of (i) proving efficacy in new contexts and (ii) developing stable liquid
formulations. To this end, a wide matrix of formulations will be tested with a
variety of soils, crops and pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.