* 1951006
* Collaborative Research: Multiscalar Approaches to Understanding Syndemic Water Insecurity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Cassandra Workman, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 04/30/2024
* USD 89,098.00

Water insecurity interacts with food and sanitation insecurity in affecting
psycho-emotional and physical health. Although significant evidence attests to
these relationships, how these effects manifest across multiple measures and
domains remains unresolved. Investigations of both qualitative lived experience
and quantitative assessments of health and well-being outcomes will improve
understanding of the utility of different methods addressing resource insecurity
while providing holistic insights as to meaning of resource insecurity across
life domains. This project combines theory and method from anthropology,
geography, public health, and engineering and responds to calls for multi-
pronged and interdisciplinary approaches to global health challenges. The
research trains students and has direct relevance for policy analysts,
development practitioners and academics grappling with domestic challenges of
resource insecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are
to (1) ethnographically examine the lived experience of water insecurity in a
population facing chronic, but variable degrees of water shortage; (2) compare
objective and subjective measures of water insecurity to understand the
predictive capacity of these factors in structuring psycho-emotional and
physical health outcomes; (3) assess whether water insecurity, food insecurity,
and sanitation insecurity represent syndemic, or mutually enhancing stressors,
driving negative health outcomes; and (4) synthesize political ecology and
syndemic theory to expand the understanding and measurement of complex social
and health phenomena. This research combines ethnographic methods,
anthropometric assessments of health, quantitative measures of household water
and food insecurity, community-level hydrological data, household water testing
to identify contamination, and policy analyses. This study will deepen the
understanding of the relationship between food and water insecurity, and by
assessing sanitation conditions and health outcomes together, the research will
result in a better understanding of the complex relationship between multiple
resource insecurities and their downstream
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.