* 1951236
* Collaborative Research: Testing Models of Cooperation in a Large-scale Communal Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Winking, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 202,120.00

Human cooperation is extensive, despite constant risks of freeriding by
individuals who stand to benefit from cooperation without paying associated
costs. This study aims to understand the factors motivating large-scale
cooperation by testing evolutionary, economic, and game-theoretic explanatory
models of cooperative behavior. Whereas prior research has often relied on
experimental approaches to testing hypotheses, this study brings the lab to the
field, leveraging the explanatory power of experiments in a real-world context.
The researchers will provide a small community with the resources necessary to
construct a school building. The in situ behavioral experiment will measure
individual contributions to the project and analyze how such contributions
associate with decisions made under laboratory conditions and with community-
wide reputations for cooperating. Furthermore, a postdoctoral scholar will gain
important STEM research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will test the
Indirect Reciprocity Model (IRM) of cooperation, which suggests that individuals
earn reputations for their prosocial acts, that these reputations are widely
known, and that they are used by potential cooperators to determine how to
interact, preventing freeloading by less prosocial individuals. The research
extends pairwise cooperation models of IRM to ask whether the model also
explains contributions to public goods in real-world settings. In order to
examine the impact of reputation management on collective action outside the
laboratory, investigators will provide all of the materials needed for the
construction of a school and observe the process from the planning phase to its
completion. During the construction, the investigators will capture individual
contributions to the project using direct observation, individual reports, and
estimates of energy expenditure based on heart rate measurements. The
investigators will also conduct semi-structured interviews about the
construction process, as well as structured dyadic exchange interviews,
reputational peer rankings, and experimental economic games. These methods will
allow them to ethnographically capture the process by which a community
completes a large-scale cooperative project and to test whether 1) reputations
for collective action accurately capture variation in contributions to the
project, 2) project contributions, in turn, influence reputations, 3) whether
and how reputations influence dyadic interactions in day-to-day life, and 4) how
decisions in economic experiments reflect patterns in real world
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.