* 1951470
* The Effects of the World War II Research Effort on Postwar U.S. Science, Technology, and Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Daniel Gross, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 505,566.00

There is widespread recognition that World War II was a sea-change event in
government-science relations and in science and technology policy. The wartime
research effort organized under the Office of Scientific Research and
Development (OSRD) and led by Vannevar Bush, increased government investment in
science by one to two orders of magnitude. OSRD research contributed to advances
in a range of technologies that were crucial for winning the war—from weapons
and optics to new medical treatments (such as antimalarials, vaccines, and other
therapies that helped limit U.S. solider morbidity and mortality). In addition
to laying the groundwork for postwar U.S. science and technology policy, the
wartime effort is also thought to have had a transformative impact on the U.S.
innovation system, including by catapulting U.S. firms and universities to the
frontier of science and technology for the postwar period. As the war ended,
President Roosevelt asked Bush to draw lessons from this "unique experiment" to
harness science in peacetime. Bush’s response, Science: The Endless Frontier, is
sometimes considered the ideological blueprint for postwar science policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to provide a quantitative
assessment of the effects of the OSRD. Using newly-collected data on OSRD
research contracts, this project examines (i) the effects of the wartime
research effort on the intensity, direction, and location of postwar U.S.
inventive activity, (ii) the influence of wartime medical research spending on
postwar U.S. research, patenting, and product development in the life sciences,
and (iii) the effects of the OSRD on the postwar U.S. scientific workforce. The
use of novel datasets and methodological robust techniques for analyzing
heterogeneous historical data will inform several other fields of study and
serve as a rich training ground for students. Furthermore, the year 2020 marks
the 75th anniversary of Science: the Endless Frontier. This project will provide
a roadmap for ensuring US competitiveness and strength in the innovation system,
particularly in times of exogenous shock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.