* 1951792
* IRES Track I: US-Sweden Clinical Bioinformatics Research Training Program
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mark Chapman, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,200.00

The publication of the first human genome in 2001 transformed biomedical
research. Since then, an explosion of new technologies has required engineers
and computer scientists to invent computational methods to analyze and interpret
complex biological datasets. The efforts to develop these computational methods
created the new field of bioinformatics. Over the past two decades,
bioinformatics methods have aided in the development of diagnostics, therapies,
and predictive models of many disease, including cancer, diabetes, and heart
disease. The continual development of bioinformatics tools to analyze and
interpret biological data is critical to advancing data-driven healthcare.
Therefore, the future of healthcare depends on developing educational programs
to train young scientists as bioinformaticians. Given this need, this IRES site
aims to train 6 undergraduate students per year from primarily undergraduate
institutions (PUIs) in Southern California to conduct 10 weeks of supervised
bioinformatics research at the Science for Life Laboratory (SciLifeLab) in
Stockholm, Sweden. SciLifeLab is a consortium of researchers from Swedenâ€™s top
universities: the Karolinska Institute, Stockholm University, The Royal
Institute of Technology, and Uppsala University, and is a global leader in using
genomic data and bioinformatics to advance human health. In addition to
educating the next generation of bioinformaticians, a goal of this program is to
train a diverse cohort of researchers that become globally-engaged scientists.
To achieve this, this IRES program will focus on recruiting students from PUIs
who are traditionally under-represented in engineering. Recruitment will focus
on PUIs because these students typically have fewer research opportunities at
their home institutions and will greatly benefit from this program. To ensure
student success, extensive predeparture training will provide a foundation in
bioinformatics and prepare students for living abroad. Furthermore, upon
returning from Sweden, students will have the opportunity to present their work
at the annual Biomedical Engineering Society meeting and will be encouraged to
maintain an active virtual collaboration with their research group at
SciLifeLab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diverse array of projects which the IRES
students will be involved in are at the forefront of clinical bioinformatics.
Specifically, students will be involved in developing computational methods to
better understand kidney, breast and liver cancers, abdominal aortic aneurysms,
skeletal muscle adaptation to exercise and the spatial organization of
chromosomes in the nucleus. All of these projects involve analyzing sequencing
data from clinically relevant (i.e. human) samples to broaden our knowledge of
fundamental biology and the diagnosis/treatment of human disease. Additionally,
this work advances engineering knowledge by developing new computational methods
useful to the field of bioinformatics. Not only does this program seek to
provide exciting research opportunities for undergraduate students, but it also
gives these students a chance to live abroad and experience a different culture.
Exposure to different cultural backgrounds and ways of thinking can influence
student global perspectives and challenge preconceived notions about the world.
Moreover, working with researchers from different cultural backgrounds will give
students tools to communicate in our ever-globalizing society. This program will
likely be the first time abroad for many of the student participants, so the
experience will be both professionally and personally
formative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.