* 1951188
* SBIR Phase II:  Spatially Modulated Light For Trapping And Addressing Of Alkaline-Earth Neutral Atom Qubits
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Jonathan King, ATOM COMPUTING INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will result from the development of a scalable, universal quantum
computing platform. The range of applications are broad and will expand in
parallel with the development of new quantum algorithms, with initial
applications including molecular simulations for the chemical and pharmaceutical
industries, currently limited by the approximations necessary to make
calculations tractable for classical computers. In order to perform these
simulations at a scale useful for commercial applications, quantum computing
must be significantly scaled. The proposed system will develop a new method to
trap and control individual atoms for scaling of quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will develop technology for parallel, high-fidelity single- and
multi-qubit gates in neutral atom quantum computers. The technology will enable
neutral atoms as a platform for scalable quantum computing technology with
fault-tolerant capabilities. The proposed project includes: 1) development of
systems to control atomic qubits in parallel; 2) a methodology to enact high-
fidelity gates; and 3) development of necessary infrastructure for a cloud-
accessed quantum computer. With a previously unrealized degree of coherent
control to atomic systems, the proposed system will serve as an entirely novel
tool to study many-body physics, enabling new quantum simulations of new phases
of matter or high-energy physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.