* 1951921
* Predicting Dynamics in Unstable and Active Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* M. Lisa Manning, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2024
* USD 369,914.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research and education. Theory and computer simulations will be used
in this research to predict how solid-like materials move and fail. It focuses
on materials that are disordered – where the constituent parts are all jumbled
up – because there is not yet a good understanding of how such materials fail.
Examples of such societally important material failure events are everywhere –
ranging from rupture of a plastic container or grain silo to avalanches and
mudslides. By understanding how these materials behave while they are failing,
we will be able to better predict failure events and rationally design materials
that resist failure or fail in precise, pre-programmed ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, a new class of active matter materials, where
the constituent parts can move by themselves, are being developed in labs all
over the world. However, there are no well-established theories for how those
materials flow and fail when the constituent parts are tightly packed together.
This project seeks to identify similarities between new active matter solids and
non-active solids that are in the process of failing, to better predict the
behavior of active solids. An additional goal is to design, or engineer
disordered active solids to move in a programmed way to execute tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crowds composed of animals or humans can be thought of as
a type of active “solid”. Dense human crowds exhibit many of the features of
solid-like materials, including the ability to support waves composed of small
changes to crowd density, which are known as sound waves in ordinary materials,
as well as dangerous failure events which can lead to crushing. However, since
human crowds are actively moving at all times, existing theories for static
solids cannot be applied to them. This research will develop a new set of
theoretical and computational tools to model failure in active matter crowds. A
long-term goal of this work is to understand which types of crowd structures are
more likely to lead to local crushing events, and to develop tools to predict
and prevent such events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this project will
contribute to the education and professional development of a broad pipeline of
interdisciplinary scientists and engineers. It will support ongoing efforts to
broaden the participation of under-represented groups, including women, in STEM
fields through professional development programming, and support the PI to
develop a new “active matter” module for upper-division undergraduate and
graduate students in an interdisciplinary Physical Cell Biology class.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education. The PI aims to develop a
broad theoretical and computational framework for predicting the dynamics of
unstable and active solids, by exploiting and extending previously developed
methods that use vibrational modes to predict deformation in stable disordered
materials. The first objective is to use a new computational method to quantify
the localized deformations and normal modes of unstable disordered solids during
an avalanche or catastrophic failure event. These data will be used to develop
an analytic continuum model that predicts brittle and ductile failure and
incorporates features of both elasto-plastic and shear transformation zone
models. The second objective is to elucidate a nascent connection between
sheared particulate matter and active self-propelled particles, using a new
computational technique. The third objective is to create a stable active matter
simulation, based on “point-of-interest” human crowds, and match it to a non-
active simulation with an artificial external potential, as a tractable starting
point for extending vibrational mode analysis directly to active systems. This
will enable simulations that gradually tune away from the stable active solid in
order to generate a theoretical framework that can make accurate predictions
about density fluctuations in human crowds and other active matter
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge by identifying
new types of material behaviors that are possible for driven or active systems
at very high densities. Unlike active gases or fluids, these high density
unstable and active solids can transmit shear stresses, exhibit strongly
anisotropic behavior, and likely store memories. Preliminary data suggests these
new methods can be used to predict dynamics and behavior in active or unstable
avalanching systems, which would represent a systematic approach to rationally
design active solids to exhibit specified rheological behaviors or accomplish
tasks. A second thrust will focus on a new idea for quantitatively comparing
sheared particulate systems and active matter, in order to understand which
ideas from well-studied sheared systems can be adapted to make prediction for
active matter, and also where there are important differences between sheared
and active systems that require new theories. Together, this will permit the
development of an analytic continuum model for predicting avalanches and
instabilities in both sheared and active matter
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is applicable to problems of societal
import. Avalanches and catastrophic brittle failure in granular materials and
structural glasses are important in industry and nature – the tools developed
here to constrain continuum models based on microscopic material properties
could improve scientists’ ability to predict earthquake and landslide dynamics,
as well as help rationally design better structural materials. This funding
would also contribute to a societal goal of broadening participation in STEM,
through training and mentoring of female scientists, including a systematic
series of women-specific professional development events. As part of this
proposal, the PI will also develop an active matter module, with lecture
materials, active learning exercises, and a group research project that will be
deployed in a course for upper-level undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.