* 1951405
* Control of translation by the nascent protein after its full synthesis and release
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Nora Vazquez-Laslop, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The centerpiece of cell survival is the proper regulation of the expression of
genes, the units of DNA that carry the instructions to make proteins. Most of
the known regulatory mechanisms occur at the outset of gene expression, when the
synthesis of the protein is just being initiated. Thanks to the researchers'
studies on how uniquely a small protein protects honeybees from bacterial
infections, they realized that gene expression can also be modulated at the end
of the road, when the synthesis of the encoded protein has already been
completed. In this project, the researchers will investigate how widespread is
this formerly unknown mechanism of gene expression regulation and will further
explore the elements in the cell that guard it from working properly. The
research activities will contribute to training students from high school,
college, and graduate programs, as well as postdoctoral researchers. The results
will be incorporated in the teaching and community service activities that the
researchers conduct. The findings of the project will be communicated to the
scientific community through presentations in national and international
meetings and by publications in peer-reviewed journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
has formerly been assumed that once a protein is fully synthesized, it freely
diffuses from the ribosome that has produced it. However, evidence has been
gathered that this is not always the case: certain proteins, whose synthesis has
been thoroughly completed, linger in and interact with the ribosome, and
influence the behavior of ribosomes at the translation termination stage. The
behavior of proteins during their release from the ribosome may impact the
expression of genes encoding other proteins. During this project, ribosome
profiling (Ribo- Seq), an approach that reveals the position of translating
ribosomes genome wide, will help identify the Escherichia coli genes where the
end of protein synthesis is sluggish. Biochemical approaches in combination with
structural studies will help elucidate the lingering interactions of the
completed protein with the “mother” ribosome that modulate the termination phase
of gene expression. The proposed research will advance our understanding of a
previously unknown layer of translation regulation controlled by interactions
between the nascent protein and the ribosome. The findings of the project may
spark new ideas to control gene expression in response to variable biotic and
abiotic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.