* 1951051
* Collaborative Research: Magnetically Actuated Black Silicon Ratchet Surfaces for Digital Microfluidics
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Sung Cho, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 02/29/2024
* USD 318,218.00

Since most of the sensitive and standardized bio-analytical techniques work in
the liquid medium, the lab-on-a-chip system should be able to efficiently handle
liquid solutions in micro/nano scale. To date, most of these systems have been
developed based on the continuous flow system which lacks device
reconfigurability. Consequently, much attention has been drawn to droplet-based
lab-on-a-chip systems, namely, digital micro fluidic systems based on
electrowetting that manipulate discrete liquid droplets rather than continuous
liquid streams. Nevertheless, the electrowetting-based approach suffers from
limitations such as high voltage requirement and biofouling, hampering many real
applications. This project provides a straightforward pathway to a new digital
micro fluidic platform without electrowetting-related limitations. The proposed
platform exploits a purely mechanical means to drive discrete liquid droplets in
a rapid, flexible, programmable, and reconfigurable manner. This project will
also generate information and demonstration materials that can be directly used
to promote both classroom teaching and general public's interest in materials,
microfluidics, interfacial science, micro/nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to explore the dynamically tunable
surface morphology and consequential interfacial wettability using a black
silicon ratchet surface in order to seek a new strategy to manipulate liquid
droplets for the advancement of digital microfluidics. The proposed ratchet
surface involves superhydrophobic black silicon scales on elastomer micropillars
such that individual signals actuate individual scales and change the entire
surface morphology forming a black silicon ratchet surface that drives liquid
droplets. Consequently, droplets are essentially driven mechanically, not
electrically. In addition, it is expected that conical nanostructures on the
black silicon surface and/or slippery liquid infused porous surfaces to be
integrated will significantly reduce biofouling. The proposed approach cannot be
realized without elucidating underlying principles and establishing necessary
techniques. Two principal investigatorsâ€™ expertise encompassing mechanics,
materials, manufacturing and microfluidics will be combined in order to achieve
those understanding and knowledge, and finally open up a new interdisciplinary
research area across smart composite materials and digital microfluidics. During
the project, three objectives will be systematically pursued to towards the
project goal. First, the mechanical characteristics involved in the proposed
superhydrophobic ratchet surface will examined, Second, the interaction between
liquid droplets and the superhydrophobic ratchet surface will be characterized
and associated forces to manipulate liquid droplets on it will be investigated.
Finally, droplet manipulations including droplet transporting, merging, and
splitting along with the reduced biofouling will be
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.