* 1951274
* Collaborative Research: Steepland dynamics and steady-state forms resulting from debris flows
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Luke McGuire, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2024
* USD 350,635.00

Landscapes encode valuable information about tectonics and climate, as well as
the frequency, size, and types of processes that shape them. Reliable extraction
of this information, however, requires that we understand the relationships
between the processes that transport sediment over the Earth’s surface and the
landscapes that they create. The overarching goal of this project is to
understand the role of debris flows in shaping steep landscapes. Debris flows
are mixtures of mud, rocks, and other incidental debris (such as trees) that can
travel at high speeds down valley networks. Their large size, rapid motion, and
episodic behavior pose hazards to life and infrastructure. They also erode the
valleys they travel through, contributing to the shape of steep landscapes.
Debris flows are thought to be a dominant mechanism for transporting sediment
and eroding bedrock in steep terrain, but we currently lack a mathematical
framework to describe how landscapes respond to erosion by debris flows. In this
project, the investigators will develop a model to predict how debris flows
erode landscapes and apply this model to understand how changes in tectonics,
climate, and land-use influence topography and the sediment volumes passed on to
downstream rivers and reservoirs. The project will improve our ability to
extract information about tectonics and climate from topographic data and will
contribute to resolving a long-standing debate regarding the relative importance
of debris flows and water-dominated flows in sculpting bedrock channel networks.
This project will train one postdoctoral researcher, one PhD student, one MS
student, and three undergraduate students. Two of the undergraduate students
will be recruited through the University of Arizona ASEMS (Arizona’s Science
Engineering and Math Scholars) program, which is designed to support
underrepresented students in STEM fields. The investigators will also produce
online community learning tools, lead in-person clinics that support students
and researchers in using the model and analysis tools developed through the
course of the project, and give guest lectures at a public high
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Debris flows are thought to be a primary driver of
erosion in many steeplands but we currently lack a generalizable, mechanistic
approach for quantifying debris flow erosion within landscape evolution models.
As such, our ability to predict the dynamics of steeplands, including their
geomorphic responses to tectonic, climatic, and anthropogenic forcing, is
limited. This project will address three fundamental questions related to the
geomorphic role of debris flow erosion: 1) How can we quantify erosion by
episodic debris flows over geologic timescales?, 2) How does debris flow erosion
influence the morphology of quasi-steady state landscapes?, and 3) How does
debris flow erosion influence transient signals (e.g. knickpoints) propagating
through the channel network? To address these questions, the investigators
propose to analyze debris flow dominated landscapes in the Oregon Coast Range
(OCR) and the San Gabriel Mountains (SGM), conduct a field campaign designed to
relate changes in landscape morphology to tectonic forcing and environmental
factors, and develop a novel landscape evolution model that incorporates debris
flow erosion. The debris flow erosion model will employ process-based equations
for debris flow motion that honor the discrete nature, transient flow dynamics,
and limited mobility of debris flows that differentiates them from water-
dominated flows. From this detailed picture of nonlocal debris-flow dynamics,
the investigators will then calculate debris flow erosion within bedrock
channels integrated over geologic time. The model will be validated through
comparisons with topographic analyses of channel network properties and
millennial-scale erosion rates in debris-flow-dominated valleys in the OCR and
SGM. They will apply their process-based modeling approach in combination with
data and observations from our study sites to derive a geomorphic transport law
for debris flow erosion, quantify the impact of debris flow erosion on the form
of steady state landscapes, and explore how debris flows influence the
propagation of transient signals through the channel
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.