* 1951083
* SBIR Phase II:  Cloud-Based Electric Power Grid Simulation Software With Equivalent Circuit Methods
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2020,07/31/2023
* David Bromberg, PEARL STREET TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 799,938.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will result from the ability to enable a safer, more reliable, and more
resilient electric power system. A reliable and efficient grid is the
cornerstone of the nation’s economy. With the rapid adoption of distributed
energy resources (DERs), a transition from conventional generation plants to
utility-scale wind and solar farms, and the threat of cyber- and/or physical
attacks on the bulk electric system, ensuring the reliability and resilience of
the grid has become ever more challenging. The software being developed in this
project will help grid planning engineers and operators cope with these modern
challenges. For the first time, engineers from organizations across the utility
industry will be able to collaboratively plan the grid on a secure, scalable,
cloud-based software platform that provides the capabilities needed to fully
assess the impact of renewables and DERs. The software’s industry-leading
simulation robustness will allow users to analyze extreme contingencies,
cascading events, and weak grid scenarios to develop preventive and corrective
actions that secure the grid. The software is designed to support an annual
$50B+ in US power infrastructure investment and an annual $400B+ in power market
transactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
II project will develop software for electric power transmission and
distribution (T&amp;D) planning. Technical tasks are to: 1) Make cloud
architecture responsive to demand with autoscaling and queueing services; 2)
Architect results generation for minimized data storage requirements; 3) Manage
data handling for reduced re-loading of datasets; 4) Implement a file parser for
industry-standard three-phase unbalanced distribution system models; 5)
Implement models of common distribution system components; and 6) Extend the
cloud platform to support integrated T&amp;D analysis. Integration of these
optimized components will lead to an improved system engineered for usage at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.