* 1951531
* A 3D Multiscale Computational Model for Fluid Flow Over Osteocyte in Loaded Bone
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Luoding Zhu, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Bone regulation plays a major role in several bone-related diseases (e.g.
osteoporosis) and conditions (e.g. broken bone). Understanding how to improve
such scenarios requires increased understanding of bone components including
osteocytes, important bone cells that, when sensing force or stress, send out
signals that make other cells create or destroy bone. Despite experimental
evidence that osteocytes do significantly affect bone regulation, early
observations revealed that the stress on the osteocyte needed to initiate bone
regulating activities was much greater than the stress bones experience during
daily activities. For osteocytes’ bone regulating abilities to be triggered, it
appears force must somehow be amplified as it is transferred through the bone
down into the microscale regions in and near the osteocytes. While various
reasonable explanations for how such force amplification can arise have been
suggested, a consensus has not been reached primarily because the complexity of
bone has made it difficult to consider all possible factors in any single
existing study. Addressing this issue, this study will develop an integrative
model to combine multiple components of the osteocyte and its surrounding
environment across multiple scales to better understand how everyday forces can
be amplified as they travel to the osteocyte. The model will be used to identify
which components of the cell are most likely responsible for sensing force. The
model can also be used in future studies to consider how to improve force
sensing and resulting bone regulation in individuals with osteoporosis,
osteoarthritis, leukemia, broken bones, and other bone-related conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to better understand how
osteocytes sense forces in vivo (mechanosensation) and how the osteocyte and its
microenvironment amplifies stress and strain to levels detectable by osteocytes
in vivo by computational modeling and laboratory experiments. This goal will be
achieved by introducing a multiscale 3D computational model for the osteocyte-
fluid lacuna-canaliculi system and the encasing bone matrix under mechanical
loading. The integrative model comprises three parts: a cross-linked
viscoelastic fiber-network based “cytosolid model” for force-bearing components
in the cell; a lattice-Boltzmann-equation based “fluid model” (intracellular and
extracellular) for the remaining cellular and interstitial substances; and a
continuum “poroelastic model” for the bone matrix. These three submodels will be
integrated through the mutual fluid-structure-interaction (FSI) using the
immersed boundary (IB) framework. Model parameters will be obtained from both
existing data in literature and collaborators’ in vitro experiments. The three
submodels will be verified prior to assembly by separate experimental data and
the integrated model will be validated using the ex-vivo experiments.
Predictions of the integrated computational model on large-scale CPU-GPU
computer clusters will be used to characterize the stress and strain fields, and
investigate the stress and strain magnification mechanism, generate new insights
into osteocyte mechanosensation and stress/strain amplification, and introduce
novel experimental designs to study how disease-related changes may regulate
osteocyte mechanotransduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.