* 1951330
* OP: Building Artificial Photonic Materials from Nanoscale Optical Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Zijie Yan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 215,589.00

Nontechnical description: Photonic materials are patterned constructs consisting
of particles, smaller than the wavelength of light, that are artificially bound
together in various ordered arrangements. By varying the size, shape and
periodic arrangement of the particles it is possible to control material optical
properties such as color, shine and even the absorption of light. This project
aims to design and build photonic materials comprising particles that are only a
few nanometers in size. This is accomplished by shining light onto a fluid
containing numerous metal nanoparticles. Analogous to the process of atoms
joining to form molecules, the metal nanoparticles bind together in the fluid to
form arrangements of particles. By varying the flow of the fluid it is possible
to control the structure of these photonic materials, and therefore their
optical properties. A combination of computer simulations and experiments
provide a rich environment for training undergraduate and graduate students.
Incorporating components of the research into existing undergraduate courses and
laboratory experiments enables students to develop a deeper understanding of a
wide range of materials-related concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Optical matter represents a unique material arising from pure
mesoscale electrodynamic interactions of colloidal particles in an optical
field. Due to significant instabilities associated with nanoparticle-comprising
optical matter, previous studies have predominately addressed microparticle-
based structures. This project aims to eliminate the inherent instability
problem and create a paradigm for constructing artificial photonic materials
using nanoscale optical matter. The paradigm relies on advanced laser beam
shaping techniques and significant mesoscale electrodynamic interactions among
strongly scattering plasmonic metal nanoparticles in optical fields. Efficient
simulation models are developed to elucidate the collective electrodynamic
interactions of multiple nanoparticles, to reveal the equilibrium binding
configurations. Optimized optical fields are created to increase the spatial and
temporal stability of the nanoscale optical matter. Optical-matter-embedded
polymer microparticles are further fabricated in microfluidic channels by
photopolymerization. These hybrid particles can serve as building blocks for
two- or three-dimensional metal-dielectric superlattices, leading to new types
of photonic materials with tailored optical properties.