* 1951025
* Mechanisms Driving Emergent Behaviors during Myxococcus xanthus Development
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Lee Kroos, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 02/29/2024
* USD 891,784.00

How organisms build structures of controlled size and shape, and with cells that
adopt alternative fates, are fundamental questions in biology. Myxococcus
xanthus provides a unique opportunity to answer these questions: when starved,
these rod-shaped bacteria move in streams and build mounds that produce
structures, called fruiting bodies, while at the same time some cells
differentiate into round spores. Other cells die or remain outside of the
fruiting bodies as rods. Short-range signaling (called C-signaling) between
cells coordinates streaming and mound formation with spore differentiation, but
how this occurs is not fully known. To understand the process, the research will
identify which genes are involved, how their expression changes during streaming
and mound formation, what genes initiate change in cell shape, and how the cells
communicate. Cell-cell interactions impact the life of all organisms. Further
understanding of how cell-cell interactions drive behaviors will benefit society
by, for example, providing information that will permit manipulation of
microbial communities for pollution and climate control, and increase the
potential for bioenergy and food production. The project will also benefit
society by providing strong interdisciplinary training to students and by
increasing public scientific literacy and engagement through interactive
presentations and outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Myxococcus xanthus is an
attractive model system because multicellular development occurs rapidly and
synchronously under laboratory conditions. The signaling and sensory
capabilities of M. xanthus rival those of lower eukaryotes in complexity and
include eukaryotic-like features, such as the use of short-range signaling to
coordinate emergent behaviors. By focusing on how M. xanthus uses short-range
signaling to coordinate streaming and mound formation with spore
differentiation, the project will provide deep insight into emergent properties
found commonly in development, such as assembly of multicellular structures and
cell fate determination, using a highly genetically tractable system. The
knowledge gained and methods developed will also catalyze research on microbial
communities (microbiomes). The complexity of multispecies microbiomes and their
environments makes it challenging to discover the underlying mechanisms and
understand how they contribute to emergent properties. In particular, the role
of short-range signaling is understudied. The research team's focus on how M.
xanthus uses short-range signaling to drive successive emergent behaviors will
advance knowledge that has potential to transform thinking about how the
properties of microbiomes emerge. They will use a broad range of approaches
including microscopy, genetics, biochemistry, and mathematical modeling. The
team has extensive experience investigating signaling and gene regulation in
bacteria, extracting data from microscopic images, and using data-driven
computational simulations to interpret results and guide further experiments.
Recently, they devised methods to visualize the shape and gene expression of
individual cells during M. xanthus development. The new methodology paves the
way for the work, which also relies on innovative strategies to identify genes
driving emergent behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.