* 1951816
* SCC-PG: Coordinated Safety Management Across Smart Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Jose Fortes, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This planning grant enables research at the University of Florida (UF) and the
City of Gainesville (City) to guide UF and City communities on how best to
integrate and coordinate safety-relevant data, decision-making, and protective
interventions. A joint UF-City strategic plan, among other objectives,
anticipates the deployment of smart sensing and adaptable infrastructure for
data-informed coordinated management of community safety. UF and the City are
deploying smart-lighting infrastructure on multiple streets across UF and
neighboring streets which also provides the scaffolding needed to deploy sensors
of several kinds. Multiple scenarios can be envisioned for safety enhancement,
including talk-down speakers for warnings or instructions, gunshot/active
shooter and duress sounds detection, remote image/video capture and light and
mobility management. It is anticipated that human sensors (e.g. people using
smartphones) will provide information via social networking platforms, home-
security systems and safety apps. Data generated from social networks can
complement data from infrastructure sensors with early warnings and help
implement and evaluate interventions to address potential risk areas and actual
safety events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several multidisciplinary questions are
being considered in the context of the project. How can data from UF and City
locations be streamed, correlated, integrated, analyzed and visualized jointly
by separate safety management entities? How can safety incidents be prevented
and/or detected in real time from observed data patterns? How can data from
infrastructure sensors and human sensors be integrated? How can humans (managers
and citizens) access, visualize and interact with data analytics systems used to
extract and present safety information? How are safety, security and privacy
issues collectively addressed? How can distributed computing systems be
architected to support computing, storage and network needs of such workflows
across a smart city infrastructure, including devices owned by users in the
community? The anticipated outcomes of this project include (1) well formulated
research problems that integrate socio-technical perspectives in the context of
UF-City communities, (2) identification of academic and community partnerships
with the necessary knowledge to address the problems and (3) preliminary work
and testbed designs to be included in a future SCC-IRG proposal to address the
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.