* 1951148
* Social &amp; Moral Factors in Post-Hurricane Evacuation Decisions: Implications for well-being
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Rosalyn Negron, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 269,943.00

Environmental forecasts show that already vulnerable places will be
disproportionately impacted by natural disasters. The decision to stay or leave
in the aftermath of a natural disaster can have significant long-term impacts on
individual and group recovery and resilience. This project examines the
interactions among the material, social, and ideological factors, thereby
contributing to the development of multi-level models of evacuation decision-
making. In the wake of a hurricane, material factors, including the physical
conditions of homes and access to jobs, push people to consider evacuation. But
if separation from (or reunion with) family and friends is in play, material
factors alone cannot predict an evacuation decision. Beyond the social and
material, the researchers will also consider dynamics at the level of beliefs
and values, the moral considerations that people weigh in choosing to leave or
stay. Under what circumstances might moral convictions trump the social and
material concerns of people still recovering from a disaster? Understanding the
role of homeland-diasporic connection in people's decisions to stay or leave can
inform policies that manage diasporic contributions to resilience and
development. In pursuing these aims, the project will train under-represented
graduate research assistants in methods of scientific data collection and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines factors that shaped
evacuation decisions after Hurricane Maria. While considering economic and
health factors, which typically shape people's evacuation decisions, the
investigators examine factors that have received less attention in disaster
evacuation studies: social and moral dimensions. Specifically, they will focus
on the role of social ties and moral discourses. Ultimately, the project seeks
to understand how these factors influence mental health, and whether they stayed
or left he island. It is crucial to understand such factors as they shape
disaster adaption systems. Further, data on migration trends showed marked
increases in relocation following Hurricane Maria. By shedding light on the
complex set of factors evacuees consider, this research can inform policies that
aim to address depopulation in already economically vulnerable contexts. In
addition, this research will shed light on factors, beyond material ones, that
are contributing to mental health crises. To do this, the investigators will
employ individual and group interviews, media analysis, and a survey to: (1)
study how social ties influence evacuation decisions and how social ties
interact with other factors, such as people's sense of duty to nation or
community; (2) investigate the moral discourses that circulate in various media
and interviews with research participants to better understand how they
influence evacuation decisions; and (3) assess how material, social, and
ideological factors interact with evacuation decisions to affect mental
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.