* 1951469
* River Responses to Natural and Human-induced Changes in Sediment Supply
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Francis Magilligan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2023
* USD 427,479.00

This project explores the processes and outcomes of river responses to both
natural and human-induced changes in sediment supply to better develop
predictive models of channel morphlogic adjustments and the mechanisms of
sediment transport. Rivers reflect and respond to changes in streamflow and
sediment supply striving to maintain equilibrium by mutually adjusting an array
of channel properties. Yet, recent research reveals that the type and magnitude
of these responses is conditioned in unknown ways by variations in sediment
supply. The investigators will use stream reaches at and below existing/removed
dams that decrease/increase sediment supply as an experimental design to capture
these potential responses. With its focus on dams and dam removal, project
outcomes will be relevant to watershed managers, especially as the nationâ€™s
existing dam infrastructure continues to age, posing significant environmental,
social, and economic risks. This project will recruit diverse students from
underrepresented groups. Through articles and presentations at conferences and
public meetings, results will be disseminated to a broad array of scientists and
regional stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project
is to quantify the channel morphologic evolution to transient and/or sustained
changes in sediment supply and to demonstrate how morphologic evolution
conditions hydraulic properties and subsequent sediment transport. The
investigators will utilize a research design that is based on detailed
geospatial field mapping and channel surveying combined with monitoring the
mobility of gravel clasts tagged with radio-frequency identification (RFID)
tracers and with embedded accelerometers to quantify the variation in bankfull
hydraulic properties, threshold stream power, and bed architecture in response
to changes (both positive and negative) in sediment supply. By taking advantage
of the natural experiments provided by both dam emplacement and removal, the
research will improve our understanding of channel evolution following a
disturbance and thereby advance our theoretical understanding of fundamental
river processes that can be applied in other geomorphic settings. The broadly
disseminated results are essential for river restoration, with implications for
both nature and society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.