* 1951164
* SBIR Phase II:  Controlling plant pathogens with novel seed treatments based on nematode-produced ascarosides
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Murli Manohar, Ascribe Bioscience Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 899,421.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) phase II
project is to develop a novel seed treatment technology, based on naturally
occurring small molecules proven to strongly activate plantâ€™s natural defenses
against a wide range of agriculturally important pathogens. The proposed
innovation is active at extremely low concentrations, can be readily synthesized
in large quantities, and is biodegradable and non-toxic. Every year,
approximately 500 million kg of more than 600 different chemical pesticide types
are used; this costs an estimated $10 billion and yet 37% of all crops are still
destroyed by pests and pathogens. By providing an alternative, effective method
for managing diseases in crops, dependence on existing agrochemicals, synthetic
fungicides and antibiotics will be reduced, as will the rate of resistance
development. The proposed research will establish viability of a natural small
molecule as a crop protectant and can improve the economic and environmental
sustainability of agriculture by reducing the use of potentially harmful
pesticides and significantly enhancing global food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop a novel
control for plant pathogens by leveraging a class of small, naturally occurring
molecules that elicit specific immune responses in plants. The proposed project
will demonstrate a seed-coating formulation capable of long-term stability and
efficacy under field conditions, adversely affecting neither seed germination/
growth nor natural microbe/insect populations. The project objectives are to 1)
Perform multi-location field trials with wheat and soybean against three high-
impact pathogens to confirm efficacy of seed treatments; 2) Conduct greenhouse
studies to investigate potential synergies of seed and spray treatments,
including in combination with other crop protection agents; 3) Determine effects
of seed or spray treatments on nematode infestation in soybean; 4) Scale
chemical synthesis of the active ingredient and optimize the seed-coating
formulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.