* 1951447
* IIBR Instrumentation: Sub-micrometer Resolution Mass Spectrometry Imaging by Deep-UV Laser Ablation and Post-ionization
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Kermit Murray, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2024
* USD 836,650.00

An award is made to Louisiana State University and Baylor University to develop
an instrument for imaging biomolecules in tissue that uses mass spectrometry and
has both high spatial resolution and high mass range. The instrument is simple,
low-cost, and easy to use and will bring high-performance untargeted biochemical
imaging to a broad range of researchers in fundamental and translational
biological research. This instrument will be used in a combined sampling and
imaging workflow with the ability to localize, identify, and quantify
biomolecules in tissue. Mass spectrometry has the unique advantage among in
vitro imaging methods in that it is un-targeted; thus, it has the capability of
detecting lipids, metabolites, peptides and proteins without prior information
about the components. This instrument addresses a critical technological barrier
of large biomolecule ionization at submicrometer precision that is necessary for
cellular localization of compounds. The user community benefiting from the
proposed instrument includes researchers in fundamental and applied areas that
require spatially localized chemical compound identification and quantification.
Basic biological research will benefit from an instrument that can analyze a
wide range of biochemical classes. Translational research will benefit from an
instrument that is robust and highly sensitive and the relatively low cost and
ease of use will bring it to research centers where this capability is not
typically found. The mass spectrometry imaging project will leverage STEM
education resources for high-school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
education and training. The project will provide research opportunities for
students participating in the NSF S-STEM Scholars program and the Louis Stokes
Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation. Opportunities will be available
for undergraduate researchers from the State participating in the Louisiana
Biomedical Research Network summer research program and for local middle and
high school science teachers through the LSU Cain Center for STEM
Literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current mass spectrometry imaging techniques
require a compromise between secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) that uses a
precisely focused beam of ions to image small molecules and matrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization (MALDI) that uses a less-focused but gentler laser
beam to image large molecules. The proposed research eliminates the need for
this spatial resolution and mass range compromise through the use of a highly
focused deep-UV ablation laser combined with an ultraviolet post-ionization
laser for two-laser MALDI (MALDI-2). The approach uses the MALDI effect on
ablated tissue and matrix material and therefore has the mass range and gentle
ionization properties of MALDI. Furthermore, it uses simple, robust, and
relatively low-cost mass spectrometry technology that has the potential to bring
the capabilities of the instrument to more biological imaging researchers.
MALDI-2 imaging is combined with deep-UV laser ablation sampling for liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis. The results of the project
will be disseminated using a variety of social media platforms as well as
traditional methods of publications and conference presentations An online
presence will be established through a dedicated website and social media that
will post photos, videos, and updates on the instrument. The website will be
mobile device compatible and feature photos and videos of the instrument in
operation as well as the data obtained. The site will also include instructions
and protocols, example data, and instrument control and analysis software. The
anticipated outcome of this project is a prototype deep-UV ablation MALDI-2
imaging mass spectrometer with 1 Âµm spatial resolution and greater than 10,000
Da mass range. The instrument will be capable of imaging with the speed, ease of
sample preparation, and ease of data acquisition that is comparable to
conventional MALDI imaging mass spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.