* 1951090
* Quantifying Processes Driving Interannual Variability in the Biological Carbon Pump in the Western Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Michael Stukel, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 05/31/2024
* USD 163,549.00

Algae in the surface ocean convert carbon dioxide into organic carbon through
photosynthesis. The biological carbon pump transports this organic carbon from
the atmosphere to the deep ocean where it can be stored for tens to hundreds of
years. Annually, the amount transported is similar to that humans are currently
emitting by burning fossil fuels. However, at present we cannot predict how this
important process will change with a warming ocean. These investigators plan to
develop a 15+ year time-series of vertical carbon transfer for the Western
Antarctic Peninsula; a highly productive Antarctic ecosystem. This region is
also rapid transition to warmer temperatures leading to reduced sea ice
coverage. This work will help researchers better understand how the carbon cycle
in the Western Antarctic Peninsula will respond to climate change. The
researchers will develop the first large-scale time-series of carbon flux
anywhere in the ocean. This research will also support the education and
training of a graduate student and support the integration of concepts in
Antarctic research into two undergraduate courses designed for non-science
majors and advanced earth science students. The researchers will also develop
educational modules for introducing elementary and middle-school age students to
important concepts such as gross and net primary productivity, feedbacks in the
marine and atmospheric systems, and the differences between correlation and
causation. Results from this proposal will also be incorporated into a
children’s book, “Plankton do the Strangest Things”, that is targeted at 5-7
year olds and is designed to introduce them to the incredible diversity and
fascinating adaptations of microscopic marine organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This research seeks to leverage 6 years (2015-2020) of 234Th samples collected
on Palmer LTER program, 5 years of prior measurements (2009-2010, 2012-2014),
and upcoming cruises (2021-2023) to develop a time-series of summertime particle
flux in the WAP that stretches for 15 years. The 238U-234Th disequilibrium
approach utilizes changes in the activity of the particle-active radio-isotope
234Th relative to its parent nuclide 238U to quantify the flux of sinking carbon
out of the surface ocean (over a time-scale of ~one month). This proposal will
fund 234Th analyses from nine years’ worth of cruises (2015-2023) and extensive
analyses designed to investigate the processes driving inter-annual variability
in the BCP. These include: 1) physical modeling to quantify the importance of
advection and diffusion in the 234Th budget, 2) time-series analyses of particle
flux, and 3) statistical modeling of the relationships between particle flux and
multiple presumed drivers (biological, chemical, physical, and climate indices)
measured by collaborators in the Palmer LTER program. This multi-faceted
approach is critical for linking the measurements to models and for predicting
responses to climate change. It will also test the hypothesis that export flux
is decreasing in the northern WAP, increasing in the southern WAP, and
increasing when integrated over the entire region as a result of earlier sea ice
retreat and a larger ice-free zone. The project will also investigate
relationships between carbon export and multiple potentially controlling factors
including: primary productivity, algal biomass and taxonomic composition,
biological oxygen saturation, zooplankton biomass and taxonomic composition,
bacterial production, temperature, wintertime sea ice extent, date of sea ice
retreat, and climate modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.