* 1951120
* SBIR Phase II:  Optical Coherence Tomography(OCT)-Sensor Guided Sub-Retinal Injector
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Lok Chu, LIV Medical Technology Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2023
* USD 640,899.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II Project continues from Phase I to realize a new surgical tool system to
enable safe and precise delivery of stem cells and genes for ophthalmic
application, specifically to repair and restore vision for patients with retinal
degeneration. Visual impairment occurs in the natural course of aging, with some
conditions potentially addressed surgically. Associated improvements in both
quality of life and reduced health care expenditures can be addressed with a
system involving augmented real-time visualization technology, tools capable of
minute actions, and smart algorithms informing surgical actions. The proposed
technology improves imaging by incorporating machine vision, with applications
in ophthalmic treatment and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II
project will advance the development of an optical coherence tomography (OCT)
guided sub-retinal injector system. Technical tasks include conducting studies
to test clinical safety and procedure efficacy on both cadaveric human eyes and
in-vivo porcine eyes. Specifically, trained surgeons will use the system to
validate the capability to execute tasks related to subretinal microinjection
procedures, determine the time to task completion, and characterize the
magnitude and frequency of errors. The system will be validated with histology
samples and compared to current the standard of care of freehand performance.
Optimization and validation studies will take place to advance the translation
of this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.