* 1951251
* SCISIPBIO: SBP: Collaborative Research: Reliability, Risk Aversion, and Bias in Grant Peer Review
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Karen Schmaling, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 05/31/2022
* USD 83,987.00

Agencies that fund scientific research use peer review to identify the most
meritorious research projects for support. Peer review involves multiple expert
scientists evaluating applications based on pre-determined criteria (e.g., the
quality of the methodology, the qualifications of the scientists, etc.) and
assigning it a score. As research funding is highly competitive, peer reviewers
must identify the most outstanding projects among many of those deserving
funding. Peer reviewers’ judgments, however, are subject to individual biases
and preferences. Currently, little research exists on peer reviewer preferences
and how these may influence their judgments. In this project, peer review is
considered as a process of evaluating and weighing project risks and benefits.
The hypothesis is that reviewers’ attitude towards risk, i.e., risk preference,
will influence their judgments and scores. Science can proceed in smaller steps
or in larger leaps. Risk is important to progress in science: innovative and
novel projects may be associated with higher risk, and result in great
achievement or failure. Therefore, peer reviewer risk preference may influence
the rate of scientific progress. This project involves an experiment in which
peer reviewers judge the merits of projects that vary in terms of risk. The
information from this project will inform peer reviewer training and evaluation
criteria. In addition, a module for undergraduate science classes will educate
students on peer review and potential biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
hypothesis is tested in this project by having peer reviewers evaluate and score
a set of fictitious NIH-style overall impact statements (i.e., summary
critiques) for an R01-type research grant application. Different versions of the
impact statement are created to systematically reflect different sources of risk
(methodology versus investigator) and levels of risk (high/low) associated with
the application. The text is varied to reflect either female or male applicants
and will contribute to our understanding of the Science of Broadening
Participation. Peer reviewer participants also complete questions about
demographic information, expertise, self-assessed level of bias, and a measure
of risk preference. The factors associated with reviewer demographics and risk
preference are then tested as potential predictors of the reviewers’ scores;
furthermore, the interaction of these predictors with different sources and
levels of risk is examined. Finally, the effect of gender on reviewers’ scores
is examined, and how gender interacts with reviewer preference and type and
level of risk. The results will account for more of the variability in
reviewers’ scores than is evident in the extant research and potentially inform
efforts to orient peer reviewers regarding risk preference and
biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.