* 1951300
* Collaborative Research: Creativity in Teams: Identifying the Role of Meetings in Fostering Effective Cognitive and Social Processes in Teams
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Roni Reiter-Palmon, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 295,091.00

In the last two decades, interest in creativity and innovation has grown
tremendously. Creativity and innovation have been suggested as important for
organizational performance. In addition, the use of teams in organizations is on
the rise. The purpose of this research is to evaluate the interrelationships
between social and cognitive processes in team meetings for generating a
creative idea or product. The project will assess the team cognitive process
sequences that effectively result in more creative ideas, the effect of team
dynamics on these cognitive processes, and how cognitive and social processes
interact to produce creative outcomes. We will further investigate whether an
intervention to facilitate team creativity will improve creativity and the
effect it has on both cognitive and social processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address these aims, two studies will be conducted. The first study will be a
laboratory study, where teams will be ad-hoc, one-time meetings. These will be
short-term teams that have no previous interaction. The laboratory conditions
will allow for audio and video recording of the team interactions, which
facilitates detailed and nuanced analysis of both cognitive and social
processes. The laboratory study will also allow us to test an intervention using
debriefs to facilitate reflection that fosters team reflexivity. Building on the
findings from this initial study, our second study will recruit semester-long
undergraduate teams in engineering design courses at University of Nebraska
Lincoln (UNL) and Clemson. These teams work to develop a product or idea based
on real client demands, for a semester long project. As a result, these teams
will provide an opportunity to understand ongoing interaction throughout a 3 to
4 month period. The study of these teams will allow us to understand dynamics
that have consequences associated with teamwork and creative processes over
time. This project is jointly funded by the Science of Organizations program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.