* 1951923
* Implementing a linguistic database for analysis of an endangered language
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Bruce Nevin, Endangered Language Fund, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 11/30/2023
* USD 199,960.00

Modern technology allows for new ways of constructing infrastructure for
linguistic analysis. The essential elements that constitute the minimal
scientific documentation of a language include a reference grammar, a
dictionary, and transcribed narratives with translations and linguistic
analysis, and this project undertakes this by developing an interactive database
of an endangered language. The project builds on a database that includes
records of words, stories, and songs of the last fluent speakers of the language
as well as language information derived from archival records. Using newer
technology, proper morphological and syntactic analysis is now possible,
identifying the parts of words, the semantic contribution of each, and how they
can (and cannot) be put together to make words. This is crucial for documenting
this language (thereby making it available for future analysis) because most
words, and all verbs, are complex, and the translations given for them are more
specific and limited to the given context than is warranted by the meanings of
their several parts. This research provides insights into how a language puts
emphasis on what is easy or difficult or obligatory to communicate, and on how
the structure of a language provides a scaffold upon which perceptions and goals
are organized. This gives a window into different ways of thinking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be invaluable to anyone examining
relationships between languages in an area where many languages came into
contact with each other, and also will highlight the linguistically unusual
features of this language. For instance, morphemes are a challenge to identify
in the language, and word formation is complex, with little formal understanding
of how it works; with challenges for theories of word formation. The database
will allow for the construction of new words, and the database will allow for
better analysis. The lexicon will specify the constituent morphemes as well as
words that are analyzable only etymologically or not at all, and the grammar
will provide insight into how to construct complex verb stems as well as syntax
in the familiar sense of combining words into phrases and
sentences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.