* 1951284
* SBIR Phase II: Research and development of production-scale high-efficiency Thermal Photovoltaic (TPV) cells to enable ultra-low cost energy storage.
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,06/30/2022
* David Bierman, Antora Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,234,779.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to generate inexpensive, reliable
electricity through solar cells. As renewables such as wind and solar provide a
new low-cost means of generating power domestically, energy storage systems
capable of transforming these intermittent sources into dispatchable ones are
increasingly commercially attractive. However, conventional energy storage
technologies, such as advanced batteries, cannot provide the needed resiliency
of on the length scale of days. Ultra-low-cost storage technologies, such as
those based on thermal energy storage in earth-abundant materials, have the
potential to address this large commercial opportunity. The proposed project
will advance the development of a new type of heat engine to convert heat into
electricity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to move this
thermophotovoltaic (TPV) heat engine from the lab to the market. The goal of
this project is to develop large-scale and high-yield manufacturing of these
cells with industrial equipment and large-area substrates. The proposed project
will explore the cost-performance trade space toward the goal of high-volume
production of PV material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.