* 1951230
* SBIR Phase II:  Scale Up and Commercialization of Lignin-Based Biodegradable and Compostable Plastics for Horticultural and Agricultural Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Tony Bova, MOBIUS PBC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

This broader impact of this SBIR Phase II project is to develop low-cost,
biodegradable biopolymers to replace non-degradable, single-use plastics to
reduce plastic waste. Currently, most plastic products are made from non-
renewable resources and are not degradable in nature. In agriculture and
horticulture, there is a need for low-cost, biodegradable and compostable
plastics to support the production of food and other agricultural products. More
broadly, in other industries, like consumer packaged goods and food-service
packaging, there is a growing demand for biodegradable and compostable products.
The proposed research will demonstrate scale-up and commercial viability for
biopolymers made from lignin, the primary waste product of the paper and biofuel
industries. These biopolymers will have mechanical properties comparable to
commercial plastics; they will be biodegradable in soil in under 2 years and in
industrial composting conditions in under 6 months. At the end of this project,
multiple grades of biopolymers will be identified and optimized for
applications, such as nursery containers for greenhouses or agricultural mulch
film for farmers. The scope of this project will also include the exploration of
novel manufacturing processes that will address product applications beyond
agriculture and horticulture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed SBIR Phase II
project will advance the development of a new family of biodegradable plastic
materials using lignin, an organic waste product from the paper and biofuel
industries, as a key low-cost input material treated as a copolymer, rather than
a reinforcing filler, such as carbon black. The proposed research will
demonstrate scale-up and commercial viability of a novel reactive extrusion
technology, capable of producing biodegradable and compostable thermoplastics
with lignin contents of at least 50 weight percent, using solvent-free reactive
processing. The polymer alloys will have mechanical properties comparable to
commodity polymers, such as low-density polyethylene and polypropylene, and
biodegradable in soil in under 2 years and thermophilic composting conditions in
under 6 months. These materials will be validated for commercial scale
production using twin-screw extruders, converted to raw material feedstocks used
in plastics manufacturing including filament, pellets, and sheet, and then
converted with standard equipment into products such as containers for
agriculture, floral, and forestry plant production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.