* 1951089
* SBIR Phase II:  Internal Control Design for a Portable Cholera Pathogen Detector
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Katherine Clayton, Omnivis LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2023
* USD 942,269.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is an inexpensive handheld smartphone device
for rapid detection of pathogens, such as cholera, in environmental water
sources. Current water-based pathogen detection methods involve a 3-5 day
laboratory procedure. Our alternative is a portable smartphone-enabled platform
working offline to detect the pathogen in under 30 minutes . When the smartphone
has connectivity, geo-mapped and time-stamped detection results are sent to
relevant stakeholders. This novel and proactive approach for detection can
enable organizations to remediate water sources prior to community infection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project addresses the need to develop a rapid and portable field-ready DNA
amplification device for pathogen detection. The Phase II project integrates a
polyethylene glycol linker as an internal amplification control for device
verification and validation. This project proposes a new assay design
integrating a polyethylene glycol linker to eliminate extra user steps, while
maintaining assay sensitivity and specificity. The project's technical
objectives include systems engineering of an internal amplification control into
the hardware functionality of the device. This project will advance the
development of a fully integrated sample-to-answer device for detection of
waterborne pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.