* 1951311
* SaTC: EDU: Collaborative: Connecting Contexts: Building Foundational Digital Privacy and Security Skills for Elementary School Children, Teachers, and Parents
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Marshini Chetty, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 01/31/2024
* USD 231,259.00

User behavior plays a crucial role in creating and maintaining cybersecurity,
and children are an under-researched user group who are at risk from a range of
online privacy and security threats. Young children’s online safety needs are
poorly served by existing educational materials and resources, which are
typically limited to a single setting (home or school) and rarely consider the
contexts where learning occurs. In this project, the research team will leverage
understanding of the contexts in which children interact with digital
technologies to create life-relevant opportunities for privacy and security
skill building for elementary school children. Specifically, the project will
promote young children’s privacy cybersecurity learning across the two contexts
where they spend most of their time: home and school. The project will develop
resources for each of its three stakeholder groups (teachers, children, and
parents) to help in teaching and learning about everyday applications of
cybersecurity. The project will also impact cybersecurity training for
elementary school children by facilitating their learning about basic Internet
and technology concepts and developing those skills to help them make smarter
and safer decisions online. There will be a significant focus on outreach to
ensure developed resources are flexible enough to be used in school districts
around the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages Bronfenbrenner’s
ecological systems theory to develop and test a new framework—Connecting
Contexts Framework for Privacy and Security Learning. This framework will be
used to establish methods for designing and implementing tools and resources to
help children, parents, and teachers develop digital privacy and security skills
and practices they can apply in their everyday lives. Through participatory
design research with teachers and families, the research team will create
curriculum and related educational materials (i.e., micro-lessons for students,
training for parents, and professional development and curriculum materials for
teachers) that will be tailored across three grade bands (K-1, 2-3, 4-5). This
strategy will ensure students can successfully develop and expand their
understanding of four core concepts throughout elementary school: how the
Internet works, digital privacy, cybersecurity, and being a good digital
citizen. The research team will work with parents to identify their needs to
help them become partners in the learning process. Data collection will occur at
two elementary schools in the Washington, DC and Chicago, IL metropolitan
regions. Parent-specific resources will help scaffold parent-child conversations
at home to encourage family conversations about digital privacy and security
practices in everyday life. Developed resources will be created and maintained
through a digital platform to provide widespread access to the resources to
teachers, parents, and school districts across the U.S. In the final year,
resources will be shared widely, and the team will work with teachers and other
educators around the country to encourage wider adoption of curriculum and
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address
cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.