* 1951905
* Resolving Mesoproterozoic supercontinent configuration with an integrated multi-tool approach to sedimentary provenance analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Richard Gaschnig, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 04/30/2024
* USD 245,061.00

The supercontinent cycle involves the periodic assembly of the Earthâ€™s
continents into a single supercontinent followed by breakup and dispersal. One
of the oldest supercontinents for which significant geologic constraints exist
is Columbia (also referred to as Nuna), which is thought to have been assembled
by about 1.5 billion years ago. Sediments deposited between ~1.5 and 1.4 billion
years ago in western North America include minerals that lack known North
American sources and thus suggest that another continent was adjacent to western
North America within Columbia. However, the identity of this continent and the
extent to which any rearrangement occurred between ~1.5 billion years ago and
the formation of the next supercontinent (called Rodinia) at ~1.0 billion years
ago remains debated. Models have been proposed that place either northern
Australia, southern Australia, and/or eastern Antarctica adjacent to western
North America. This research will test these different models through detailed
analyses of the ages and compositions of minerals within ancient sedimentary
rocks in Montana, Idaho, and Arizona and comparison with potential sources in
Australia and Antarctica. Further constraints will be provided from comparable
analyses of minerals in ancient sedimentary rocks collected from Antarctica.
This project will support graduate and undergraduate student research at the
University of Massachusetts Lowell (UML), the development of a new summer field
geology and ecology course for UML students held in and around Glacier National
Park (which is a key locality for the rocks of interest in this project),
incorporation of supported research into other undergraduate courses at UML, and
collaborations with scientists in Idaho, Arizona, Washington, Texas, and
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to test models for
the identity and positions of continental blocks that were connected to western
North America in the Mesoproterozoic supercontinent Columbia. The study will
focus on the provenance of Mesoproterozoic sedimentary rocks in western North
America, particularly the Belt Supergroup in Montana/Idaho and similarly aged
rocks in Arizona. These sedimentary sequences have previously been recognized as
having non-North American input via conventional detrital zircon dating. This
work will use an innovative and integrative approach to determining provenance
by way of simultaneous U-Pb dating and trace element fingerprinting of detrital
zircon, monazite, and rutile, along with Hf and common Pb isotope
characterization of detrital zircon and feldspar, respectively. Results will be
compared to potential source rocks in the North Australian craton, South
Australia craton, and East Antarctic craton. Previously collected sedimentary
samples from East Antarctica will also be included in this study in order to
expand knowledge of the Precambrian basement geology of that ice-covered
continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.