* 1951436
* RUI: Structural and Dynamical Specializations of Axons that Enhance Neural Coincidence Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Joshua Goldwyn, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2024
* USD 119,984.00

Highly specialized cells process and transmit information throughout the brain.
This project aims to develop mathematical models and theory to illuminate how
neurons in the auditory system process sounds with exquisite temporal precision.
Using an original modeling framework that allows systematic and parametric
control of spike-generating regions of neurons, the project will explore
relations between structure, dynamics, and function in an important stage of
auditory processing: neurons in the auditory brainstem that encode the spatial
locations of sound sources. These neurons are coincidence detectors â€“ they are
sensitive to the timing of inputs and respond maximally to inputs that arrive
with near simultaneity. One prong of the research contributes to the advancement
of public health by considering how pathological changes in neuron structure may
degrade temporal processing in individuals with hearing loss. An essential
component of the project is the mathematical and scientific training of
undergraduate students. Students will engage in unique summer research
experiences, gain knowledge working at the interface of mathematics and
neuroscience, and contribute to a vibrant research environment at an
undergraduate-only institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops new
mathematical approaches to modeling of neural coincidence detection. The first
objective is to develop multi-compartment models of soma-to-axon coupling to
quantify how coincidence detection sensitivity may be enhanced in neural
structures with multiple sites of spike generation along the axon. The focus
will be on creating low-dimensional models (with few spatial compartments) that
preserve essential dynamical properties of these neurons and that elucidate how
the site of spike initiation enhances coincidence detection sensitivity. The
second objective is to dissect the dynamical mechanisms by which neurons process
temporal information in high-frequency signals. The focus here will be on
coincidence detector neurons in the brainstems of birds. These neurons respond
to inputs that generate small amplitude voltage oscillations at kilohertz-scale
frequencies. The goal of this work is to develop novel mathematical theory to
account for how neurons extract temporal information from oscillations at speeds
similar to, or faster than, intrinsic neuronal time-scales. The third objective
is to assess (with simulations) how pathological changes to axon structure
during hearing loss may degrade coincidence detection sensitivity in the case of
"electric hearing" with cochlear implants. By investigating neural coincidence
detection in a variety of contexts, the project will contribute to the general
understanding of nonlinear neural dynamics and temporal processing in neural
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.