* 1951194
* Conference: Collaborative Research on Risk, Energy Development, and Environmental Sustainability in the Navajo Nation
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Andrew Curley, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 26,400.00

This is a conference proposal that would convene scholars working on issues of
environment, climate, and economy in the Navajo Nation, for a two-day conference
to examine how methods in ethnographic, historical, spatial, hydro-geological,
and indigenous research can improve our understandings of vulnerability and risk
produced in contexts of sustained energy extraction. The workshop provides a
platform for scientific collaboration and capacity building among a group
historically underrepresented in science, through professional collaboration
with scholars at a tribal college. The research collaborative that will emerge
through this workshop has the potential to become a model for other Native
Nations to build research capacity and development. The workshop will facilitate
the development of more effective methodologies and avenues for the
dissemination of findings from anthropological research to promote public
understanding of science and the scientific process. The project also
contributes to the training of graduate students in methods of scientifically-
grounded and empirical data collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
the workshop is to develop a research agenda to advance knowledge of extractive
contexts in which questions of environmental risk and local governance are at
stake. The proposed activity advances new understandings of behavioral sciences
with the potential to transform the way we understand technological and cultural
change in times of energy and environmental crisis. Workshop participants will
meet at Diné College in Tsaile, Arizona, in Navajo Nation to share research
interests and discuss work in Diné political ecology and resource geographies.
The objective of the workshop is to develop a long-term collaborative project.
The project would advance anthropological science in the areas of environmental
risk, extractive industry, and energy transitions. The workshop aims to build
networks of indigenous political ecological scholarship in theorizing the
relationship between technological and cultural change, and energy transitions.
Results will improve theoretical understanding of the material and economic
conditions of indigenous environmental governance in the 21st century and
establish a basis for future comparative research in understanding how other
extractive contexts, particularly within Native Nations in the United States
(e.g., Crow, Hopi, MHA Nation, Northern Cheyenne) might theorize and implement
strategies for economic and energy transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.