* 1951307
* LTREB Renewal: The Long-Term Evolution Experiment with Escherichia coli
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Richard Lenski, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Bacteria play critical roles in many environmental processes, in human health
and disease, and in biotechnology. Therefore, it is important to understand the
processes by which bacteria change over time, and to measure the actual rates of
change in their genes, physiological functions, and ecological performance. The
two research teams will propagate and analyze 12 populations of Escherichia coli
as they evolve in a controlled laboratory environment for thousands of bacterial
generations. To measure adaptation, the researchers will place the bacteria from
later generations in competition with the ancestral strain, which has been
stored in a deep freeze, and which will be revived for these assays. To quantify
genetic change, the researchers will sequence the genomes of bacteria from the
evolving populations at different time points and compare them to the ancestorâ€™s
DNA sequence. These analyses will provide unique information about the rates,
mechanisms, effects, and predictability of bacterial evolution. The knowledge
gained will benefit science and society because bacteria are essential to the
environment, health, and biotechnology, and because their on-going evolution can
impact these vital systems. This long-running study has attracted substantial
public interest, and the investigators will continue to communicate their
findings with the public as well as with other scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This long-term research project provides a unique study of
bacterial evolution by generating an exceptionally long time-series of samples
from 12 replicate populations, all of them founded from the same ancestral
strain of E. coli and maintained for decades in identical environments. The
research teams will propagate the populations by transferring them daily into
fresh medium; every 500 generations, samples will be stored frozen, where they
remain viable and available for study. During the next five years, the
experiment should surpass 85,000 generations. The frozen samples will be used to
analyze the dynamics of adaptation by natural selection, the coupling of
phenotypic and genomic evolution, and the repeatability of evolutionary changes.
Among the questions to be addressed: Will the fitness of the bacteria relative
to their common ancestor continue to increase? Do the trajectories for relative
fitness and genomic evolution have similar curvatures, or are they discordant?
How repeatable are the fitness gains and genomic changes across the replicate
populations? The biological samples and datasets generated in this project will
be shared with the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.