* 1951153
* SBIR Phase II:  A New Approach for Isolating Leukocyte Sub-populations to Enable Efficient Manufacturing of Cellular Therapies
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Sean Gifford, HALCYON BIOMEDICAL, INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/28/2023
* USD 948,852.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will offer an improved and simpler alternative
to existing equipment currently used at several stages of cell therapy
manufacturing. An efficient, standardized, and scalable approach to
manufacturing will accelerate the translation of lab-scale discoveries to
curative, widely available therapies. This project will also enhance
understanding of applications of microfluidic technology concepts to clinically
relevant applications (requiring high volumetric throughput) in a practical
manner. The proposed technology will offer a passive (pump-, equipment-, and
even electricity-free), high-throughput, continuous-flow platform that is easily
kept sterile, readily used with no formal training, and inherently scalable,
thus leading to a new low-risk and inexpensive technique.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project proposes to employ a revolutionary cell separation approach for a high-
throughput prototype device to help simplify and streamline the manufacture of
cellular therapies. The proposed project will optimize the technology for a
scaled production process relying only on passive gravity-driven flow to
operate. The performance of prototype devices will be measured with respect to
enrichment of lymphocytes versus removal of red cells, platelets, monocytes, and
granulocytes from an initial blood sample. Retention of 75% or more of
lymphocytes from the initial sample, processed at a rate of 5 mL/min or higher,
is expected. Further, the degree to which the isolated T-lymphocytes expand in
culture and are transduced with standard cellular therapy vectors will be
measured and compared to conventionally-isolated
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.