* 1951202
* Collaborative Research: HIPER - 3D Onshore-Offshore Imaging of Controls on Subduction Zone Megathrust Rupture and Slip Behavior
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Susan Beck, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 253,012.00

The largest earthquakes worldwide occur in subduction zones where the tectonic
plates associated with ocean basins descend into Earth’s interior. These
earthquakes occur on large faults that separate the descending oceanic plate
from the overlying continental plate. Ground shaking from these earthquakes have
significant human and economic impacts. Subduction zone earthquakes that rupture
the seafloor can generate tsunamis that cause additional destruction. Regions of
the world at risk from these earthquakes include the U.S. Pacific Northwest and
Alaska, Central and South America, Japan, and Southeast Asia. Here, the
researchers deploy a dense array of seismometers to image at high resolution a
portion of the subduction zone that ruptured offshore northern Ecuador in a
large earthquake in 2016. The project leverages data acquisition from an
offshore and onshore deployment supported by European funding agencies. Analysis
of the data provides an opportunity to link variations in structure and seismic
properties along the subduction zone to the distribution of slip behaviors that
culminates in large earthquakes. Results from this research improve seismic
hazard assessment near subduction zones. The project also provides support for a
graduate student in seismology and training of undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High resolution studies of subduction zones
reveal their complexity and diversity of structure and physical properties.
Heterogeneity downdip and along strike influences plate coupling and slip
behavior on the plate interface, as well as in the downgoing plate and in the
upper plate, which ultimately culminates in large magnitude earthquakes. The
HIPER project (High Resolution Imaging of the Pedernales Earthquake Rupture
Zone) is supported by French and German funding agencies. It acquires active and
passive offshore-onshore seismic data along the northern Ecuador subduction zone
in and adjacent to the 2016 Mw 7.8 Pedernales rupture. The HIPER project
includes 60 ocean-bottom seismometers and 150 land stations that record active
source shots from a 3D grid, followed by passive recording of earthquakes. Here,
the U.S. team complete the project by deploying a dense array of 3-component
short period nodes (~300) and 60 broadband sensors. The goal is to significantly
densify the onshore portion of HIPER for active source recording. It also widens
the aperture of passive recording to improve lateral coverage and imaging at
depth. The combined arrays present an exceptional opportunity for multiscale 3D
imaging and examine the relationship between structure, fluids, and variations
in slip behavior from seismic to aseismic. Ultimately, it allows to reconcile
observations from geodesy and seismology with geology, structure, and
seismicity. Data analysis employs machine learning generalized phase detection
to significantly increase source detection. It also involves a combination of
traveltime and ambient noise tomography, and high frequency receiver functions
as input to a multi-step series of inversions to constrain earthquake locations
and seismic structure along and above the seismogenic
zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.