* 1951094
* Molecular dissection of protein poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in plant immunity and pathogen-induced DNA damage
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ping He, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,145,477.00

Immune responses in plants is collectively represented by a wide range of
processes that have evolved to protect plants during pathogen and pest
infection. Among the various responses plants use to defend themselves, and
moreover, processes that pathogens target to disable the plant immune system,
damage to DNA – the genetic code that underpins all of life – is one key point
of interaction between plants and pathogens. In the current study, the
investigators ask: How do plants protect and repair damage to DNA during
pathogen infection to ensure that the immune system continues to function.
Previous research in this area suggests that at least 1 type of repair mechanism
– poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (i.e., PARylation) – plays a critical role in a
maintenance of cell survival and immune signaling. In short, this mechanism has
the ability to detect and repair damage to the plant (host) DNA. As a key
process required for immunity during pathogen infection, the researchers will
test the hypothesis that PARylation provides a mechanistic link between plant
immunity and pathogen-induced DNA damage. The molecular and biochemical
mechanisms underlying the regulation of plant immunity by protein PARylation and
genome integrity after pathogen infection will be determined. Knowledge
generated from these studies is expected to help design better disease control
strategies for crop improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PARylation is primarily
mediated by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), which transfers ADP-ribose
moieties from NAD+ to acceptor proteins. This modification is reversible and the
covalently attached poly(ADP-ribose) can be cleaved from acceptor proteins by
poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG). PARylation has been extensively
characterized in humans due to its profound medical impacts in various
inflammatory and malignant disorders and especially cancer chemotherapy.
However, the function of PARylation in plants is poorly understood. The
viability and normal growth of Arabidopsis parp and parg null mutants provide a
unique opportunity to study protein PARylation in diverse cellular processes,
including plant immunity and DNA damage repair at the whole organismal level.
The results of the work will provide novel insights in understanding how the two
fundamental surveillance mechanisms, DNA damage and plant defense responses, are
intricately interconnected and function coordinately. This proposal aims to
unravel the regulatory mechanisms of PARylation in plant immunity, identify the
targets of PARylation-regulated immune genes and proteins, and elucidate the
mechanism of pathogen-induced DNA damage and how it is protected by
PARylation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.