* 1951261
* SBIR Phase II:  Removing the Purification Bottleneck in Biopharmaceutical Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Bob Snyder, Proteios Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2022
* USD 949,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to remove the purification bottleneck in biopharmaceutical
production. Protein engineering has enabled the new experiments to better
understand the molecular basis of disease and to aid in the discovery of new
biopharmaceuticals. However, low-cost purification of the protein of interest
from thousands of other proteins remains a challenge. Access to inexpensive
proteins for study will accelerate drug discovery with an estimated 10x savings.
The proposed project will optimize development at scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance the translation of a
suite of protein purification solutions at various operational scales. The
proposed project will optimize a research-scale kit for recombinant protein
purification for an estimated eighty percent of the purifications performed in
research today. Specialized kits for high yield and purity will be developed for
the remaining twenty percent. Enzymes used to remove an affinity tag from the
protein of interest after it has been purified will be developed at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.