* 1951819
* RESEARCH-PGR: A Systems Biology Approach to Enable Cotton Fiber Engineering
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Jonathan Wendel, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 2,752,818.00

The highly polarized cotton fiber cell that emerges from the seed coat surface
is the foundation of a multi-billion-dollar international industry. Because
important traits such as fiber diameter, length, and strength are defined by the
growth of individual cells, it is important to understand how these traits are
determined in order to generate higher value crops. Cotton fibers grow for weeks
on seeds in the developing ovary, and upon maturity, the cotton boll opens to
reveal dried inch-long fibers ready for harvest. The outer fiber cell wall
defines the shape and material properties of the fibers. At present the ability
to predict and control fiber traits is limited by the lack of understanding
regarding the primary controls governing the rate, duration, and patterns of
cell growth. The goal of this project is to build a knowledge base that will
enable scientists to develop new strategies for enhanced cotton fiber traits.
Using a multi-disciplinary approach, the project will provide detailed
developmental analyses of the gene expression patterns, protein complexes, and
cell wall features that program cotton fiber traits. It is expected that this
study will reveal gene regulatory networks that control developmental
transitions and the protein complexes and cell wall features that directly
affect cell growth. The project will help train the next generation of
biologists and will help high school teachers create learning modules that can
be used to expose students to plant biology in a way that is educational, fun,
and interesting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grand challenge in biology is to
understand the connections between genotype and phenotype. This project will
take an innovative systems biology and biomechanical modeling approach to gain
mechanistic insight into the control of important cotton fiber traits. This
global textile economy is based solely on the growth and morphogenesis of
individual fiber cells that emerge from the developing seed coat. Numerous
advances in our understanding of cell morphogenesis are revealing the basic
mechanisms by which cytoskeletal and cell wall systems are coordinated to
specify growth patterns. Therefore, it is possible to define relationships
between genotype and phenotype and genetically program fiber cells and specific
traits. The long-term goal of this project is to generate a knowledge base and
computational models of fiber growth control that will broadly enable the
genetic programming of fibers with improved traits using a systems biology
approach that is anchored to the reproducible developmental timeline of cotton
fiber development. By using developmental time and key morphological transitions
as a unifying variable among the datasets, it will be possible to associate the
dynamics of mRNA, proteins, protein complexes, and cell wall composition with
fiber phenotypes that determine the final length and morphology of the cell. All
datasets will be publicly available through publications and access at long-term
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.