* 1951190
* SBIR Phase II:  Modified Finned Tube Heat Exchangers for Economically Purifying Produced Water
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Gary Katz, Katz Water Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2023
* USD 807,127.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will improve the use of water for the oil and gas
(O&amp;G) industry, especially during hydraulic fracturing, transforming the
industry into a producer of fresh water and changing produced water from its
current status as a waste product to a commodity. The proposed technology
creates two reusable products: purified water and heavy brine. In addition to
the high cost, disposal of produced water through deep injection wells has
recently been linked to seismic activity and may impact groundwater quality,
prompting policy solutions. The O&amp;G industry competes with other water uses,
especially in US arid regions where significant O&amp;G production occurs.
Produced water, contaminated with salts, hydrocarbons, and metals, is generated
each year through O&amp;G production, costing $37B to manage in the U.S. Current
demand for global fresh water resources for agricultural, industrial or domestic
purposes is increasing, primarily due to reduction of water supplies in areas
affected by drought, climate change, population growth, and expanding
industries, as well as degradation of water quality due to contaminants from
industry, flooding, or runoff. The proposed project will provide a new treatment
for water used in O&amp;G production, creating a renewable source of fresh water
from otherwise unusable wastewater or impacted water
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to advance the
development of an innovative thermal distillation treatment system for produced
water generated during O&amp;G production. Current treatment technologies, like
reverse osmosis, cannot handle the high-total dissolved solids (TDS) content of
most produced water, and thus only a small portion may be reused currently.
Disposal is generally through permitted deep injection wells, with water
transportation typically serving as the largest disposal cost component. The
proposed system accomplishes the entire thermal distillation process in one
piece of equipment - a technological advance over state-of-practice thermal
distillation units requiring separate energy sources, heat transfer,
distillation, separation, and condensation units. It reduces manufacturing and
maintenance costs, and it uses less energy in operation. The system can be set
up on-site at the well, eliminating the need to transport produced water off-
site for disposal. The proposed treatment process yields two reusable products:
(1) purified water, which may be sold for use at the well site, sold for
agriculture/industrial uses, or discharged to surface waters; and (2) heavy
brine, which may be sold as a drilling fluid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.