* 1951678
* Characterization and Prediction of Viral Capsid Geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Antoni Luque, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Viruses are the most abundant biological entity on the planet and play a crucial
role in the evolution of organisms and the biogeochemistry of Earth. Closely
related viruses, however, can have very dissimilar genomes, complicating
integration of knowledge acquired from the study of independent viruses, and
limiting prediction of the characteristics and potential threats of emerging
viruses. Viruses, however, conserve a few structural properties that could help
circumvent this problem. Most viruses store their infective genetic material in
a protein shell called a capsid. The capsid self-assembles from multiple copies
of the same (or similar) proteins, and most capsids display icosahedral
symmetry. This architecture optimizes the interaction of proteins and the volume
available to store the viral genetic information. This research project
hypothesizes that viruses have evolved a limited set of replication strategies
to specialize and exploit the reduced number of geometrical templates capable of
forming icosahedral capsids. This, in turn, may have constrained the number of
three-dimensional configurations adopted by capsid proteins, providing a
mechanistic rationale for the existence of viral structural lineages. This
hypothesis will be tested by analyzing and comparing hundreds of viruses from
multiple different viral families using novel mathematical methods. Confirming
this hypothesis will offer a quantitative framework to study viral evolution and
open the door to design of generic antiviral strategies targeting viruses in the
same structural lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Only ten protein folds have been
identified among major capsid proteins of viruses that form icosahedral capsids.
These folds define viral lineages that group viruses that can be genetically
unrelated and infect hosts from different domains of life. This limited number
of folds contrasts with the vast genetic diversity of viruses. The existence of
these folds across the virosphere, however, remains unknown. Here, it is
hypothesized that there is a direct relationship between the viral replication
strategy of each viral lineage, the icosahedral lattice of the capsid, and the
fold of capsid proteins. The hypothesis will be tested by developing a database
that will include the viral replication, protein fold, and capsid lattice of
five hundred viruses that have been reconstructed at high or medium molecular
resolution. Voronoi tessellations and protein-protein interaction lattices will
be obtained to identify computationally the icosahedral lattice associated to
each virus. Additionally, molecular measurements of the reconstructed capsids
will be obtained to establish allometric relationships for at least one viral
lineage, facilitating the prediction of icosahedral capsid properties from
genomic information. The new icosahedral framework will be also extended to
obtain new sets of elongated capsids, which represent the second most abundant
type of capsid. The methods will be disseminated online for use by viral
structure researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.