* 1951995
* IRES Track I: Exploring the Ecophysiology of Energy Balance in Vienna, Austria
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jessica Healy, Austin College
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2025
* USD 294,696.00

This award aims to grow a globally engaged U.S. scientific workforce by
providing an international research experience in Vienna, Austria to a diverse
group of U.S. undergraduate students. Five students per year will conduct
individual research projects on energy balance in vertebrates (including
hibernating dormice and migratory birds), mentored by a dynamic group of
international ecophysiology researchers at the Department of Interdisciplinary
Life Sciences of the University of Veterinary Medicine in Vienna. Understanding
how various vertebrate animals choose to allocate energy resources under
different environmental conditions is important for predicting how those animals
might respond to a changing climate. On their return to north Texas, students
will present the results and broader implications of their research on these
topics and their travel experience to the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparative ecophysiology provides a unique
opportunity to investigate the strategies by which various vertebrates at
different life stages cope with extreme energy demands under a potentially
changing climate. Hibernators gain extensive body fat to fuel survival over
months of aphagia, and have lifespans longer than predicted for their body size.
Migratory birds expend immense amounts of energy to fuel continent-scale
migrations, but also must have sufficient energy for costly breeding behaviors
and courtship displays. Understanding the common strategies by which birds and
mammals manage energy allocation in different seasons may provide insights into
the ability of these organisms to deal with the likely perturbations of food
availability due to climate change. IRES participant projects fall into 3 main
categories: 1) effects of early-life caloric restriction (on hibernation and
ageing in dormice, and on migratory behavior in birds); 2) cost/benefit
decisions of arrival time and breeding behavior in migratory birds; 3)
regulation of metabolic costs of courting behavior in birds. IRES students will
participate in a semester-long half credit pre-departure course providing
training in cultural competency, necessary technical skills, and project design
in collaboration with their international research mentors. During their 7 weeks
in Vienna, students will carry out their individual projects, present on their
findings, and write up a project report that where appropriate may be submitted
for publication. On their return to the US, students will present their research
to peer, scientific, and general audiences in a variety of local, regional, and
national venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.