* 1951813
* SCC-PG: Advanced Learning for Energy Risk Tracking (ALERT)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Mladen Kezunovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The energy supply is the backbone of Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC).
It ties together various energy stakeholders (providers, consumers, and
services) across different social, economic and cultural layers, and among
groups corresponding to the residential, commercial, or industrial settings.
Recent statistics indicate that despite all the measures taken by the utility
industry to maintain the reliability and security of the energy supply, the
number of major blackouts throughout the world is increasing. Loss of
electricity affects residents, students, private and public sector employees,
small and large businesses, and critical city services, such as, police,
firefighters, and first responders. The fundamental question is whether the data
sciences and engineering, combined with social sciences and technology can help
reduce the losses and related societal impacts. This project postulates that the
combination of the Big Data spatiotemporal analytics and physical models will
allow us to achieve predictive outage risk capabilities to address the
mitigation options not presently available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Advance
Learning for Energy Risk Tracking (ALERT) approach will focus on predicting the
outages and asset failure risks using historical data from utilities (outage,
smart meter data, etc.), along with additional data from weather-related
government and private sources (radar, satellite, ASOS, NLDN and NDFD, Vaisala),
as well as topology and vegetation data. Such risk predictions will be shared
with participating utility companies, and with their customers to mobilize
mitigation measures, which needs a strong social study aspect to better
understand customer behavior. Those measures may include: a) equipment
repair/replacement and feeder switching actions, b) relocation of the volatile
population, and local power back up for schools, businesses and essential city
services, c) scheduling firefighter and emergency services for evacuation of at-
risk populations, and d) dispatching police forces to prevent looting of vacated
houses and businesses. The goal of the communities to minimize the risk of
electricity supply failure and undesirable environmental impacts will be
achieved by engaging community stakeholders in creating and sharing outage
prediction risk maps to allow for individual and collaborative mitigation
actions. The main objective is to build research capability to develop a
methodology for predicting the risk of electricity outages, which emphasizes the
S&amp;CC aspects. To strengthen the community engagement, and to consolidate
thinking in the research team and among the various stakeholder groups in
metropolitan areas in Texas, different types of meetings will be held.. These
multidisciplinary meetings will focus on defining ALERT goals: the need for data
collection and behavioral pilots, the requirements for the integration platform,
the logistics of the user portal implementations for the dissemination of ALERT
messages and handling of false positive and false negative scenarios, as well as
collection of panel polling data in future steps. The project will identify the
research gaps and means of addressing them, the data requirements, and will
develop a comprehensive network of contacts for each partner organization, and
each prospective pilot participant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.