* 1951216
* SBIR Phase II:  Dual Element Matrix (DEM) Water Electrolyzer
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Kevin Leonard, Avium, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2023
* USD 949,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to make on-site hydrogen generation
convenient and economically viable. Hydrogen is a chemical used widely in
industry and serves an alternative fuel source for electric vehicles, increasing
drive range and shortening refueling time, but adoption has been limited by the
needs for refueling infrastructure. One method to address this is to create
hydrogen by splitting water, alleviating the safety, logistical, and reliability
issues associated with the delivery and storage of hydrogen, but existing
technology has been associated with high capital and operating costs. The
objective of this proposal is to advance water splitting technology, enabling a
non-polluting, zero-emission hydrogen solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop an advanced
electrolyzer. The project will (1) synthesize the catalysts and fabricate these
electrodes on an industrial scale; (2) characterize the relationship between
electrode architecture and kinetic and mass-transfer limitations; and (3)
identify the electrode architecture, stack compression, and flow rates required
to translate the performance of these electrodes to an industrial-sized
prototype. The project will utilize mathematical modeling to guide electrode
architecture development and a three cell industrial-sized test stack for
experimental testing before employing electrodes in a full 4 kg/day stack.
Furthermore, the project will employ the electrodes in a 4 kg/day pressurized
stack and integrate these components to produce hydrogen at 20 bar to the SAE
J2719 standard of 99.998% purity. The projected targets for stack and system
efficiency for the final system are 43 kWh/kg and 55
kWh/kg.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.