* 1951332
* The evolution of transcription initiation mechanisms and its genetic basis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Zhenguo Lin, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 02/29/2024
* USD 742,875.00

The DNA sequence of a gene needs to be copied into mRNA molecules to carry out
its function, a process called transcription. Cells are highly selective in
where they begin (initiate) transcription of their genes. The mechanism of
locating the starting positions of transcription is shared by most eukaryotic
organisms such as humans, plants, and fungi. Yet, a distinct way of
transcription initiation has been found in a few fungal species including
Bakerâ€™s yeast. This project aims to determine when and how the mechanisms of
transcription initiation have diverged. Success of this project will advance
basic understandings of the evolution and genetic mechanisms of transcription
initiation, a first step in harnessing the power of biology for the bioeconomy.
This project also develops new software and generates a large collection of mRNA
sequences, which will benefit the research community. In addition, this project
will build a user-friendly database that can serve as a portal for improving
public literacy in genomics and facilitate teaching in K-12 schools and
colleges. This project also contributes to the development of a globally
competitive STEM workforce by training a postdoctoral scholar, graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In most
eukaryotes, transcription is initiated by a large enzyme preinitiation complex
at about 30 nucleotides downstream of a short sequence element known as the TATA
box, where the preinitiation complex is assembled. In contrast, the
preinitiation complex scans DNA sequences further downstream of the TATA box for
favorable transcription start sites in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This project
aims to elucidate when the transcription initiation mechanisms have diverged and
to identify key genetic changes associated with this process. This project
applies a combination of computational and experimental approaches to determine
the initiation mechanism of 68 fungal species. Aim 1 of this project will
develop novel bioinformatics tools for accurate mapping of transcription start
sites based on high throughput sequencing data. In Aim 2, this project will
capture the first nucleotide of RNA molecules and sequence these transcripts to
generate transcription start site maps for 68 species representing all major
fungal lineages. The initiation mechanism for each species will be determined
based on the distribution of the TATA box relative to the transcription start
site on a genomic scale. A detailed evolutionary history of initiation
mechanisms will be depicted to pinpoint the occurrence of divergence. The third
project aim will identify the key genes associated with the divergence of
transcription initiation mechanisms based on their evolutionary history and
expression profiles. Important genetic changes in these genes are also expected
to be determined through comparative sequence analyses. These results will lay a
solid foundation for future interrogation of the specific functions of
preinitiation complex components in transcription
initiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.