* 1951518
* Transient Intermediates by Photodissociation and UV-Vis Action Spectroscopy in the Gas Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Frantisek Turecek, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 589,929.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Frantisek Turecek of the Department
of Chemistry at University of Washington, Seattle, is developing new methods for
the generation and spectroscopic studies of highly reactive ionized components
of nucleic acids. These intermediates play a role in radical reactions causing
DNA damage. The goal of this research is to exploit the spectroscopic properties
and energetics of these short-lived intermediates for the understanding of the
early stages of ionization damage in DNA. DNA ionization adversely affects
individuals engaged in high-altitude travel, space exploration, and work with
radioactive materials, as well as materials used for the future development of
DNA computing. The project addresses natural as well as synthetic DNA components
and lies at the interface of physical, organic, and computational chemistry.
Another part of the project is aimed at determining structure and interactions
in biomolecular complexes of protein and DNA components. The project is
therefore well suited to the education of scientists at the forefront of
chemical research. The research group is dedicated to provide high levels of
education and professional training for graduate and undergraduate students, as
well as science outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies
address two areas of chemistry where highly reactive intermediates play an
important role. In one part of these studies, gas-phase ion chemistry methods
are used to generate DNA nucleobase, nucleoside, and oligonucleotide cation
radicals, as well as those from unnatural hachimoji bases, and obtain their UV-
Vis photodissociation (UVPD) action spectra. This provides the first
interference-free electronic spectra of isolated cation radicals relevant to
reactive intermediates formed in the initial stages of DNA ionization damage.
Advanced methods of ion chemistry are employed to generate radical intermediates
that include multistage collision-induced electron transfer in transition metal
complexes, which is an oxidative process, and electron-transfer dissociation of
multiply charged non-covalent complexes, which is a reductive process. Cation-
radicals of 61 amino-acid encoding DNA trinucleotides are generated and
characterized to establish the DNA code of vulnerability to ionization damage
and radical-driven rearrangements. The experimental studies are supported and
complemented by large-scale computations, including Born-Oppenheimer molecular
dynamics, ab initio thermodynamics, RRKM (Rice–Ramsperger–Kassel–Marcus)
kinetics, excited electronic states, and vibronic spectra. Another part of these
studies is aimed at developing new photosensitive tags to be incorporated into
specific amino acid residues and utilized for photodissociative cross linking in
gas-phase complexes of peptide ions with nucleosides. Tandem mass spectrometry
is used to determine the crosslink sites in the photoproduct ions. The
experimental studies are aided and complemented by BOMD (Born-Oppenheimer
molecular dynamics) trajectory calculations to identify low-free energy
conformers and track the dynamics of non-covalent interactions in the
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.