* 1951793
* Mathematical Modeling of Antiretroviral Therapy in Pursuit of HIV Prevention and Cure
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Naveen Vaidya, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 179,990.00

There is currently no known cure or effective vaccine for human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) infection. In the absence of a vaccine, the most effective strategy
for preventing HIV transmission is to implement the “treatment as prevention”
approach, that is, antiretroviral medication to achieve undetectable viral load
in patients, thereby preventing sexual transmission. For treatment and cure of
HIV infection, one of the viable options is to begin therapy early in infection
before the establishment of virus reservoirs such as latent infected CD4+ T
cells and infected brain cells. This project develops and uses mathematical
models of cell-virus interactions and computational methods to study the
effectiveness of early antiretroviral therapy (ART), including a recently
developed nanoparticle-based preventive therapy (NBPT), for treatment of HIV.
The study will focus on HIV infections in three critical sites: vaginal mucosa,
circulation, and brain. In addition to improving our current knowledge of HIV
transmission dynamics, pathogenesis, and nanomedicine, this research will have a
significant positive and practical impact on the development of therapies and
vaccines for the control of HIV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
generate novel nonautonomous systems of differential equations to study the
effects of ART pharmacodynamics on the spatiotemporal distribution of HIV virus
in vaginal mucosa and on the persistence of HIV in the virus reservoirs. The
project will utilize experimental data from HIV infected humans and SIV (Simian
Immunodeficiency Virus) infected macaques, as well as data from experiments on
effectiveness of ARTs and NBPTs, for the model validation and the parameter
estimation. The developed models will be extensively analyzed using dynamical
systems theory as well as statistical, numerical, and machine learning methods.
Mathematical and computational challenges anticipated in this research will
offer opportunities to develop innovative techniques that advance the field of
applied non-autonomous complex differential equations as well as optimal control
theory. This project will also broaden the application of differential equation
modeling to a machine learning framework. The results, including optimal
treatment protocols, are intended help to inform evidence-based guidelines for
managing, preventing, and curing HIV infection via early ARTs and NBPTs, thereby
enhancing the quality of life for HIV infected patients. In addition, this
project will provide extensive interdisciplinary research training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.