* 1952756
* EAR-PF Bringing fossil cephalopods back to life: virtual and physical assessment of hydrostatics, hydrodynamics, and functional morphology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* David Peterman, Peterman, David J
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2022
* USD 174,000.00

An NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship has been granted to David J. Peterman to
carry out research and education plans at the University of Utah under the
mentorship of Dr. Kathleen Ritterbush. The research project focuses on
investigating the aquatic biomechanics of fossil cephalopods (e.g. nautiloids,
ammonoids, etc.) to disentangle the relationship between shell form and
function. During their extensive evolutionary history, thousands of cephalopod
species experimented with wildly different shell morphologies while serving as
vital components of marine ecosystems. Despite their abundance, diversity, and
rapid turnover, little is known about the specific modes of life or life habit
assumed by characteristic morphotypes, or the functional morphology of certain
shell features. Therefore, understanding the properties of these diverse
organisms is necessary to integrate morphology into the current grasp of
evolution and extinction, the constraints on biogeographic dispersal, and the
paleoecology of these key components of marine ecosystems. The project will
construct a self-sustaining, state-of-the-art, aquatic biomechanics laboratory
while fostering education in emerging technologies in engineering and computer
science, and thus promoting the importance of multidisciplinary collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to investigate the interaction between ecology
and evolution for shelled cephalopods, the PI will develop a cutting-edge
workflow for the generation of neutrally buoyant cephalopod models in virtual
and physical settings. The proposed virtual modeling of fossils serves as an
alternate approach to tomographic techniques. Additionally, their physical
counterparts can be used to assess complex physical properties in a chaotic,
real world setting. Such models will allow the computation of physical
properties that acted on these animals during life. These properties include
hydrostatics (the conditions for neutral buoyancy, stability, life orientation,
the directional efficiency of movement) and hydrodynamics (drag, lift, and
swimming capabilities). Such properties are fundamental to better understand the
constraints on locomotion, modes of life, life habit, paleoecology, and the
selective pressures acting on the targeted cephalopods (from the scale of
individual communities to entire morphotypes). Due to the vast temporal range,
ubiquity, diversity, and extensive geographic distributions of shelled
cephalopods, evaluating their syn vivo physical properties is vital to fully-
reconstruct almost any marine ecosystem during most of the Phanerozoic Eon. This
project received co-funding from the Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology
program in the Earth Science division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.