* 1952236
* SCC-PG: Fostering Aging-in-Place and Autonomy in Elderly Persons through Intelligent Tracking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Tracy Hammond, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

As people age they begin to need assistance with activities of daily life
(ADLs). Losing the ability to perform ADLs requires that these individuals
receive care from family members, move to senior living communities or
experience a significant drop in their quality of life. Given the projected rise
in the number of older adults over the coming decades, the resources available
to care for this population will be spread thin, potentially leaving some with
lower quality of care or even without any form of care. One means of addressing
this is developing systems that allow older adults to live independently while
maintaining their quality of life for longer. Such systems would not only meet a
well-documented desire to live independently, but also reduce the burden of care
on caregivers and/or the need for more expensive forms of long-term care. This
project will lay the groundwork for the development of a scalable
gerontechnological system consisting of sensors and novel algorithms designed to
recognize ADL performance in real-world settings. Through tracking of resident
performance of ADLs we aim to facilitate more timely and relevant care and
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project works with multiple senior
living communities to develop a gerontechnological system that allows for a
quantified daily health profile to enable meaningful care for those who wish to
age-in-place. This planning grant attempts to answer the following research
questions through interviews and observational studies with each collaborating
senior living community and determination of preliminary technological details:
(1) What are the specific needs of both caregivers and residents from a
gerontechnological system built on the recognition of ADLs and resident
location? (2) What are the requirements of the indoor positioning system (IPS)?
(3) What are the privacy needs and concerns of the caretakers and residents and
how can the system address them? The information gained from the planning grant
will allow us to submit a multi-year Integrative Research Grant that will
attempt to answer the following research questions: (1) Can common ADLs be
accurately recognized using a combination of wearable devices and novel machine
learning algorithms and methodologies? (2) How does the recognition of activity
patterns, feedback to residents and caregivers, and individually-tailored
interventions support and/or impact the lives of senior living community
residents? (3) How does the recognition of activity patterns, feedback to
residents and caregivers, and individually-tailored ADL support and/or impact
the workload and ease the burden of care on the caregivers within the senior
living facilities? Successful completion of this work has the potential to
transform the current paradigm of elderly healthcare from reactive to proactive
by monitoring and supporting the health of the elderly
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.