* 1952613
* IRES Track I: Immersive Undergraduate Research in the Galapagos as a Tool for Building URM STEM Careers
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* W Frankino, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,970.00

Part 1: Nontechnical Project Description. &lt;br/&gt;Genuine social and
financial barriers prevent talented undergraduates – particularly those from
underrepresented minorities – from participating in university research, and
ultimately from building careers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;(STEM). Overcoming these multifaceted barriers is a matter
of equity, and is critical for scientific progress,&lt;br/&gt;United States STEM
workforce development, and national security. The researchers have developed a
19-week undergraduate research experience in Houston and the Galápagos islands,
Ecuador. The Program is designed purposefully to help underrepresented
minorities overcome the social barriers that limit their participation and
success in STEM. However, the combined cost of Program&lt;br/&gt;tuition,
travel, research station fees, and lost time from work means that participation
is cost-prohibitive for&lt;br/&gt;many students. This award will support
financially the participation of talented but
financially&lt;br/&gt;disadvantaged students in the Program.&lt;br/&gt;The
primary aims are to enable an increase in the participation of talented,
financially&lt;br/&gt;underprivileged students in this unique research
experience and to bring these students to lifelong&lt;br/&gt;success in STEM. In
addition, the data generated by students are used to understand the
natural&lt;br/&gt;functioning of the Galápagos, and can guide policy
recommendations that ensure responsible&lt;br/&gt;development and conservation
not just of these islands, but of any ecologically sensitive near-
coastal&lt;br/&gt;areas that experience growing ecotourism pressures or that are
on the margins of emerging urban&lt;br/&gt;environments. Finally, the Program
evaluation will generate data-driven insights into the aspects of the Program
that leads to student success; publication of these findings will enable
adoption and modification&lt;br/&gt;of the proposed approach not just by
minority serving institutions, but by any that desire to increase the racial
and&lt;br/&gt;economic diversity of populations successful in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Project Description. &lt;br/&gt;The
existing Program is built around helping&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates, particularly
those from underrepresented minority (URMs) populations,
overcome&lt;br/&gt;contextual barriers to STEM success. Students in the Program
spend one semester in an intensive&lt;br/&gt;preparatory course at the
University of Houston (UH) that uses the Galápagos as a model to
explore&lt;br/&gt;several topics in geology, evolutionary biology, history, and
conservation. Through the course, students&lt;br/&gt;also engage in numerous
cohort building (e.g., camping, behind-the-scenes zoo tours) and
professional&lt;br/&gt;training activities (e.g., how to read the scientific
literature critically, how to present findings, RCR, use of&lt;br/&gt;field
biology gear). They then conduct collaborative research for four weeks in the
Galápagos with faculty&lt;br/&gt;based at the Galápagos Science Center on San
Cristóbal island. Undergraduate teams contribute to&lt;br/&gt;faculty-led
projects focused on basic biology and ecological health of the Galápagos under
different&lt;br/&gt;intensities and forms of stress from development. While in
the islands, students are immersed in local&lt;br/&gt;culture through home-stays
with local families, build their professional networks and STEM
identities,&lt;br/&gt;develop STEM self-efficacy, etc. Upon return to UH,
students engage in several structured academic and&lt;br/&gt;developmental
activities such as training in the use of personal narrative to communicate
their&lt;br/&gt;experiences and research, guidance in presenting findings at
professional meetings, developing&lt;br/&gt;applications to graduate school,
etc. These activities are aimed at facilitate transition to
continuing&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate research, post-graduate study, or careers in
STEM,&lt;br/&gt;The full cost of Program participation is considerable, and
excludes students with financial need.&lt;br/&gt;The IRES Award aims to provide
financial support to academically talented Program aspirants with
unmet&lt;br/&gt;financial need; funds will cover the full cost of Program
participation, including tuition, travel, housing,&lt;br/&gt;Galápagos park and
research station fees, and income lost from student time away from outside
work.&lt;br/&gt;Data generated by the students increases our understanding the
Galápagos, and has clear&lt;br/&gt;applied value for ecologically sensitive
near-coastal areas globally. Importantly, the Program evaluation&lt;br/&gt;will
generate new insights into how diverse and ongoing immersive training,
undergraduate research, and&lt;br/&gt;strong financial support can drive URM
success in STEM. Publication of these insights will enable broad&lt;br/&gt;use
of our approach to increase the racial and economic diversity of populations
successful in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;Such focused efforts to increase URM success in
STEM is a matter of equity that is critical to the national&lt;br/&gt;interest
as ongoing demographic shifts affect the composition of our student and worker
populations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.