* 1952196
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Integrating Information Flows and Supporting Communities as Decision-Makers in Response to Acute and Chronic Stressors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Katherine Lieberknecht, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,216,000.00

Local communities, and the people who live within them, experience firsthand the
impacts of severe weather events, such as flooding, extreme heat, and wildfire.
At the same time, vulnerable populations see these impacts further magnified by
chronic stressors such as poverty and poor health. As extreme weather events
increase in frequency and severity, all communities across the US—and especially
vulnerable ones— need to improve resilience planning and outcomes. At the same
time, residents on the front line of acute events and chronic stress often have
critical knowledge about the characteristics of these episodes, the harms they
cause, and potential solutions. This valuable local knowledge has been difficult
to integrate into policy and decision-making. Local agencies, nonprofit
organizations, researchers, and communities have identified the urgent need to
better link everyday knowledge about people’s experiences of and responses to
extreme weather events to larger scale planning and preparation work conducted
by municipalities and their partners. To address this need, this Smart &amp;
Connected Communities project will build upon a partnership with the Dove
Springs community of Central Texas – a diverse, socially vibrant, but
economically challenged neighborhood experiencing repeated and severe
flooding—to develop a safe and secure online portal where residents can share
knowledge about their community and their response to stressors. Using data
shared through this portal, researchers will work with community members to
design an information framework and policy process to link local knowledge with
existing large-scale data sets—such as Census data, historic flood information,
and land cover data– already used to prepare for extreme weather events, while
building long-term community health, prosperity, and safety. These integrated
data will also be used to envision and model healthy, safe, and prosperous
futures at regional and statewide scales. This project serves the national
interest by contribution to the National Science Foundation’s mission to promote
the progress of science advancing national health, property, and welfare.
Specifically, the models, information framework, online data portal, community
engagement processes, policy-making process, and data security protections
created for this project can be adapted by other communities in the US
experiencing extreme weather events and chronic stressors, serving the national
interest and society. Furthermore, this project will promote the progress of
science through new contributions to data and social sciences; advance the
national health and welfare through enhanced resilience in the pilot community
through better preparation for extreme events and chronic stressors; and create
professional development and educational opportunities for participating
residents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will produce a community-
led, innovative interface which will help residents prepare for acute stressors
while building long-term resilience to chronic stressors; a safe, secure, and
private technological system to collect, store, and analyze local vulnerability
indicator data based on lived experiences of extreme weather events, community
assets, and day-to-day threats to well-being; an original knowledge management
framework to integrate and aggregate multiple data types and scales; a co-
developed process to integrate local data into resilience policy and decision-
making; and a system to integrate local knowledge into big-dataset integrative
modeling. We will use integrative research methods, including qualitative and
quantitative methods to conduct a longitudinal assessment of community
resilience and measure decision-making processes; participatory co-design of the
portal; development of data privacy processes and construction of a knowledge
graph; and data visualization, multi-modal analysis, and machine-supported
reasoning. We anticipate the following broader impacts to society: provision of
local knowledge to improve municipal and nonprofit decision and policy-making;
sharing of innovative contributions with other US cities; establishment and
training of residents as Climate Navigators (community-based experts on the
neighborhood-scaled impacts of climate events), which will increase short and
long-term resilience in the community (including opportunities for professional
development and a Higher Ed Pathway Project); and integration of local knowledge
into computer-based modeling protocols to improve the ability to guide
resilience, preparedness, and acute responses across the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.