* 1952694
* The Tenth International Workshop on Differential Algebra and Related Topics (DART X)
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Joel Nagloo, CUNY Bronx Community College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2020
* USD 33,750.00

The Tenth International Workshop on Differential Algebra and Related Topics
(DART X) will be held at the City University of New York, from 02/10/2020 to
02/14/2020, in New York City. The subject of differential algebra concerns the
study of differential and difference equations from an algebraic viewpoint.
These are equations that describe how quantities and their rates of changes are
related and are fundamental tools that modern science and engineering use to
model physical reality. The aim of the conference is to bring together
researchers in areas of mathematics that both influence and are influenced by
differential algebra. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DART international conference
series started in 2000 and has become an annual activity in the recent years.
This research area has deep connections to mathematical logic, number theory,
and computational algebra. The conference will highlight newly discovered
connections with other areas such as functional transcendence, arithmetic
geometry, noncommutative algebra and geometry, and applications to modeling and
the identifiability of parameters. Additional information can be found at the
conference website:
https://fsw01.bcc.cuny.edu/joel.nagloo/DART10.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.