* 1952764
* EAR-PF: Unraveling the Paleogene exhumation history of the Orocopia Schist in west-central Arizona
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Nikki Seymour, Seymour, Nikki M
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2022
* USD 174,000.00

&lt;p&gt;Dr. Nikki M. Seymour has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out research and education plans at Stanford University and
the University of California Santa Cruz under the mentorships of Dr. Martin
Grove and Dr. Jeremy Hourigan respectively. This research project will determine
the exhumation history of the northern Plomosa Mountains, located in west-
central Arizona. The rocks exposed in the Plomosas originated as sediments
deposited on the Pacific Ocean floor west of California and were subducted and
added to the base of the North American continent during the late Cretaceous-
Paleogene Laramide Orogeny, a period of shallow-angle subduction from ~90-50 Ma
that has been tied to the end of Sierra Nevada magmatism, construction and
subsequent collapse of high plateaus, uplift of basement-cored mountain ranges,
and extensive volcanism. The top of the Orocopia Schist was exposed at the
surface by the Plomosa detachment fault between ~21-15 Ma, meaning it would have
been exposed at the surface after traveling more than 40 km through the crust to
reach shallow crustal levels in the latest Cretaceous-Paleogene (~73-23 Ma). The
thermal history that follows the buildup of sediment at the base of the crust
during shallow-angle subduction can reveal how these rocks moved through the
crust. This project will study metamorphic zircon rims from the Orocopia Schist
to document the timing of sediment subduction and addition to the bottom of
North America. However at present there are no constraints on the history that
brought these rocks to the shallow crust prior to Miocene faulting (~21-15 Ma).
As part of the broader impacts of this project Dr. Seymour will coordinate with
San Francisco-based software developers to expand the capabilities of the
Augmented Reality Topographic Sandbox to integrate geologic maps. Successfully
integrating maps with topography in the sandbox will allow students to
experiment with the 3D geometries of sedimentary formations and structures and
will be widely applicable throughout all levels of geoscience
education.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;p&gt;Determining the exhumation
history of the Orocopia Schist (OS) is critical to understanding the transition
from Cretaceous shortening to Miocene extension, as well as the processes
driving sediment underplating, accretion, and syn-subduction exhumation. Dr.
Seymour will systematically investigate the temporal and thermal evolution of
the Orocopia Schist subduction complex using meso- and microstructural, geo- and
thermochronological, petrological, and geochemical analyses to understand (1) at
what depth the OS was accreted and understand the processes that exhumed it, (2)
the age and geochemical affinity of the crystalline gneiss that structurally
overlies the OS and the significance of its tectonic contact with the OS, and
(3) the exhumation histories of the gneiss and OS. Methods will include detailed
mapping and microstructural study of the OS and the overlying gneiss at key
locations to document crucial cross-cutting relationships, dating of syn-
kinematic phases with clear kinematic context such as titanite for U-Pb and
hornblende, phengite, and biotite for Ar/Ar thermochronology, and
thermobarometry using Titanium-in-quartz, Raman spectroscopy of carbonaceous
material, and oxygen stable isotope ratios for thermometry and garnet-biotite-
plagioclase-quartz chemistries for barometry. This approach will document the
number and significance of fabric generations preserved in the Orocopia Schist,
and determine whether the presently exposed mylonitic fabric is related to
Paleogene metamorphism, Miocene extension, or preserves elements of both.
Comparing these results to the thermal history of the crystalline gneiss will
provide critical details to tectonic relationship between the two rock types.
Particular attention will be paid to whether the schist and gneiss share any
portion of their thermal history, and if so, at what point their histories
evolved together. A shared thermal history between the OS and gneiss would
provide insights into the geodynamic processes that control subduction complex
exhumation during or shortly following shallow-slab subduction. These
observations have implications for (1) the regional tectonics of the
southwestern USA, (2) the extent of subduction underplating during shallow-angle
subduction, and (3) the geodynamic processes that control subduction complex
exhumation during or shortly following flat-slab
subduction.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;p&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;/p&gt;