* 1952844
* EAR-PF: Morphodynamics of giant dunes in wind and water
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Julia Cisneros, Cisneros, Julia
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 11/30/2022
* USD 121,990.00

Dr. Julia Cisneros has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
conduct research on giant sand dunes formed by wind or water at Rice University,
Houston, TX and Texas A&amp;M University, College Station, TX with Dr. Jeff
Nittrouer and Dr. Ryan Ewing, respectively. This project seeks to understand how
giant sand dunes move and transport sediment in deserts and rivers. In deserts,
giant dunes migrate and change over thousands of years, recording the
variability in global climate. In rivers, giant dunes migrate over days to
months and respond to significant landscape-altering events, such as extreme
floods. Giant dunes exist also on other worlds (e.g., on Titan, a moon of
Saturn), and here on Earth, their deposits are preserved in the sedimentary rock
record providing key records of inaccessible and ancient environments. Still,
little is known about their topographic structure or how multiple scales of
dunes may co-exist. This information is vital to improve our understanding of
giant dunes formed in various environments. This project seeks to use the
expertise gained by Dr. Cisneros during her PhD investigation of dunes in
rivers, allowing her to compare and contrast dune operations across both rivers
and desert environments. As a native Texan, she plans to use her postdoctoral
researcher platform in Houston, TX to encourage underrepresented and minoritized
students to envision themselves in similar careers. The outreach work builds on
Cisneros’ existing outreach efforts that seek to understand the barriers and
perceptions young girls of color feel towards careers in the Geosciences. To
understand this, she will run a two-day summer Geoscience Camp in order to
continue learning how to engage young girls of color in support of gaining
further diversity in the Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study’s primary
objective is to develop a unifying framework for bedform morphodynamics that
spans environments and scales through studying the morphodynamics of Earth’s
largest and most complex bedforms in deserts and rivers. Giant dunes commonly
comprise smaller, superimposed dunes climbing up the large dunes stoss. Still,
little is known of their topographic structure and translation, how sediment is
transported across their structure, and how multiple scales of bedforms can
coexist. To improve our understanding of giant dune morphodynamics, Dr. Cisneros
will analyze dune morphology and identify the morphodynamics of giant, compound
and simple dunes through deploying repeat surveys of river and desert dune
areas. These surveys will be conducted on the lowermost Mississippi River, LA,
where simple and giant, compound dunes exist, and in the Algodones Dune Field,
CA, which comprises giant, compound dunes. Existing data of the White Sands Dune
Field, NM will be used for investigation of simple desert dunes. Results of this
study provide both research fields with new characterization bedform analysis
techniques and methods for quantifying sediment flux, thereby creating an
investigative framework of dune morphodynamics. Further, through relating the
influence of superimposed dunes to compound dune dynamics in rivers and
extrapolating those methods to deserts, this study will unlock the slow-moving
morphodynamics of giant dunes on Earth and other planets. The results of this
work will contribute to disciplines ranging from planetary sciences,
geomorphology, sedimentology, and engineering. This project received co-funding
from the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics program in the Earth Science
division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.