* 1952378
* Collaborative Research: Do defenses against herbivores and pathogens drive the commonness and rarity of tropical trees at local and regional scales?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Paul V. Fine, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 282,771.00

The Amazon rainforest is home to a huge number of plant species. Scientists have
wondered for a long time why some are so rare and others so common. Perhaps some
are better at protecting themselves from insects and diseases. These species
could then become unusually common. How do plants protect themselves? Most make
special chemicals that can be a potent defense against natural enemies (mostly
fungus and insects). Scientists think such chemicals may be especially important
in very common species because without extra protection, insects and fungal
diseases would spread rapidly in dense populations. This project will test
whether plant chemicals can explain how the most common rainforest trees keep
from being overwhelmed by their enemies. More generally, it may explain the
abundance of different species in different places. This study will also test
the role of plant chemicals as defenses against soil pathogens, which are
important but poorly known. Data from this project has the potential to generate
new medical and agricultural applications. The project will engage and involve
low income, first-generation high school students and undergraduates at three
universities. Finally, students at those universities will gain essential skills
by attending a tropical field biology course with students from Peru and Brazil,
and will learn how to do rainforest research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will focus on Protium (Burseraceae), a common and diverse genus of Neotropical
trees. Protium species with more diverse and effective anti-enemy defenses are
hypothesized to suffer less density-dependent mortality, gaining a strong
competitive advantage that should translate into larger populations at the local
and regional scale. In the laboratory, metabolomic approaches will assess the
diversity of plant secondary metabolites in leaves and roots of Protium in
tandem with DNA sequencing to identify how those metabolites influence the
presence of fungal pathogens, thus elucidating their role in mediating plant-
natural enemy interactions. In the field, a combination of observational and
experimental approaches will identify these plant-defense-enemy interactions and
quantify their effect on host plant species abundances and the ability of
locally and regionally abundant taxa to escape negative density-dependent
interactions. This experimental component will be conducted in forest reserves
in Iquitos, Peru where permanent plots by long-term collaborators and
international institutional partners have been established through previous NSF
projects. To investigate how chemical diversity might affect large scale
patterns of species abundances in the Amazon basin, this project will also
perform systematic surveys across large areas in Peru, Colombia and Brazil to
determine how chemistry and plant natural enemy communities change across
speciesâ€™ ranges. Results will provide a critical test of specific chemically-
mediated mechanisms thought to control plant-natural enemy interactions, and
thus a newly emerging hypothesis about the ecological processes that determine
rarity and commonness in high diversity tropical rainforests. Ultimately, this
research will yield a deeper understanding of the processes underlying the
origin and maintenance of the vast biodiversity of tropical
forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.