* 1952686
* EAR-PF Understanding the Effects of Incomplete Mixing on Mixing Corrosion: Pore-scale Visualization and Upscaling
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Michael Chen, Chen, Michael Andrew
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 02/28/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Michael A. Chen has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship to study
mixing induced calcite dissolution and develop outreach materials at the
University of Minnesota â€“ Twin Cities campus with Professor Peter K. Kang and
Dr. Diana Dalbotten. Carbonate minerals, such as calcite, make up many natural
rocks and soils, including many karst systems, and are also an important sink
for carbon in the carbon cycle. Removal of these minerals by dissolution drives
the evolution of subsurface landscapes and results in carbon release back into
the carbon cycle, and vigorous dissolution can be spurred by even the simple
mixing of waters saturated with different sources of calcite. This specific
process, called mixing corrosion, is fundamentally a soil pore-scale process and
known as a key mechanism for karst formation, but we still do not understand how
this small-scale process can lead to the larger scale patterns of dissolution in
time and space. Aquifer scale models used to study mixing corrosion typically
assume that solutions are well mixed as soon as they encounter each other,
however, this is not necessarily true at the smaller scale where incomplete
mixing may leave solutions segregated, thus reducing the total calcite
dissolution rate. Thus, the primary goal of this fellowship will be to
experimentally study mixing corrosion of calcite at the microscale, and develop
a framework for understanding how microscale flow, mixing, and chemical reaction
affect calcite dissolution at larger scales. This framework and the fundamental
knowledge gained through these studies can be extended to understand how other
microscale processes influence larger scale processes, which can be used to
improve predictions of landscape evolution, develop predictive models of carbon
sequestration, and enhance efforts to remediate groundwater contaminants. This
project will also support minority involvement in Earth Sciences through
recruiting and mentoring of interns from underrepresented groups in the Earth
Sciences, as well as through outreach with the Science Museum of Minnesota to
improve public understanding of flow and chemistry of rocks and soils using new
demonstration experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a continuing need to
better understand how the coupled processes of flow and geochemistry alter the
dissolution or precipitation of calcite for its relevance in carbon cycling and
the development of natural geologic formations, particularly karst. This is best
exemplified in the process of mixing corrosion, where two solutions that are
equilibrated with a mineral (i.e. calcite), but differing amounts of mineral
constituents (i.e. CO2 and Ca), are mixed, resulting in an undersaturated
solution that will dissolve calcite. While this process has been studied
extensively with Darcy-scale models that assumes well-mixed conditions at pore
scale, there are no reported observations of mixing corrosion at the pore scale,
where incomplete mixing can strongly influence net dissolution by mixing
corrosion. There is also increasing recognition that flow and transport at the
field or aquifer scale is impacted by pore scale flow and reaction, thus there
is need for a framework that can integrate pore-scale processes into the larger
scale models. Key among these processes is how incomplete mixing of solutions
drives variation in geochemical reaction rates and transport of dissolved
minerals. Innovative microfluidic experiments and benchtop reactors using
calcite minerals are used to study how parameters of flow and geochemical
reaction influence mixing and subsequent dissolution of calcite. The
experimental results will then be synthesized into a framework which is able to
relate overall dissolution rate to the key parameters of flow, pore geometry,
and geochemical conditions. This framework lays the groundwork to then
understand how coupled flow and geochemistry at the pore scale influences
geochemical reaction at larger scales, which will be broadly relevant to many
environmental processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.