* 1952802
* EAR-PF: Assessing the Potential for Enhanced Duration of Soil Carbon Storage via Anaerobic Microsites from the Plant Rhizosphere to Catchment Scale
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Hannah Naughton, Naughton, Hannah Rose
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2023
* USD 236,000.00

Dr. Hannah Naughton has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to study
the impact of anoxic microsites on soil carbon cycling at the University of
California, Berkeley, in collaboration with Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory. Upland soils, e.g. a typical farm soil, are considered completely
oxic and thus unlimited with respect to microbial carbon oxidation to the
greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide. However, upland soils contain up to 85%
anaerobic pore space that hinders respiration and potentially exacerbates the
release of potent greenhouse gases like methane. The goals of this fellowship
are to develop a statistical and geospatial model predicting 1) the extent, and
2) the carbon storage in these anaerobic microsites along a hillslope-to-
floodplain hydrologic gradient in East River, Colorado. This project will
develop a conceptual framework that could be used as a tool for land managers
and scientists to better understand carbon dynamics in their soils using readily
available, remotely sensed data, thus minimizing time- and money-intensive field
soil sampling and characterization. Such a tool and the basic scientific
knowledge generated through this work will improve prediction and management of
soil carbon storage under changing precipitation, temperature and vegetation
going into the future, with extensions to calculating carbon credits, deciding
between conventional and sustainable farming techniques, and better constraining
countriesâ€™ terrestrial carbon emissions. This project will support women and
other minority groups in the Earth Sciences through direct mentorship, campus
and field site outreach discussing the uncommonly known diversity of (and in)
soils, and through course development and teaching at UC Berkeley.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Saturated conditions and organic inputs, two conditions
that naturally vary along hillslope gradients, are known to deplete soil oxygen,
but the role of roots in forming soil redox microheterogeneity has not yet been
tested. Plant functional types (PFTs, e.g. shrub vs. grass) are adapted to
landscape positions according to geomorphic and geologic controls on solar
radiation, water and nutrient availability. Below-ground, PFTs differ
significantly in root traits and role in soil aggregate formation. Previous East
River work has demonstrated that PFT distribution is predictable based on
remotely sensed surface and subsurface properties, suggesting soil redox
microheterogeneity that controls carbon transformation may be predictable over
larger scales. Using the hillslope-to-floodplain gradient, I propose to evaluate
the relationship between landscape features, PFT distribution, soil physical
characteristics, and microbial metabolism, and then determine the consequences
for soil carbon composition and storage. These relationships will inform a
geospatial model utilizing LiDAR and hyperspectral data to predict anaerobic
microsite formation and resulting carbon storage potential. Mentoring and
teaching opportunities and the scope of this project will prepare Dr. Naughton
for a faculty position in an undergraduate-oriented college where she intends to
continue studying the influence of micro-scale soil heterogeneity on carbon
cycling and the means to predict and represent this knowledge over larger
spatial scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.