* 1952907
* SpecEES: Trusted Frequency-Agile Transceiver Architectures for Secure and Energy-Efficient Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/20/2019,08/31/2023
* Vanessa Chen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 655,043.00

The increasing demand for wireless communication creates a spectrum shortage.
Combining with beamforming and massive multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO)
technologies, a highly programmable software-defined radio (SDR) that enables
wireless communications across multiple platforms can increase the efficiency of
spectrum sharing among a multitude of users. However, the integrated high-
resolution wideband MIMO transceivers would consume significant power to acquire
and transmit complex signals with digital signal processing. Meanwhile, critical
security challenges associated with spectrum sharing arise because the
connection of wireless devices to networks represents new entry points for
malicious attacks, such as jamming and eavesdropping. Wireless devices and
sensors not under constant surveillance especially need comprehensive protection
for secured spectrum sharing. Advanced encryption and coding schemes are
computationally expensive and require wider bandwidths and higher carrier
frequencies. This project proposes an ultra-low-power frequency-agile
transceiver architecture that can be integrated with trusted MIMO systems to
achieve dynamic spectrum access, manage harmful interference, and identify
authorized devices. This research will have significant contributions and
impacts to the society and nation in critical need of secured spectrum access
and sharing among all users including underserved populations. In addition, the
project will provide a unique opportunity to educate students of different
levels (K-12, undergraduate, and graduate) on practical aspects of wireless
communication systems' security and energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop a reconfigurable wideband MIMO system
incorporating interference suppression, efficient beamforming, and embedded
radio frequency (RF) signatures that can be applied to many types of wireless
systems including short-range unlicensed communications and long-range licensed
communications. For interference and noise mitigation, reconfigurable RF
receivers using nonlinearity with adaptive amplitude folders will be developed
to instantaneously push harmful jammers to higher frequencies while preserving
the integrity of weak signals of interest. The project will use a programmable
noise-shaping loop with embedded N-path filter banks to further suppress
wideband interference, remove folded jammers, and achieve a scalable wide
dynamic range over a large frequency spectrum while consuming ultra-low power.
To achieve maximum programmability with minimum increase of power and area,
combinatorial intrinsic device characteristics will be adopted as tuning
elements to build filter banks and folders for rapid adaptation to a dynamic and
unplanned electromagnetic environment. To achieve better power efficiency,
frequency-agile power amplifiers (PAs) for N-path MIMO antenna array will be
developed to maintain high power efficiency over the entire SDR bandwidth
through the use of joint load-pulling and optionally discrete envelope tracking.
The project will utilize inherent nonlinear functions and memory effects of
power amplifiers to enable disruptive RF forensic fingerprinting science and
technology. The time-varying RF fingerprint polling from the augmented PA
nonlinearities and the RF signature identification through base-station post-
distortion decoding will enhance the wireless communication security. These
unique signatures of each device will make it difficult for adversaries to fake
the signatures through precoding the data symbols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.