* 1952841
* Realizing robust superfluorescence from nanocrystal superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Boldizsar Janko, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,877.00

In the project entitled “Realizing robust superfluorescence from nanocrystal
superlattices”, the emission from semiconductor nanocrystals assembled in a
regular fashion, akin to the arrangement of atoms in a crystal, will be
investigated. Such assembled nanocrystals are thought to exhibit synchronized
emission. Perhaps the best way to think of this phenomenon in everyday life is
if everyone broke into applause at the end of a concert at exactly the same
time, as if on cue. Such synchronized emission represents a potential source of
high brightness photons for the emerging field of quantum information science.
Yet despite this potential, very little is currently understood about the
phenomenon. The work will therefore conduct concerted experimental and
theoretical studies with the aim of seeing whether it can be made robust and
observable at room temperature. In the broader impacts part of the project, low
cost, portable microscopes, capable of single particle imaging, will be
developed for local community educators. Up to five microscopes will be built
and, through collaboration with Notre Dame’s Energy Center, local educators will
be trained to use and demonstrate these microscopes to their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of advanced, non-classical light
sources is key to realizing eventual applications of quantum information
science. Single molecules, cold atoms, color centers, nanostructures, and
quantum dots have all been explored as sources of deterministic photons. New
quantum communications protocols, however, require even higher brightness
sources of entangled photons. On-demand, superfluorescent photons offer a
potential solution. This project will investigate recently reported
superfluorescence in solid state superlattices of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals using
concerted theoretical and experimental studies. This first entails developing a
microscopic model to describe nanocrystal superfluorescence. Accompanying
experimental studies will focus on establishing the emergence of nanocrystal
superlattice superfluorescence through control of superlattice size and shape.
These studies also involve conducting spatially- and temporally-resolved (fs-ps
timescale) emission microscopy and spectroscopy measurements on individual
nanocrystal superlattices to learn more about superfluorescence dynamics and the
influence superlattice electronic/structural disorder has on its robustness. The
ultimate goal of these studies is to realize robust, room temperature
superfluorescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.