* 1952912
* Collective Migration of Loosely Connected Cell Clusters
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Hector Gomez, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 267,502.00

Cellular motion is a tightly regulated action that plays a crucial role in
several biological processes. It is important to tissue formation, wound
healing, and immune response. Abnormal behavior of motile cells may lead to
serious conditions, including vascular disease and cancer metastasis. Therefore,
understanding and controlling the mechanisms that control cell migration is
useful. The migration of single cells has been profusely studied. It is known
that this migration may be spontaneous or guided by external cues. However, our
understanding of the coordinated motion of multiple cells remains limited. This
award will support fundamental theoretical and computational research to study
the collective motion of loosely connected cell clusters. Specifically, cell
interaction through simultaneous biochemical and mechanical signals
simultaneously will be observed. This type of collective motion is known to
tightly regulate early embryogenesis and cancer metastasis. Therefore, the
results of this project will advance our scientific knowledge on collective cell
migration, and also have a sustained impact on national health and
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most research on collective cell migration has
focused on the coordinated motion of tightly-packed monolayers of epithelial
cells. The collective migration of loosely connected cell clusters that
communicate via mechanical and chemical interactions has received little
attention partially because the computational methods for tightly-packed
collectives are not applicable to loose clusters that interact mechanically and
biochemically. We researched a unique and enabling computational method to study
this problem. The research will have a transformative impact in the field of
collective cell migration, but in addition, the project will also deliver a
general computational framework that can be used to study other problems in
future work in the general area of biomedical engineering. This computational
framework could ultimately yield new insights into wound healing, immune
response, and metastasis. The computational framework is also expected to have
impact in other fields of engineering such as fluid-structure interaction, pore-
scale modeling of porous media flow, and additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.