* 1952634
* Model-based Systems Engineering Boot Camp: An Initiative to Integrate Current Systems Engineering Transformations into Workforce Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Satya Aditya Akundi, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers
and technicians by supporting a workshop on model-based systems engineering for
production engineering. Models are simplified representations of ideas,
relationships, structures, and other constructs. Examples of models include
graphs, diagrams, mathematical equations, and physical representations. Model-
based systems engineering helps engineers better understand processes, make
decisions, and predict outcomes. This project will support a two-day bootcamp on
model-based systems engineering that will be held in El Paso, Texas. The
bootcamp will include industry experts on model-based systems engineering,
faculty from two- and four-year colleges and universities across the country,
scientists from national laboratories, and trainers who will facilitate the
bootcamp activities. To attract additional participants, the investigators will
advertise the bootcamp through systems engineering professional societies. The
bootcamp will produce white papers, model-based systems engineering training
manuals, case studies, training examples, and printed workbooks. It will also
develop guidelines for how to incorporate model-based systems engineering into
curricula at all levels. A website will be used to provide the resulting open-
access materials to any interested individual or organization. It is expected
that this bootcamp will lay a foundation for improving and expanding model-based
systems engineering education to enhance the capabilities of the Nation's STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model-based systems engineering is a systems
engineering methodology that focuses on using models throughout a project life
cycle, from design and development through operations. More recently, this
approach has also been useful for computer simulation experiments, to further
overcome the gap between the system model specification and the respective
simulation software. Model-based systems engineering has the potential to
increase productivity by minimizing unnecessary manual transcription of concepts
when coordinating the work of large teams. The application of model-based
systems engineering to production engineering systems is novel and of increasing
importance as production systems become more complex. This project will seek to
increase workforce skills in this important area of engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by NSF's EHR Core Research:
Production Engineering Education and Research (ECR: PEER) program, which seeks
to improve the education of future and current professionals in production
engineering. It also aims to study the effectiveness of the innovative
educational strategies adopted by these projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.