* 1952439
* EAGER: Assessment of Coupled Hydraulic Fracturing Fluid Mass Transfer and Biodegradation in Shallow Aquifer Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Natalie Capiro, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 11/30/2020
* USD 54,595.00

Hydraulic fracturing fluids (HFFs) are fluid mixtures used for hydraulic
extraction of petroleum (fracking). Despite the implementation of measures
designed to contain HFFs during operation, accidental releases associated with
transportation, fluid mixing, injection, storage, and well casing failures have
led to contamination of drinking water supplies by HFFs. Such releases can
impact soil, surface waters, and/or aquifers, potentially requiring corrective
action to limit the extent of contamination. Further, as HFFs are complex
mixtures, it is necessary to understand the environmental fate of all components
of the mixture, which includes organic additives, surfactants, biocides, and
salts. The proposed research aims to obtain a more complete understanding of the
biological and chemical reactions impacting HFF in the environment. These
results will help to inform regulatory decisions, and provide the technical
basis for sustainable management and remediation strategies for HFF releases to
the environment. The project will also incorporate education initiatives beyond
the traditional framework of classroom instruction and scholarly publication,
through the inclusion of undergraduate students in laboratory research. This
research will also help to strengthen the Nation?s pool of talent through the
recruitment of female and underrepresented minority science and engineering
undergraduate and graduate students. Finally, the results will be broadly
impactful through the sharing with practitioners through collaboration with
environmental consulting firms, as well as to communities that may be
disproportionately burdened by hydraulic fracturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have shown the potential susceptibility
of organic compounds (e.g., petroleum hydrocarbons, gelling agents and biocides)
in hydraulic fracturing fluid (HFF) to natural attenuation in field samples
obtained from deep shale and in laboratory-scale reactors. However, the
physical-chemical mass transfer and biologically-mediated transformation
reactions of specific HFF components in the environment is largely unknown,
potentially threatening the safety of drink water supplies impacted by HFF
releases. The goal of the research is to investigate HFF under conditions
representative of shallow aquifers, with an emphasis on biotic transformations
of HFF organic constituents (e.g., naphthalene and benzene). The research
program is structured around three tasks that are designed to: (1) develop a
well-characterized synthetic HFF mixture and characterize field-derived
flowback, (2) measure the sorption and desorption of HFF constituents as a
function of soil properties and salinity, and (3) quantify HFF biodegradation,
microbial community response and catabolic gene expression as a function of HFF
exposure concentration. Novel aspects of this research include the coupling of
microbial community analysis with targeted molecular techniques to assess both
structure and function, and the use of advanced mass spectrometry techniques to
characterize effluent streams and identify degradation products. Results of this
work will improve understanding of: (a) natural attenuation processes (physical-
chemical and biological) impacting organic compound reactivity and byproduct
formation in a complex, high organic carbon waste stream, (b) the potential of
native subsurface microbial communities to influence HFF mass transfer (and
ultimately, HFF constituent longevity) and, (c) a sustainable, low-intensity
approach (i.e., natural attenuation) for remediation and management of HFF-
impacted sites. Specifically, the experimental rate parameters derived from this
work will assist environmental professionals assess natural attenuation capacity
for a range of environmentally relevant conditions. Further, these results will
provide preliminary data and the technical basis for the design of future
studies examining the fate and transport of HFF in multi-dimensional systems,
and aid in the development mathematical models for improved management of HFF in
shallow aquifer systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.