* 1952231
* SCC-PG: Smart &amp; Connected Childcare
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Erica Ryherd, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 149,305.00

In the United States, millions of young children under five years of age attend
childcare. Research has demonstrated the critical importance of emotionally
supportive caregivers and stimulating learning environments as the early
experiences that affect later health, learning and well-being. But monitoring
childcare facilities to identify these experiences is time- and resource-
intensive. This makes it difficult to identify the quality of most childcare
settings. Increasing the quality of many childcare environments in the United
States would better promote children’s healthy development. This project will
use a sensor-based system that measures traits of the physical and social
environments of childcare settings. These traits affect children’s language
development and physical activity, two key elements of young children’s
development. This project, and subsequent work that builds upon it, will lead to
new insights in both technological application and integration of sensors, as
well as theories of child development. University researchers will partner with
a community-wide intervention group, childcare providers, and parents on the
development of a sensor-based system designed to provide childcare providers
with rapid and direct feedback focused on various child-environment interactions
and dimensions. Beyond scientific advances, the results have the potential to
help address and improve quality in childcare, which may benefit millions of
young children and their families. Ultimately, these efforts can benefit society
through improved quality of care and thus enriched developmental outcomes for
young children. The project will also contribute to knowledge of engagement of
community partners in the design and implementation of technological systems to
improve community well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
examine the feasibility of a smart and connected childcare community through a
sensor-based system used to evaluate physical characteristics of childcare
settings. This project will contribute to a larger body of work that furthers
scientific progress in four ways. This project will: (1) design smart childcare
communities by developing novel sensor technology to generate useful and
actionable information, while integrating heterogeneous network and advanced
computing approaches; (2) optimize the deployment of smart sensing in childcare
communities to obtain useful and actionable information without compromising the
privacy requirements and objectives essential for monitoring active spaces; (3)
develop an efficient communication and computing framework for feedback loops in
smart and connected childcare, using an edge-assisted childcare data fusion
approach to analyze information from sensors; and (4) lay the groundwork for a
research program that will contribute to new theories and related measures of
child development and childcare quality. The project anticipate enhanced
descriptions of context-specific childcare quality that will provide a mechanism
for ongoing feedback to childcare providers and communities at-large. Work
through the planning grant will inform the development of a longer-term research
program that addresses the impact of sensor-based measurement of provider
behavior and quality of young children’s learning environments. Ultimately, the
resultant smart and connected childcare community can improve young children’s
development and learning, enhancing understanding of how built environments
affect human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Smart and Connected Communities initiative and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.