* 1952924
* Bond Dissociation Energies and Electronic Structure of Small Transition Metal and Lanthanide Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Michael Morse, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 528,310.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Michael Morse of the
University of Utah is using sophisticated laser techniques to measure the amount
of energy that is required to break chemical bonds. The measured bond
dissociation energies are key to determining whether a reaction can proceed
spontaneously or not. Although some of these bond dissociation energies have
been measured previously, the associated measurement errors are quite large. The
PI has developed new methods that reduce the measurement errors by factors of 10
to 100, thereby establishing bond dissociation energies to unprecedented
accuracy. The species that are amenable to these studies are small molecules
containing transition or lanthanide metals, which are particularly difficult to
treat by computational methods. The new data obtained by the PI will provide a
useful reality check, allowing computational chemists to determine what methods
are suitable for modeling of these difficult but important species. The broader
impacts of this work include developing a systematic database of bond
dissociation energies, providing the data necessary to benchmark computational
methods for the transition and lanthanide metals, and providing opportunities
for the training of students in the design and construction of advanced
experimental instrumentation and spectroscopic data analysis. Students working
on these projects develop strong problem-solving skills, which are transferable
to many different arenas of scientific endeavor. In an outreach effort to the
local community, Dr. Morse continues to give twice-yearly workshops for high
school Advanced Placement (AP) chemistry teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on diatomic and triatomic molecules that possess a high density
of electronic states at the ground separated fragment limit. Specific molecules
include MX species, where M is an open d-subshell transition metal or
lanthanide, and X is a p-block element or ligand, such as B, C, N, O, Si, P, S,
Se, F, Cl, Br, CN, or CH. The molecules are formed by laser ablation of the
metal in a carrier gas stream containing a source of the ligand. The molecules
are cooled by supersonic expansion into vacuum and probed by resonant two- or
three-photon ionization schemes. Due to the exceptionally high density of states
in these metallic systems, there is a plethora of intersecting potential energy
curves at the energy of the ground separated atom limit. When the molecule is
excited below this limit, a dense quasicontinuous vibronic spectrum is recorded.
When the molecule is excited above the ground separated atom limit, however,
spin-orbit and nonadiabatic interactions enable it to hop from curve to curve
and find its way to separated atoms on a subnanosecond to few-nanosecond time
scale. The abrupt drop in ion signal is readily identified as the bond
dissociation energy. In an extension of the method, a cryocooled ion trap
photodissociation instrument will be employed, using similar methods to
precisely measure bond dissociation energies of metal-containing
cations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.