* 1952180
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Transportation Gaps and Disability-Related Unemployment: Smarter Cities and Wearables combating Commuting Challenges for the Visually Impaired
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Yao Wang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,499,038.00

The pathologic link between vision loss and physical inactivity has confounded
doctors, scientists, engineers, and patients for centuries. Mobility losses are
extremely variable and not only tied to significant compromises in quality of
life, but also to an abysmal unemployment rate. One massive employment barrier
related to mobility loss in urban areas is the ongoing struggle to utilize
public transportation during daily commuting. While technological advances in
data science and artificial intelligence continue to rapidly spawn new digital
tools and electronic solutions, many of these new devices are incomplete answers
that leave end users cognitively overwhelmed between device switching and task
completion. This project will support foundational research needed to study low-
vision behavior and develop more powerful wearables that can handle data-
intensive processing, enabling parallel functionality. The project will afford
VIS4ION, a revolutionary wearable platform that uses backpack-mounted sensors,
advanced machine vision, wireless communications, and human-machine interfaces,
the ability to perform ‘connected’ dynamic localization and navigation
assistance for the visually impaired in complex urban environments. The project
will lead to a healthier low vision population with more gainful employment, a
framework for behavioral investigation in disability studies, guidelines for the
design and delivery of navigation-focused wearables, students who are well-
versed in multi-disciplinary and disability-focused research, and a blueprint
for a smart and connected community that enhances economic vitality, safety,
security, health and wellbeing, and overall quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will respond to the commuting
challenges that stymie employment by creating new connections between visually
impaired residents and their surrounding environment through innovations in
science and engineering. The project envisions fundamental research in novel
behavioral studies, optimized data streams, enhanced power management, and city-
agency cooperation to fill a number of knowledge gaps, including (1) lack of a
scientifically-principled, experimentally-based understanding of users’ needs
and behavioral patterns, (2) limited ability to interpret real-world scenes
through computer vision algorithms and excessive computational burden, (3)
incomplete understanding of technical methods to balance local versus cloud
analytics and manage power effectively, and (4) lack of hypothesis-driven
studies with ecological validity that could scale-up to solve commuting
challenges. A convergent research plan will fill these gaps and contribute key
advancements in computer vision, machine learning, video compression, wireless
transmission, human factors, and spatial positioning. By quantifying user needs
regarding transportation and subsequently enhancing the safety profile of
visually impaired travelers, gainful employment will improve, with secondary
impacts on reducing health and economic burden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.