* 1952199
* Uncertainty and Mechanisms of Antarctica's Changing Snowfall and its Role in Sea Level Change
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* David Schneider, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 606,798.00

The Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS) is sensitive to and an indicator of climate
change. While ice loss is largely driven by ocean warming, this might be
mitigated by enhanced snowfall on the ice sheet. By developing an understanding
of the processes governing snowfall variability and change on the AIS, this
project will contribute to understanding the long-term role of the AIS as a
contributor to sea-level rise. This project is strongly embedded in the
collaborative, open-source framework of the Community Earth System Model version
2 (CESM2) and will deliver new datasets of Antarctic precipitation for use by
the research community. The project will help to build a diverse geoscience
workforce by recruiting and training a student to be directly involved in the
research through the Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and
Science (SOARS) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage the
Climate Model Intercomparison Project 6 climate model ensemble as a whole, and
CESM2 in particular, to disentangle the major sources of uncertainty and to
elucidate the underlying mechanisms of Antarctic precipitation change, with a
particular focus on the role of atmospheric circulation changes relative to the
role of atmospheric warming. Using the variable resolution capabilities of
CESM2, the team will provide the community with precipitation estimates at a
very high horizontal resolution. The analyses will also use a forthcoming
100-member large ensemble. The project seeks to answer the following questions:
1) How well does the CESM2 represent the present-day Antarctic surface climate,
precipitation, and surface mass balance, including the mean and its variability?
2) What is the sensitivity of simulated Antarctic precipitation to model
resolution in present-day and future climates? 3) What are the roles of
thermodynamics (warming atmosphere and ocean) and dynamics (changes in
atmospheric circulation) in observed and projected snowfall changes? How do
these break down into forced and internal variability? In particular, is there a
significant forced precipitation trend due to circulation changes driven by
stratospheric ozone depletion and recovery and increases in greenhouse gas
concentration? 4) What processes and boundary conditions drive the ensemble
spread of Antarctic precipitation in single-model and multi-model ensembles? How
does the spread driven by initial surface conditions (including sea ice cover,
surface fluxes, inversion strength) compare with the irreducible uncertainty due
to internal climate system variability?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.