* 1952809
* EAR-PF: Application of Paired Ti and Fe Isotopes to Understand the Evolution of Earth's Upper Continental Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Aleisha Johnson, Johnson, Aleisha
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2022
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Aleisha Johnson has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
investigate how the stable isotopes of Ti (Titanium) behave during the formation
of continental crust. Her research and public service will take place at the
University of Chicago under the supervision of Prof. Nicolas Dauphas. Stable Ti
isotopes have been recently proposed to trace the evolution of Earth’s upper
continental crust and the onset of plate tectonics. If demonstrated, to be a
robust proxy, Ti isotopes would fill a unique niche because they are (1)
ubiquitous in igneous rock suites and (2) insensitive to modification by
weathering, fluid overprinting, or metamorphism. However, Ti isotopes appear to
behave differently in tholeiitic (plume-like) and calc-alkaline (arc-like)
magmas, complicating interpretations of the ancient geologic record. Dr. Johnson
will measure Ti isotopes in modern arc volcanoes to understand what controls Ti
isotope fractionation during the formation of crust, which will allow her to
calibrate the proxy and revisit the geologic record to learn more about the
composition of Earth’s ancient continents. During her tenure as an NSF
Postdoctoral Fellow, Dr. Johnson will become involved as a mentor in two
organizations: the first is the FLI network at University of Chicago (First-
generation, Low-income, Immigrant, Ally) where she can mentor students similar
to her own background to encourage diversity and inclusion in science at the
private college level. She will also volunteer at the National Association for
Geoscience Teachers (NAGT) annual meetings as an alum of the workshop “Preparing
for an Academic Career”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing geochemical proxies for
the composition of Earth’s early continental crust present a conundrum. Stable
Ti isotopes are being used to distinguish between existing hypotheses by
providing a temporal record of magmatic differentiation. As fractional
crystallization progresses, the lighter isotopes of Ti are preferentially
incorporated into oxides and ultimately sequestered in magmatic cumulates. Thus,
felsic crust carries an isotopically heavy signature whereas mafic crust
indicates minimal fractionation. The recent observation that tholeiitic and
calc-alkaline magmas fractionate Ti isotopes to different extents signaled that
there are important unknown variables left to consider: water content, oxygen
fugacity, crystallization temperature, and mineral phase. Proper calibration in
modern settings can address this challenge and perhaps identify new processes
which Ti isotopes are sensitive to. Mineral-melt fractionation factors of Ti
isotopes will be measured in a calc-alkaline volcanic suite from Rindjani
Volcano, Indonesia. Paired Fe isotope analyses will quantify the role of oxygen
fugacity and magnetite crystallization specifically. This differentiation suite
will elucidate the controls on Ti isotope fractionation in arc settings, which
will allow Ti isotope fractionation during crust formation to be modeled
accurately for the first time. Finally, modeled Ti isotope values will be
compared with the shale record to better identify the compositions of ancient
crustal protoliths. This project received funds from the Geochemistry and
Petrology program in the Earth Sciences division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.