* 1952545
* IRES Track I: Planet-hunting Around the World with Students (PAWS)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Phillip Reed, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 243,985.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports international research experiences for
twelve U.S. undergraduate students in astronomy from Kutztown University at the
University of Southern Queensland in Australia. Both the home and host
institutions perform follow-up observing for NASA’s Transiting Exoplanet Survey
Satellite (TESS). TESS is tasked with the Level 1 Science Requirement of
discovering and measuring the masses of 50 transiting small planets (less than 4
Earth radii), and it is expected to discover thousands of additional exoplanets
in orbit around nearby, bright stars. The TESS mission relies on a dedicated
network of ground-based follow-up observatories to identify false-positive
signals, confirm planet radii and masses, and provide other planetary
characterization measurements. The on-campus observatory at Kutztown University
(KU) in Pennsylvania conducts such work as an active member of the TESS Follow-
up Observing Program (TFOP) Working Group (WG). KU’s observatory is an on-campus
educational research facility capable of detecting and measuring the sizes of
large Jupiter-like exoplanets (already having co-discovered more than 10 new
planets) and clearing smaller TESS planet candidates of false-positive signals.
The foreign partner institution, the University of Southern Queensland (USQ) in
Australia, is also an active member of the TFOP WG. USQ’s MINERVA-Australis
observatory is a new world-class facility in a dark-sky location that provides
TESS with some of the most accurate measurements of the masses of small planets.
This project is designed to promote the progress of science by training the
participating undergraduate students at KU, and then engaging them in 10-week
research experiences at USQ. Furthermore, this activity will impact (1) national
and international interests in exploration by increasing the number of known
worlds beyond Earth, (2) the field of astrophysics by studying and
characterizing these worlds, (3) scientific literacy by communicating these
discoveries to the public and developing inquiry-based activities for local
school students, (4) the economy by producing US citizens who are both globally
engaged and more rigorously prepared for advanced study, research, and
employment in physics- and space-related industries, (5) civil equality by
making efforts to recruit qualified female and minority students (both
underrepresented in the physical sciences), and (6) international relations by
cultivating individual human connections between the citizens of multiple
nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;This project employs two basic
astronomical observing techniques; photometry and spectroscopy. High-precision,
seeing-limited photometry enables the measurement of an exoplanet’s size
(radius) by detecting the small decrease in apparent brightness of the host star
as the planet transits in front of it. Photometry is also a powerful tool for
eliminating false-positives by detecting other nearby variable stars, such as
eclipsing binaries (two stars orbiting each other), which are often culprits of
these false-positive signals in the TESS data. The TESS field-of-view is very
wide and therefore the light from multiple stars blends together, while the
follow-up telescopes are much larger with narrower fields, permitting the direct
measurement of individual stars’ brightness variations. High-resolution Doppler
spectroscopy detects stellar radial velocity variations to measure the mass of
an exoplanet, as the planet’s gravitational interaction with the host star
causes the star to orbit (“wobble”) around the star-planet system’s center of
mass. This project will contribute many valuable photometric observations and
analyses during the participants’ training at KU, with high-precision radial
velocity work being done during their involvement at USQ, thereby assisting the
broader TESS mission in achieving its goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.