* 1952542
* IRES Track 1: Neurobiology and evolution of frog dance displays in Austria and India
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Lisa Mangiamele, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 10/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

Social signals are central to animal life, mediating how individuals pick mates
and compete with rivals. Understanding how these signals arise and change over
time is therefore a fundamental goal of modern biology. In this IRES project,
undergraduate students from around the U.S. will be trained to investigate this
topic by combining cutting-edge techniques in fields of neuroscience, behavior,
and computational biology. Specifically, participants will train with leading
PIs that are part of an international research team that takes an integrative
approach to studying how the nervous systems controls complex behavioral traits,
as well as the way modifications to these physiological systems can support
signal innovation. The program will recruit a total of 6 students per year, with
a strong emphasis on selecting both FirstGen and underrepresented minority
students. Participants will then work abroad in Austria and India for a 10-week
period during the summer in the laboratory and field to conduct team-led
research and independent research. This experience will be bookended with pre-
and post-travel training to hone the studentsâ€™ technical and cultural training,
while providing extensive career preparation from a diverse set of mentors. In
this way, we will focus on building skills related not only to scientific
acumen, but also international proficiency and awareness. Our program therefore
promises to fulfill the goals of the IRES program by producing college graduates
who are ready to join the global STEM workforce in the 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International research collaborations are vital to
biology, laying the groundwork for major discoveries that cross disciplinary
lines and uncover principles about the diversity of life. However, undergraduate
students from the U.S. often experience significant hurdles that prevent them
from participating in such collaborative work. This is especially a problem for
students from historically underrepresented groups, including both FirstGen
students and underrepresented minority students. As a result, many
undergraduates are ill-prepared to join the modern global STEM workforce. We
therefore propose a program to address this issue by bringing 6 undergraduate
students from historically underrepresented groups and 1 graduate student each
year to Austria and India, where they will participate in a 10-week experience
studying the physiological basis of display evolution in frogs. They will
conduct research in large teams and independently to investigate adaptations to
motor control systems that underlying social signaling behavior. They will also
use advanced phylogenetic comparative methods to track how these motor systems
change over time to support the diversification and elaboration of signaling
behavior in frogs. Participation in the project involves working closely with
PIs in Austria and India, where our species of interests are found. It also
involves combining elements of laboratory work and field work to address
fundamental questions about how social signals work in physiological and
functional contexts. Accordingly, students who participate in this IRES project
will be given the chance to not only address fundamental questions in the field
of biology, but also do so in an international context that helps prepare them
for STEM careers in a global landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.