* 1952032
* JST: SCC-PG: Bridging the Digital Gap and Identifying Cross-Cultural Pathways for Adoption of IoT Technologies to Support Super-Aging Societies in the U.S. and Japan
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Carmen Sceppa, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 04/30/2022
* USD 75,000.00

Aging is a recognized global societal issue. It is expected that between now and
2050, every Nation in the world will see a substantial increase in their number
of citizens older than 60. Furthermore, there will be more than a dozen super-
aged societies in 2020, where more than one in five of the population is 65
years or older. The U.S. and Japan, specifically, are experiencing dramatic
population aging and share several similarities. This planning grant will bring
together experts bridging disciplines and countries to explore research and
development of effective strategies to address healthy aging. Specifically, to
achieve the ambitious goals of NSF’s Smart and Connected Communities and Japan’s
Society 5.0 and Sustainable Development initiatives and to meet the growing
societal expectations, there is a need to realize trustworthy, reliable, safe,
secure, and effective smart and connected technologies to empower older adults
in all aspects of life. Despite ongoing efforts, there remains a significant
digital gap in adoption and user acceptability of assistive technologies among
older adult communities. Furthermore, cross-cultural and socio-economic factors
play a significant role in achieving scalability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
JST:SCC-PG proposal assembled a convergent, multi-disciplinary team of
researchers from four institutions across two Nations, UMBC and Northeastern
University from the U.S. and Kyushu University and Keio University from Japan.
The research expertise within the team covers relevant disciplines including
gerontology, sociology, health sciences, decision science for sustainable
society, information systems, cybersecurity, cyber-physical systems, robotics,
and computer science. Built upon international consensus, the team will realize
innovation far more effectively than any single-nation research team. The team
collectively has comprehensive expertise in not just the research areas, but has
facilities, best practices, cyber-infrastructure (e.g., cloud-computing and big
data servers), and hardware and software design expertise. This JST: S&amp;CC-PG
will focus on team-building, user-centered design ideation, and community
participation activities to develop a tight and sustainable collaboration among
U.S. and Japan researchers to realize new digital solutions based on Internet of
Things, Information and Communication Technologies, Artificial Intelligence,
Data Science, Trust Services, Security, and Assistive robotics in support of
super-aging societies and to educate a new cadre of scientists, engineers,
technologists, and entrepreneurs cognizant of global societal challenges. The
goal of this Planning Grant is to develop an Integrative Research Grant proposal
to NSF and JST, applying these key technologies to create Smart and Connected
Communities that address the key challenges of super-aging
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.