* 1952402
* IRES track I: International Research Experience in France on Thermal Treatment of Biomass (I-CEMITURE)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Karelle Aiken, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 279,827.00

The development of sustainable technologies is crucial for the welfare of future
generations in the United States and for the economic viability of manufacturers
committed to sustainable production processes and materials. In order to lower
the environmental impact of human activities at a national and international
scale, there is a need for the development of value-added products from local
biomass. It is possible to enhance some properties of biomass through the use of
a controlled heat treatment in the absence of oxygen (torrefaction).
Torrefaction is a thermal process to convert biomass into a coal-like material,
which has better fuel characteristics than the original biomass. Torrefied
biomass is more brittle, making grinding easier and less energy intensive. Heat-
treated (torrefied) biomass can be more easily processed, leading to more
homogeneous products for energy applications. The goal of this project is to
refine a mathematical model describing the kinetics of biomass pyrolysis to more
accurately determine the best treatment conditions for different biomass. Such a
model will allow manufacturers to tailor heat treatment to specific biomass
sources, ensuring optimal properties in the final products and providing control
over the reproducibility of those properties. This project will provide US
students of a diverse background and limited research and international
experience, hands-on training in cutting-edge technical skills while partnering
with a world-class laboratory for wood research in France. Its advanced and
specialized unique facilities put it at the forefront of technology development
worldwide for the heat treatment of ligno-cellulosic materials. The US students’
experience will be complemented by professional development activities that will
guide them in fine-tuning their communication skills (scientific writing and
presentation), making strategic plans for their careers in science, and
disseminating the results of their work. Ultimately, participants in this
project will gain knowledge and skills necessary for the increased economic
growth and technological innovation of the United States of America.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES (track I) project is a ten-week annual program
in which four US students conduct research projects focused on studying biomass
torrefaction kinetics in a renowned laboratory at the University of Lorraine, in
Epinal, France. After returning to the US, they validate their findings using
local biomass at Georgia Southern University. In addition to the research
component, the program includes a series of professional development activities
that were proven successful by the PI and co-PI in their department’s summer
undergraduate research experience program over the past several years.
Therefore, this project utilizes an established, solid framework for the
assessment, recruitment, and professional development of the participants. The
research plan consists of four separate projects tied together by a common goal.
The four proposed projects are (1) Refinement of a mathematical model describing
pyrolysis of biomass by incorporation of modules associated to mineral content,
reaction atmosphere, and nature of ligno-cellulosic biomass (hardwood vs
softwood), (2) Data acquisition on the effect of mineral content on torrefaction
of biomass, (3) Data acquisition on the effect of reaction atmosphere on
torrefaction of biomass, and (4) Data acquisition on the effect of biomass
nature (harwood vs softwood) on torrefaction of biomass. The data acquired in
projects (2), (3), and (4) will be used in project (1) for refinement and
improvement of the mathematical model. Upon continuous revision of the
mathematical model over the course of the funding period, a better expression
will be obtained, providing further insight about the torrefaction mechanism.
Indeed, a mathematical model describing the kinetics of biomass pyrolysis will
more accurately determine the best treatment conditions for different biomass,
allowing manufacturers to adjust heat treatment to specific biomass sources,
further ensuring property optimization in the final products while providing
greater control over the process and properties’ reproducibility. This can
potentially eradicate two of the major impediments to widespread commercial use
of biomass, namely (1) inherent variability in the results and (2) the inability
to control the outcome. Overall, this project is a combination of cutting-edge
research in sustainable energy and training of future U.S. workforce in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.