* 1952498
* Collaborative Research: Ground-based Very Low Frequency (VLF) and High Frequency (HF) Measurements in Support of the VIPER Sounding Rocket Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* John Bonnell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 121,221.00

Radio emissions in the Very Low Frequency (VLF) range are known to propagate
long distances bouncing between the surface of the Earth and the partially
ionized layer of the upper atmosphere near 90 km in altitude called the D
region. The D-region impacts long range radio communications between extremely
low frequencies (ELF), used for long-range submarine communications, and high
frequencies (HF), used by many critical communications systems. VLF emissions
can also escape the ionospheric layer and propagate to much higher altitudes
with denser plasma. VLF emissions of both natural and man-made origin can also
cause wave-particle scattering in the magnetosphere resulting in particle
precipitation in the ionosphere. VLF radio wave propagation and signal strength
reduction has been challenging to model and observe, mostly due to the lack of
continuous measurements in the D region and significant uncertainties in the
knowledge of both plasma and neutral densities at these altitudes. In this
project, an enhancement will be made to the existing VLF Trans-Ionospheric
Propagation Experiment Rocket (VIPER) experiment, to launch from Wallops Island
in July 2020. VIPER will provide important information about radio waves
detected along its trajectory, enabling a determination of the VLF attenuation
through the ionospheric D region. Specifically, this project will support the
installation of ground-based VLF and HF receivers near the transmitter site to
provide ground-truth measurements to compare to the rocket measurements. These
ground measurements will constrain the ionospheric state and will enable an
accurate assessment of the attenuation of the VLF wave as a function of
altitude. This project will also support the education of a student at CU
Boulder, the training of a postdoc at CU Boulder and a postdoc at UC Berkeley,
enhancing their continuing educations and providing a unique opportunity to
learn about the valuable work at Wallops Flight
Facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative effort with provide direct
multi-point measurements of VLF wave amplitude and phase, referenced directly
from the source transmitter. VIPER will measure the height-resolved amplitude
and phase of the NAA (24.0 kHz) transmitter signal broadcast from Cutler, Maine,
enabling a determination of the VLF attenuation through the collisional D-region
ionosphere. VIPER will also measure the plasma density and HF signal amplitudes
during the ionospheric traverse. Together with the rocket measurements, we will
have VLF measurements at the transmitter; downrange on the ground; and downrange
as an altitude profile from 60 to 150 km. These measurements will provide
unprecedented insight into the attenuation of VLF waves by the collisional
D-region plasma. In turn, this attenuation will yield insight into the effect of
ground-based transmitter signals on the D-region ionosphere and their injection
into the magnetosphere. The project also has the potential to make measurements
of lightning sferics (on the ground) and whistlers (above the ionosphere),
providing a broadband (DC to MHz) view of this attenuation. The lightning
observations are a secondary goal and are not critical to the success of the
VIPER project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.