* 1952669
* FRG: Collaborative Research: The Hypoelliptic Laplacian, Noncommutative Geometry, and Applications to Representations and Singular Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Nigel Higson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 428,231.00

The collection of frequencies at which a geometric structure resonates is called
spectrum of that structure. Encoded in the spectrum is a great deal of
information about geometric form, which is difficult to extract. One might ask:
How does the sound of a bell determines its shape, or vice versa? A new approach
to the problem of relating geometry to the spectrum, based on a concept called
the hypoelliptic Laplacian, has shown great promise. The purpose of this project
is to build a new theoretical foundation for the hypoelliptic Laplacian, and
then develop its applications in harmonic analysis and elsewhere. Expected
outcomes will include a clearer and deeper overall understanding of the the
hypoelliptic Laplacian, and a broadening of the range of applications to which
it may be applied. There will be significant training and mentoring
opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in geometric and
harmonic analysis, distributed across the three sites involved in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this project will create a foundational
theory for Jean-Michel Bismut's hypoelliptic Laplacian as it arises in symmetric
and locally symmetric spaces, and elsewhere. For this purpose the investigators
will use techniques previously developed in noncommutative geometry, especially
the pseudodifferential operator theory originally developed to tackle the local
index problem in noncommutative geometry. Turning to applications, in principle
the hypoelliptic Laplacian offers a new approach to Harish-Chandra's Plancherel
formula for real reductive groups, and an early priority will be to explore this
application further. The newly established Mackey bijection in the
representation theory of reductive groups (discovered in noncommutative
geometry) will be investigated simultaneously. Many other potential applications
in noncommutative geometry present themselves, and these will be studied
carefully during the course of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.