* 1952873
* A Study of Deformation and Macroscopic Damage in Engineered Architected Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Junuthula Reddy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 03/31/2025
* USD 540,234.00

This grant will focus on investigating a novel approach to the study and
simulation of the mechanical behavior of architected material structures. These
structures are specially engineered with one or more materials with controlled
fine scale macroscopic spatial arrangements. Such material structures offer
significant advantages in terms of weight savings (relative densities often as
low as 0.1 - 0.2) and optimal use of raw material, with no significant loss of
stiffness or strength values. However, they are prone to sudden localized
collapse and the material reserve load capacity is significantly reduced,
especially when the structure contains flaws or perforations. Because these
failure modes cannot be currently predicted well, designers are forced to impose
larger safety factors, limiting their use and obviating their weight advantage
and resource savings. The research will investigate machine learning based
methods to gain a deeper scientific understanding and insight into the principal
modes of fine scale response and how it affects the durability of the structure.
The resulting insights will then be used to develop software to rapidly simulate
the response and likely damage to these materials that is suitable for design
iterations. This, in turn, will help designers to create optimized architectures
for achieving required performance. By providing the ability to predict the
strength, stiffness, and damage tolerance of such materials before they are
deployed, this research will enable designers to certify the performance and
durability of architected material structures. The research will be closely
coupled with educational and outreach activities aimed at introducing the design
and use of architected materials with demonstrations, hands on activities and
curriculum development to a wide audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of the researched work is to investigate the principal modes of
deformation, inelasticity and localized damage in Engineered Architected
Materials using a concurrent physical experimentation and modeling (theoretical
as well as computational).&lt;br/&gt;The approach is based on (1) using a
completely discrete structural level modeling approach for simulating the
response so that the fine scale features are not “smeared out” (2) augmenting
the macroscopic deformations with a small number of fine scale degrees of
freedom (3) using a mechanics driven machine learning approach to analyze the
data from experiments and detailed simulations to extract the most important
fine scale modes of deformation and damage and the constitutive parameters; this
will replace current ad-hoc “intuition based” approaches with a systematic
approach that has broad applicability. Through this process, we also expect to
create a novel strategy for structural-level modeling of the behavior of these
materials that is capable of accounting for the fine scale deformations and is
yet at a scale that is several orders of magnitude larger than the cell size of
architected materials, without loss of accuracy. This is considered a preferred
alternative to directly using fine-scale Finite Element Analysis (FEA) for such
studies, which are enormously expensive (or even impossible) and time consuming,
thus precluding realistic modeling of architected material
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.