* 1952490
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track 1: International Research Experience for Students in Big Data Applications in Energy and Related Infrastructure
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Bimal Nepal, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2024
* USD 139,846.00

The necessity of preparing a data-savvy and global workforce has been widely
recognized in the published literature. The World Economic Forum projects that
big data and machine learning would create a very large number of jobs in the
global marketplace. Among other industries, energy and related infrastructure
have tremendous need and potential for applications of big data to enhance the
safety and efficiency of energy production, distribution, and infrastructure
support. The project “Collaborative Research: International Research Experience
for Students (IRES) in Big Data Applications in Energy and Related
Infrastructure” has three distinct goals: 1) prepare students with professional
skills to join a diverse and global STEM/knowledge workforce in advanced data
science and analytics; 2) increase enthusiasm and research skills of
undergraduate students from underrepresented population groups who otherwise
might not have an international opportunity for professional development; and 3)
foster collaboration between the faculty and students from Asian (economically,
one of the fastest growing regions in the world) and U.S. universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support 27 undergraduate students (over
a three-year period) for a 6-week long high quality research internship
experience. These students will work on energy related real-world big data and
machine learning projects at a reputed international research institute in
Malaysia. Out of nine participants per year, three each from the participating
institutions, Texas A&amp;M University, North Dakota State University, and
University of Nevada, Las Vegas, will be recruited for this program. To broaden
the participation, efforts will be to recruit about two-third students from
female and underrepresented population groups. The proposed IRES site,
Universiti Teknologi Petronas (UTP), Perak, Malaysia, is a highly ranked
research institution in the ASEAN region (a 10-Nation bloc with a combined GDP
of nearly $3 trillion). The UTP has a very strong connection with the energy
industry. This project will unveil novel applications of big data and machine
learning tools and techniques in energy and related infrastructure domains
including energy production and operations issues such as reliability,
environmental impact, and distribution logistics in an interdisciplinary manner.
Students will gain intellectual experiences and understanding on assessing
reliability of the energy networks utilizing degradation or physics-of-failure
models and tools such as stochastic modeling, Bayesian updating, and
optimization models for maintenance planning. Lastly, students will work in a
cohort of multi-university and multinational teams mentored by renowned
international faculty and researchers. It will further enable these students to
join global workforce by gaining global research and cultural experiences. The
project will benefit multiple groups and entities including the students,
universities from both countries, faculty members, and industries. Finally, the
well stablished Engineering Global Preparedness Inventory scale will be used to
objectively assess the impact of IRES activity on
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.