* 1952897
* Collaborative Research: Variational Inference Approach to Computer Model Calibration, Uncertainty Quantification, Scalability, and Robustness
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Stefan Wild, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 110,000.00

Computer models are found to be effective in many applications such as climate
modeling, human organ modeling, and nuclear physics problems. There is an
increasing interest how the computer output could be coupled with locally
available data for quick inference that accounts for the myriad of uncertainty
sources. This project focuses on developing new computational techniques and
flexible model building in addition to associated software development. The
project will impact science and society because of the interdisciplinary
research between nuclear physics, computer modeling, and statistical theory.
This research will uncover statistical properties and computational techniques
to transform the next generation computational scientists and practitioners. The
fast and scalable computation will enhance the use of computer models in real
world problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops
statistically valid techniques that are both computationally inexpensive and
practical to facilitate the use of computer model outputs together with local
data accounting model and parameter uncertainty. The approach extends to a
robust modeling approach in case of model failures that can occur when covering
a large study domain. In particular, the research team will develop Gaussian
process-based emulator that models both the sparsely observed computer model and
the unknown discrepancy that explains the gap between the model and reality. The
approach is Bayesian which provides for the natural quantification of
uncertainties. The key tool for statistical inference is to replace the standard
practice of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) with a novel usage of variational
Bayes (VB) inference. While the variational Bayes is popular in machine learning
literature, the technique is not as popular in statistics as MCMC based sampling
techniques. The slow uptake the VB framework seems to be due to the additional
complexities it adds to modeling and the relatively uncharted theoretical
properties. This project develops an innovative VB algorithm to resolve the
present issues in computer model calibration with the aim of improving the
computation scalability and extendibility in a robust modeling approach. We plan
to build software for translational research to reach the desired applications
for maximum impact. The research will provide transformative research that
impacts statistical computation, Bayesian statistics, computer modeling and
calibration, and related applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.