* 1952642
* EAR-PF:Quantifying Scale of Lower Crust and Mantle Heterogeneities Beneath the Continental United States: Bridging Seismology, Mineral Physics, Petrology, and Magnetotellurics
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2021,08/31/2023
* William Shinevar, Shinevar, William J
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. William Shinevar has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education activities at University of Colorado Boulder
under the mentorship of Dr. Vera Schulte-Pelkum. The goal of this project is to
improve interpretations of lower crustal and mantle seismic anomalies in terms
of temperature, pressure, major element chemistry, hydration, and melt fraction
by integrating constraints from the measurement of Earth’s electrical
resistivity (magnetotellurics), and the directional dependence of the seismic
wavespeeds (seismic anisotropy). Constraining the scale of lower crustal and
mantle thermal and chemical heterogeneities is fundamental to determining the
rheology and stress state of the lithosphere. This, in turn, is crucial to
understanding seismic hazard, as well as how the continental crust and mantle
compositionally evolved over Earth’s history, which is important to better
understand the formation of natural resources. Dr. Shinevar’s education plan
focuses on mentoring an undergraduate student on a research project associated
in order to introduce a student to interdisciplinary approaches for
understanding Earth processes. In addition, he will participate in public
outreach and K-12 education activities in the Boulder
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic wave speed on the lithospheric-scale is
dependent on the (an)elastic moduli of the minerals present as well as the
distribution and elastic moduli of fluids if present. The minerals present
mainly depend on major element composition, water content, pressure, and
temperature. Seismic wavespeeds of lower crustal and mantle rocks have been
recently calculated using databases of whole-rock compositions, thermodynamic
modelling, and grain-scale experimental observations of mineral moduli and
anelasticity. The interpretation of seismic wavespeeds is non-unique. Applying
these new calculations, this project will assess the scale and magnitude of
chemical and thermal heterogeneities compatible with the most current seismic
tomographic models of the lower crust and upper mantle, thus quantifying
interpretation uncertainty. However, not all wavespeeds from these tomographic
models can be interpreted using these calculations. For these anomalous regions,
two other datasets will be used: seismic anisotropy can estimate uncertainty in
isotropic tomographic models, and magnetotelluric measurements, which are highly
sensitive to fluids and silicate melts, can better constrain mantle melt
fraction or hydration. With these independent constraints, tomographic models
will be edited to include expected seismic wavespeeds in anomalous regions due
to melt or hydrous phases. Seismic delay times will be forward modeled to
validate these calculations. This synthesis will increase our understanding of
the evolution of mantle lithosphere from the Archean to the present as well as
allow for a direct link between large-scale geophysical observations and small-
scale laboratory measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.