* 1952144
* SCC-PG: Cultivating a Smart Equity-Driven Policymaking Infrastructure to Improve Youth Learning Opportunities
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Sheena Erete, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 149,892.00

Amid growing commitment to address inequities of access to quality learning,
this Smart and Connected Communities Planning Grant supports the creation of a
collaborative working group consisting of Chicago city agencies, community-based
out-of-school time (OST) program providers, schools, funding organizations,
families, and youth in Chicago to create a smart, equitable out-of-school
learning infrastructure that more effectively allocates learning resources, such
as spaces, mentors, technology, and funding, in order to eradicate out-of-school
learning deserts in Chicago. This project responds to the critical need to build
and strengthen connections among stakeholders, including city agencies, informal
educators, out-of-school program leaders, school district leaders, parents, and
youth, with an evidence-based understanding of OST offerings. Information about
the abundance and diversity of programs and provider organizations, location of
programs, capacity of programs, youth interest, and youth population can be used
to effectively improve the health of Chicagoâ€™s OST learning ecosystem. This
project will contribute an actionable framework consisting of policies,
practices, funding models, and collaboration structures that support a smart,
data-driven method to create equitable out-of-school learning
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working in an existing OST learning
ecosystem, this project takes a community-driven approach to evaluating the
current OST learning landscape by bringing together key stakeholders and
facilitating the conversation using interactive smart tools such as data
visualizations and GIS maps, that layer community-based OST program, city, and
demographic data. This information can help stakeholders discuss and expand and
diversify OST learning opportunities and participation among youth in resource-
constrained communities. The outcome will be a socio-technical framework, co-
created with key learning stakeholders in Chicago, that will include a suite of
smart, data-driven technologies that enable a robust, out-of-school learning
ecosystem customized to the needs of neighborhood youth. This actionable
framework will consist of policies, practices, and structures at both the city
and community levels derived from defining a socio-technical infrastructure and
shared language, identifying policies and practices that inhibit or support
collaboration among learning stakeholders, and co-creating practices for
community-based collaboration to transform and activate a new OST
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.