* 1952181
* SCC-PG: Low-cost Smart Cities: Designing Affordable Smart Cities for All Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Corey Baker, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Smart cities offer the potential to improve the public health, safety and
welfare by integrating intelligent technology into the built environment. For
example, Internet-of-things (IoT) devices deployed throughout a city can be used
for real-time crime detection and monitoring, or to collect data on the movement
of people in a way that enables more intelligent decisions about how to design
the built environment itself. However, smart city projects can be extremely
expensive to deploy and manage. Cities such as San Diego, New Orleans, London,
and Songdo have either proposed or invested in smart city projects that cost
between $30 Million and $40 Billion. In addition to the cost of deploying and
maintaining the IoT devices themselves, a significant portion of the expense is
a result of providing Internet connectivity via 5G or WiFi to those devices.
These costs are a major barrier to the widespread deployment of smart city
technology and the social benefits that may ensue from that technology.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To alleviate the costs, this project proposes use of
delay tolerant networks (DTNs) as a backbone for smart city communication. DTNs
provide opportunistic networking connections in areas with little to no
infrastructure. Messages are delivered with some delay which is directly
correlated with the layout, density, and mobility of nodes in the network.
Recognizing that some data are needed in real-time, this project seeks to
investigate advancements in edge-computing, while optimizing the placement and
use of internet-connected nodes in the network. For data that can tolerate
delays, this project proposes to use the natural movement of people and vehicles
through a city to transfer data between nodes. In this way, the citizens become
an integral part of the smart city network itself. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal is to enable developing communities to become smart cities at a fraction of
the cost along with enabling developed cities to minimize cost and maximize
efficiency. The City of Louisville, Kentucky, is the partnered city for this
research. To ensure that Louisville as a smart city serves its citizens, the
project takes a “human centered design,” combined with “activity centered
design” approach. The goal is to ensure that the design of the smart city system
takes into account the needs and concerns of community members and is useful to
them. For example, a successful design must be sensitive to concerns about data
privacy, and to how the data will be used to improve quality of life within the
city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.