* 1952385
* Growing Apart: Sex-Specific Plasticity And The Developmental Regulation Of Male And Female Body Size
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Alexander Shingleton, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 842,695.00

In many animal species, including humans, adult males and females have different
body sizes. However, despite the commonality of this phenomenon, scientists have
a very poor understanding of the mechanisms that cause males and females to grow
to different sizes. Previous research, using the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster as a model organism, suggest that the difference in body size
between sexes is due to differences in how males and females respond to
nutrition during their growth. In almost all animals, high levels of nutrition
during growth increase adult body size. Preliminary data show that while males
and females are the same size when reared on a poor-quality diet, females are
better able to respond to a high-quality diet than males, and grow to a larger
size. Consequently, females are more nutritionally-sensitive than males. The
goal of this study is to discover the developmental and physiological mechanisms
that make females more nutritionally-sensitive than males with respect to their
growth and final body size. This research contributes to a growing understanding
of how and why females and males respond differently to environmental stimuli, a
phenomenon that has wide-ranging and important implications for many aspects of
biology, including human biology. The grant will also support broader impact
activities designed to bring together academic, medical, and educational workers
from across the UIC campus and wider Chicago-land area, to discuss the
scientific, medical, and societal impacts of biological differences between
females and males. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research by the Shingleton Laboratory
and others indicate that sexual-size dimorphism (SSD) in Drosophila melanogaster
is at least partially regulated by the insulin/IGF-signaling pathway, a
regulator of body size with respect to nutrition in almost all animals; that is,
nutritional plasticity. These data, as well as several adaptive hypotheses on
the evolution of SSD, suggest a relationship between SSD and sex-specific
plasticity (SSP), the phenomenon whereby body size in one sex is more
environmentally variable than in the other sex. Preliminary data from the
Shingleton Laboratory support such a relationship by showing a strong genetic
correlation between SSD and SSP among isogenic Drosophila lineages. The goal of
this project is therefore to use Drosophila melanogaster as a model organism to
test the hypothesis that the developmental genetic mechanisms that regulate
sexual SSD also regulate SSP, and that these mechanisms either target or lie
within the insulin-signaling pathway. The hypothesis will be tested by: (1)
using a genome-wide association study to determine whether the same loci are
associated with genetic variation in SSD and SSP; (2) characterizing at the
level of gene expression/activity how females and males differentially respond
to changes in developmental nutrition, and; (3) functionally testing the role
that genes (identified in [1] and [2]) play in regulating SSD and
SSP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.