* 1952241
* SCC-PG: Addressing Unprecedented Community-Centered Transportation Infrastructure Needs and Policies for the Mobility Revolution
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Stephen Ritchie, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

This Smart and Connected Communities Planning Grant (SCC-PG) will support the
development of next-generation transportation planning models that incorporate
mobility service providers (e.g. Uber and Lyft) and connected automated vehicle
technology. While mobility service providers have significantly improved
mobility and accessibility in metropolitan regions over the last ten years, they
have also significantly increased traffic congestion and harmful vehicle
emissions. The eventual deployment of automated vehicles within mobility
services is likely to exacerbate these societal benefits and negative societal
outcomes. Through identifying effective transportation policies, this planning
grant will help communities harness the benefits and avoid (some of) the
negative outcomes associated with mobility services and connected automated
vehicle technology. Moreover, the planning grant will support the deployment of
automated vehicles on public roadways through models that identify
infrastructure upgrades that benefit the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research is to improve sustainability, livability, and
mobility throughout entire metropolitan regions via supporting transport
planning, specifically infrastructure upgrades and transport policies, to
capture the potential benefits of automated vehicles and mobility services. To
meet this goal, the project will prototype multi-resolution agent-based regional
transport system modeling tools that are sensitive to transport policies (e.g.
congestion pricing) and infrastructure investments (e.g. protected left-turns,
lane striping) and also explicitly capture the behavior and system impacts of
mobility service providers and connected automated vehicle technology. The
project will also involve prototyping optimization models to support proactive
infrastructure investments that maximize the community benefits of new
mobility/vehicle technologies such as connected and automated vehicles, rather
than reactively upgrading infrastructure. Additionally, the planning phase of
the project involves: working closely with community partners to identify their
specific modeling needs; forming the best team of interdisciplinary researchers;
and further refining the methodological approach. The research team will work
closely with its main community stakeholder, the San Diego Association of
Governments, other regional planning agencies, and cities who will implement
infrastructure upgrades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.