* 1952089
* SCC-PG: JST: Multimodal Data Analytics and Integration for Emergency Response and Disaster Management
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Shu-Ching Chen, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 75,000.00

The prevalence of high-speed data management and communication systems have
produced countless large volumes of high-veracity, real-time data collections
across many domains. For example, natural disasters initiate a myriad of human
communications, data exchange, and situational assessments. It is crucial to
quickly collect and analyze all of the relevant data, as life or death decisions
may rest on the outcome. Hurricane Irma in 2017 caused the largest civil
evacuation in Floridaâ€™s history and emphasizes two critical problems in
emergency management: 1) pre-storm evacuation coordination; and 2) post-storm
support for shelter-in-place locations. Disaster information integration and
fusion technologies have the potential to deliver enhanced situational awareness
tools across all sectors, enabling a more efficient, effective, and automated
emergency management and recovery process. However, there is no discernible
approach to identify and exploit the underlying patterns of each dataset while
also minimizing possible drawbacks. This project aims to utilize multimodal
data, such as text messages, images, videos, traffic information, and geo-
referencing information, from various sources including social media, news,
government announcements, and radio broadcasts. This work will investigate the
analysis and fusion of this information to provide useful insights for aiding
the decision-making process for both residents and government agencies. The goal
is to develop new tools and technologies that can support emergency managers to
better evaluate the effectiveness of disaster management policies such as
evacuation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research provides potential
solutions to solve crucial information analysis challenges related to disaster
information management while leveraging the team's previous work. In addition,
the team's research approach offers rapid key information identification,
efficient multimodal data integration that facilitates emergency management, and
enhances dynamic community disaster information sharing. Moreover, solutions
developed could later be extended to other domains in the information management
field. This project fosters collaboration among two institutions, Florida
International University (FIU) and University of Tokyo, as well as institutions
across the public and private sectors, to develop advanced techniques for
effective emergency response and disaster management. The broader impact of this
work will lead to scientific advances in the preparation, response, recovery,
and mitigation of major disasters. As the largest graduate Hispanic Serving
Institution in the continental United States, FIU will also benefit from the
impact of this project that expands the participation of underrepresented groups
in STEM fields. The research findings of this project will be broadly
disseminated via publications, presentations, and an organized
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.