* 1952868
* I-Corps: Hexacoordinate pincer complexes for organic electronic devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Thomas Schmedake, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
materials for organic electronic devices. Relevant applications include organic
light emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs), large panel
displays, and implantable/wearable biotech devices. The switch to organic
electronics offers flexible, lighter, cheaper, and more sustainable devices. The
materials being developed offer customized charge transport properties optimized
for the various needs of the electronics industry sectors. The materials are
compatible with current material processing techniques and are ready for rapid
integration into existing device manufacturing streams. These materials could
enhance the device efficiency, leading to devices that can last longer before
needing to be recharged, as well as device lifetime. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the hexacoordinate Si(pincer)2 platform, uniquely
suited for synthetic tailoring to meet the demand for low-cost materials with
improved charge mobility in the organic electronics industry. The push-pull,
charge transport nature of the pincer ligands allow for selective tuning of the
material's HOMO or LUMO levels, accurately predicted through molecular modeling.
The molecular geometry of the Si(pincer)2 complexes enhances solid state packing
efficiency to facilitate charge transport, while also ensuring negligible dipole
moments and higher vapor pressure for thermal evaporation. The hexacoordinate
silicon center also enforces planarity of the dianionic pincer ligands. The
materials are compatible with current thermal evaporation
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.