* 1952679
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Inference for Interpretable Random Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Peter Mueller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 04/30/2024
* USD 149,903.00

Many challenging questions in data science can be characterized in terms of
inference for random subsets of patients, customers, proteins, symptoms, or
other experimental units. Examples include the search for a subpopulation of
patients who most benefit from a given treatment, the identification of subsets
of mutations that characterize different tumor cell subpopulations that could
then serve as possible treatment targets, or the discovery of latent disease
patterns in electronic health records that could be used to propose an improved
allocation of resources. In all three examples, the unusual nature of the
inference targets as random subsets gives rise to challenging data analysis
problems. In contrast, most traditional methods work for inference targets that
are a single number, like a treatment effect, a level of differential protein
expression, or a mean response. This project aims to address this gap in
currently available methodology by developing and applying new methods to solve
several specific inference problems related to random
subsets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops novel statistical inference
methods for random subsets to approach such inference problems by explicitly
introducing parsimony and interpretability as criteria for the reported
inference. Related methods are developed for random partitions, feature
allocation, and extensions of such structures. Besides the development of models
and inference paradigms, a second major thrust of the proposed work is the
development of computationally feasible implementations for large data sets.
Model-based Bayesian inference for random subsets quickly leads to prohibitively
computation-intensive implementations when simulation-exact posterior Monte
Carlo methods are used. While several big data posterior simulation methods for
global parameters have been developed in recent literature, there are few such
methods for random subsets, i.e., local parameters. The project will explore
several approaches to develop such methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.