* 1952643
* EAR-PF:Stratigraphic paleobiology in continental settings: Developing a sequence-stratigraphic framework of fossil preservation in continental deposits through model building and
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Katharine Loughney, Loughney                Katharine      M
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2022
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Katharine Loughney has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship to
investigate large-scale controls on fossil preservation at the University of
Georgia under the mentorship of Dr. Steven Holland. Many factors contribute to
the preservation of fossils, including the habitats in which plants and animals
lived, and the geologic processes that control the burial of their remains. In
marine environments, water depth is a major control on habitat, sedimentation,
and animal abundance, and the rock and fossil records of marine systems can
therefore be studied in relation to their mutual drivers. On land, tectonics,
climate, elevation, and stream processes are important controls on the spatial
distribution of habitats and the burial of organisms. The interaction of these
controls is complex and has not been as extensively studied as those in the
marine realm. The goal of this project is to study the preservation of fossils
in relation to the controls on habitat and burial in terrestrial environments.
Through modeling fossil accumulation under varying tectonic and climatic states
to predict the occurrence of fossils in sedimentary basin fill, and by testing
these predictions in the field, the large-scale drivers of preservation can be
better constrained. The outcomes of this project will enhance understanding of
how tectonics, climate, and sedimentation processes control fossil preservation
and will allow the occurrence of fossil-bearing strata to be predicted. This
project will involve undergraduate students in field and laboratory work, while
project findings will be incorporated into field-based paleontology courses to
contribute to the training and education of graduate students. Additionally, the
project will be the basis for public museum
displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accommodation and sedimentation are the two main
stratigraphic controls on the distribution of sedimentary facies, which can be
evaluated using sequence stratigraphy. Stratigraphic paleobiology integrates the
fossil record with sequence-stratigraphic architecture, revealing the
predictable occurrence of fossiliferous facies. The goal of the proposed
research is to apply the principles of sequence stratigraphy to understand the
distribution of fossiliferous facies in relation to the history of accommodation
and sedimentation in continental extensional-basin sequences. Extensional basins
are important repositories of the continental fossil record, and their tectonic
and facies evolution is predictable and well characterized. Dr. Loughney will:
1) develop a conceptual model of fossil accumulation in alluvial systems tracts
that incorporates the intra- and extrabasinal controls on sedimentation in
extensional continental basins, and 2) test the model with field work in the
Miocene Stewart Valley Group of Nevada. Characterizing the facies relationships
and stratigraphic occurrence of fossil localities through the Stewart Valley
Group will test the predictions of the model and demonstrate how fossil
preservation changes through the history of accommodation and sedimentation in
the basin. This research will enable patterns of evolution and extinction in
continental plants and animals to be integrated with stratigraphy and
preservation across basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.