* 1952088
* Constraints on genetic relationships between organic-rich black shales and Zn-Pb mineralization in the Mid-Continent Region, U.S.A.
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Adriana Potra, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2024
* USD 397,057.00

Mississippi Valley-type (MVT) ores are important worldwide, especially in
developing countries that are utilizing their natural resources to create jobs
and develop infrastructure. The US technologic and economic interests are
critically reliant on a continuation of prospecting, discovery and exploitation
of new strategic ore deposits. Resources of this type necessitate investigation
since they are part of our effort to ensure societal development on a
sustainable Earth. Constraining the source(s) of metals in the MVT deposits is
very important for a better understating of how this significant class of ores
form. Understanding the mechanism can lead to modeling and predicting where they
may be concentrated and may result in identification of yet-to-be-found
deposits. The PI’s intent is to emphasize the education and training of economic
geologists and will integrate research with an effort to enhance students’
preparation and understanding in the natural resources area. Research will also
include student training in the radiogenic isotope class 100 clean lab and use
of the state-of-the-art technology, including a Nu Plasma MC-ICP-MS and Thermo
Scientific iCAP Q ICP-MS. The PI is using this research as a platform to
contribute to ongoing outreach efforts focused on training and recruiting high-
quality students of under-represented minorities of historically Black Colleges
and Universities and Hispanic Serving Institutions. This project is jointly
funded by the Petrology and Geochemistry Program the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
genetic link between black shales and MVT ores has long been thought to exist
because of (1) the presence of mature hydrocarbon and brine fluid inclusions
within many MVT ores, (2) the association of the hydrothermal fluids that are
linked to MVT ore formation with organic compounds and oil-like droplets, and
(3) the highly radiogenic nature of the ores. Research aims to provide a better
understanding of the genetic relationship between metal-rich black shales in
large sedimentary basins and sulfide mineralization associated with (1) major
MVT ores in carbonate sequences and (2) minor occurrences of ores in shales. A
secondary goal is to better constrain the sources of metals in the MVT ores. The
main hypothesis to be tested is that metal-rich black shales deposited in large
sedimentary basins are the source of metals for Pb-Zn mineralization in the Mid-
Continent Region of the United States. Preliminary Pb isotope and trace element
data suggest that U-enriched black shales represent a potential source for
radiogenic Pb to be mobilized in the ores and that different depositional
environments within the larger shale body may explain the patterns of metal
occurrence in the black shales and their movement into adjacent strata.
Recognition and proof that these shales may be a major source of metals in ores
may cause a paradigm shift of the basic concepts of how and where these deposits
form. Understanding MVT deposits can also lead to enhanced knowledge about
presence and relevant characteristics of metal-bearing black shales. This
project is jointly funded by the Petrology and Geochemistry Program the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.