* 1952072
* IRES Track I: Behavioral Ecology, Demography and Conservation of Primates in the Humid Chaco of Argentina
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Eduardo Fernandez-Duque, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project will train U.S. students to conduct research that contributes to
understanding the evolution of mammal and primate societies and how ecological
and social factors influence their structure and functioning. The students will
conduct research projects to examine if the interactions with predators and
competitors (e.g. coatis, howler monkeys) influence owl monkey monogamous groups
and solitary floaters differently. Developed within the fields of behavioral
ecology, demography and conservation of primates, the projects will be conducted
within the Owl Monkey Project in the Humid Chaco of Argentina. This IRES site
will leverage a successful 23-year-old international research program to offer
opportunities to 18 undergraduate students recruited nationally from Primarily
Undergraduate Institutions. The students will receive training, networking
opportunities and mentorship before, during and after the 8-week summer research
experience. Societal benefits will include, among other things, a series of
freely available educational materials for use in biological anthropology and
primatology courses (in both English and Spanish). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute to a research program that is making theoretical and
empirical contributions to the study of the evolution of mating and social
systems in mammals and primates. The student activities will be developed within
the Owl Monkey Project, which has been studying monogamous owl monkeys (Aotus
azarae) without interruption since 1996. Owl monkeys are one of the few
monogamous primates in the world, the only primate genus with nocturnal habits
in the Americas, and one of two primates with the most extreme forms of paternal
care among mammals. To further understand the mechanisms and evolution of
monogamy, pair-bonding, and paternal care, the students will conduct studies
contributing to an evaluation of the influence that the competition between owl
monkey solitary floaters and resident adults has on the demography, life-history
and genetic correlates of the owl monkey population. In the spring prior to
summer field work, students will participate in an online course to introduce
them to key concepts in primate behavior and ecology, and to guide them
designing high-quality feasible research projects. Students will spend 8 weeks
in the field collecting, curating and analyzing data under the guidance and
mentoring of the PIs and 4 foreign collaborators. Back in the US, participants
will receive additional training and mentoring in data analysis and scientific
writing via virtual meetings. At the end of the fall semester, participants will
present their projects at a professional meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.