* 1952223
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Empowering Environmental Justice Communities with Smart and Connected Technology: Air and Noise Pollution, Wellbeing, and Social Relations in Times of Disruption
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shivakant Mishra, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,816,000.00

Major construction projects across the U.S. can have heavy impacts on
communities that can last decades. These projects can generate noise and air
pollution, disrupt traffic, and affect individual and community health and
social structure. Environmental justice communities, or communities with large
numbers of minority and/or low-income households, are disproportionately subject
to negative health and environmental effects. This project partners with three
environmental justice communities in Denver, Colorado to understand and help
mitigate disruption caused by two major projects, including a highway
reconstruction project and related neighborhood redevelopment. This effort will
create a socio-technical system that equips community members with environmental
sensors to monitor their personal environment (air and noise pollution) and a
set of smartphone apps to report their individual wellbeing and social
relations. The data reported through the sociotechnical system will allow us to
1) understand how community members are affected by planned environmental
disruptions, 2) mitigate negative impacts of future planned disruptions, and 3)
connect policymakers to data generated by citizens within local communities. By
providing communities access to data with smart and connected cutting-edge tools
and the ability to interact with these tools, the project aims to improve
community members’ personal environment, wellbeing, and social relations, while
enabling evidence-based responses to community members’ experiences and
informing policy and decision makers in real-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project’s overarching goal is to improve the quality of life within
environmental justice communities that are impacted by planned, major built
environment disruptions, such as the construction of new highways and
infrastructure projects. To meet this goal, a socio-technical system (STS)
composed of environment sensors, smartphone platforms, and a data analytics
server equipped with predictive modeling and visualization is being designed and
integrated into communities in order to: 1) understand how individuals’ personal
environment (air and noise pollution), wellbeing, and social relations is
affected by a planned disruption; 2) mitigate negative impacts of a planned
disruption; and 3) equip policy and decision makers with predictive information
about potential negative impacts of upcoming disruptions to help them plan
appropriate safeguards. This community-embedded research project will study two
prototypical, planned built environment disruptions in Denver Colorado: the
Central 70 project and the National Western Center redevelopment. The research
collaboration proposed in this project is with three affected environmental
justice communities: Globeville, Elyria-Swansea, and Cole. It is a partnership
of the residents, local community organizations, government entities, and
University of Colorado faculty in computer science, air quality engineering,
sociology, and engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.