* 1952521
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: Ph-IRES Philippines International Research Experience for Students - Fisheries Impacts at the Global Epicenter of Marine Biodiversity
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Gauthier, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,079.00

This collaborative IRES project is co-funding by OISE (Office of International
Science and Engineering) and GEO/OCE (Division of Ocean
Sciences).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1, Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;In
the Philippines International Research Experience for Students project (Ph-
IRES), 15 U.S. undergraduates will spend eight weeks at Silliman University (SU)
conducting independent research with Filipino mentors. Projects will explore
marine fishes and the human activities affecting their evolution. Research will
include: (1) genetic barcoding to document fish diversity; (2) life history
studies to examine how fishing pressure influences how fish grow and reproduce;
(3) genetic studies to see how fish populations connect with one another, and;
(4) study of how microplastics pollution may affect reef fishes. Students will
be involved in an immersive international research experience that emphasizes
collaboration among cultures and contributes to development of a diverse,
globally-engaged workforce with world-class skills. Through this training
program, we will enhance U.S. leadership in research, and strengthen economic
competitiveness through training the next generation of international research
leaders. Society relies upon marine resources for food security, and the
proposed research will contribute to our ability to sustainably harvest fish by
helping us understand how our activities affect their evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2, Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
students will conduct research in modern ecological and evolutionary science to
test for the evolution of exploited marine fishes in the epicenter of marine
biodiversity. Ph-IRES will build upon the existing, successful international
summer REU program organized by the "NSF-PIRE-1743711- Centennial Genetic and
Species Transformations in the Epicenter of Marine Biodiversity" collaboration,
which is focused on short-term molecular evolution of marine fishes by adding
capacity for five nationally recruited students/year whose research projects
focus on documenting present-day genetic diversity and the impacts of human
activities on fisheries species. Students will work with Filipino mentors at SU
to explore research questions in four focus areas: (1) DNA barcoding of marine
fishes will be used to document and compare long-term evolutionary
relationships, species and genetic diversity in a region with the greatest
marine biodiversity and relatively few scientific studies; (2) Marine fish life
history projects will gather data on growth rate, age of reproductive maturity
or sex change, and parental investment in offspring to make comparisons between
areas with different levels of fishing pressure; (3) Research projects on
population connectivity will use genetic data to test for genetic structure; (4)
Projects in marine pollution and microplastics will directly examine these
contemporary anthropogenic threats to marine fishes in the Philippines. In
addition to the scientific focus areas, the educational goals of Ph-IRES are to
(1) help students integrate into international STEM culture, (2) promote
disciplinary practices and knowledge, and (3) increase participation and
retention of students in STEM fields. Students will gain authentic experience in
developing, planning, conducting, analyzing and disseminating the results of an
independent overseas research project. Ph-IRES will also provide cultural
training, a computational skills workshop, funding for membership in a
professional society and a capstone cohort trip to the National Diversity in
STEM conference where participants can network, take advantage of professional
development activities, and present their research. The proposed work will add
to existing knowledge of the effects of undergraduate research experiences, and
will in particular contribute quantitative and qualitative data on students
working with international, non-Western mentors in an overseas setting.
Additionally, the partnership of the Ph-IRES and PIRE REU programs will allow us
to contrast the effects of differing mentorship strategies between the
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.