* 1952683
* CAREER: A Hierarchical Restructuring Operation Framework for Sustainable and Resilient Electricity Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jie Li, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 472,601.00

In response to the urgent need to improve societal capabilities to withstand and
recover from major natural or man-made catastrophic events, community microgrids
are designed to provide sustainable and resilient electric energy supply for
critical services. With increased penetration of community microgrids and
distributed energy resources, distribution systems are transforming from
traditionally passive radial networks operated by a single utility to more
sophisticated active networked topologies with multiple autonomic entities. This
transformation in distribution systems has resulted in a need to reshape the way
electricity services are delivered and distribution systems are designed and
managed. To address these challenges, this CAREER project will investigate new
approaches for comprehensive modeling of distinct characteristics of emerging
distribution systems with a proliferation of community microgrids, and explore
optimal operation strategies for enhancing the sustainability and resiliency of
distribution systems. Specifically, a two-tier hierarchical restructuring
framework is proposed for guiding the optimal operation and coordination of
distribution systems and community microgrids, with special focus on
investigating fundamental market clearing mechanisms and efficient computation
tools. Results from this research could facilitate the optimal design of future
fully liberalized retail distribution markets and related energy policies, and
guide the active participation of microplayer-like electricity prosumers
(producer-consumers) in such distribution-level markets. The research efforts
will be complemented by an education and outreach plan aimed at increasing
public awareness and understanding of the complexity of distribution systems
restructuring, and to prepare the next generation workforce with needed skills
to meet the needs of the power industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both physical
feasibility and financial viability of individual autonomic entities are key to
the successful implementation of distribution system restructuring and retail
electricity markets. This project will address such challenges via five
integrated research and educational activities, namely: (i) Exploring market
operation and pricing mechanisms for distribution system operators based on
comprehensive unbalanced three-phase alternating current optimal power flow
models and efficient computation methods. The proposed per-phase nodal
distribution locational marginal pricing concept can effectively incentivize the
continued participation of various distribution customers in retail electricity
markets; (ii) Investigating market operation and pricing mechanisms for
community microgrid operators based on comprehensive unbalanced three-phase
alternating current unit commitment models and efficient computation methods.
The proposed per-phase nodal community locational marginal pricing concept can
effectively coordinate heterogeneous community partners under both grid-
connected and islanded operation modes, and incentivize their continued
participation in community microgrids. Flexibilities of typical community
microgrid partners are also investigated to help guide their strategic bidding
in community microgrids; (iii) Addressing major research questions via the
proposed models and computation methods to further promote the implementation of
distribution systems restructuring; (iv) Validating the proposed research in
simulated and realistic system models; and (v) Exploring knowledge and skill
requirements for the sustainable operation and effective restructuring of
emerging distribution systems and community microgrids, and investigating
education and training needs for retooling existing power engineering programs
and curricula.