* 1952882
* Machine Learning in Macroeconomic Modeling
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2023
* In-Koo Cho, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 252,054.00

This award funds research that will examine whether incorporating machine
learning algorithms into macroeconomic models can result in better ways to
understand modern economies. The project will begin by assuming that individual
consumers, workers, and firms can be modeled as making their decisions according
to a particular type of machine learning algorithm (a boosting algorithm). The
project seeks to understand the conditions under which a machine learning
algorithm can emulate the decision-making process of a rational individual. The
team will also analyze likely long run economic outcomes when these algorithms
are used under various institutional and informational assumptions. The project,
therefore, may develop a valuable new technique for modeling individual
decisions in the context of an entire economic system. It could also help us
understand how future economic outcomes may be affected by the increased use of
machine learning methods to aid or even substitute for human decision making.
The project could therefore help guide efforts to improve the competitiveness of
the US economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will exploit one of the
central components of the machine learning algorithm, called the boosting
algorithm, to build a highly accurate forecasting rule from a collection of
rudimentary and possibly inaccurate forecasting rules. The usual approach in
economic models is to assume that the agents (individuals, firms, etc.) are
typically endowed with misspecified models. When this is the case, an individual
or firm's decision-making process typically relies on simple, yet well fit,
forecasting rules, which can differ from the true data generating process. The
team aim to understand whether an agent endowed with flawed but well fit models
can behave as if she knows the true data generating process. The team plans to
pursue this objective in two steps. In the first part of the project, the team
will examine learning dynamics under misspecified models. As an example, it
examines a new class of learning models in which the agent has to learn the
growth rate instead of the level of a variable of interest. In many
macroeconomic models, the growth rate (e.g., inflation rate) rather than the
level of a variable (e.g., price) is the main focus of the investigation.
Assuming that the agent learns the growth rate through a recursive learning
process rather than rational expectations may result in better explanations of
important macroeconomic dynamics, such as recurrent hyperinflation and stock
price volatility. The second step in the research plan investigates the dynamics
of a specific machine learning algorithm with two research objectives: [1] if an
agent is endowed with misspecified models, how the decision maker can test and
build a new model to improve the forecast, and [2] what are the asymptotic
properties of the processes of constructing new models, in particular whether
the agent can emulate the rational agent in the long
run.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.