* 1952193
* SCC-PG: ECET: Empowering Community-centric Electrified Transportation
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Junfeng Jiao, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Electrified (E-) transportation is rapidly gaining popularity in metropolitan
areas to address environmental and sustainability issues induced by
urbanization. Ongoing efforts by individuals, transit agencies, and local
governments are increasing the availability of E-transportation modes (E-buses,
EVs, and E-scooters). This transition could introduce an unprecedented
opportunity to improve regional transportation and electricity systems, as well
as promote socio-economic growth in urban space. To realize the potential of
E-transportation, it is necessary to pursue an interdisciplinary approach and
continuous engagement with stakeholders. This project will build a collaborative
team to investigate an E-hub concept that seeks to convert transit centers to
host various E-modes. The team will collaborate with the public transit agency,
regional electric utility, and city government in Austin, Texas to explore the
potential of using E-hubs to support urban infrastructure and address social
equity issues. This planning activity will benefit our partners with actionable
results and ultimately contribute to the development of a large-scale
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate an E-hub concept
through a collaborative pilot study on its impacts on urban infrastructure and
socio-economic growth. The goal is to develop integrative solutions to promote
E-transportation at the scale of urban communities. Using real data sets
provided by our partners, we propose three cohesive research thrusts: T1)
Locating the E-hubs by developing traffic models with improved resolution and
addressing transit equity issues; T2) Powering the E-hubs by considering
emerging energy resources and intelligent charging for grid support; and T3)
Studying community-level effects of E-hubs, focusing on potentially distributing
the impacts across the whole community. The team will closely work with our
partners (City of Austin, CapMetro, and Austin Energy) to facilitate the
adoption of E-hubs in our community through regular discussions and feedback
collection. We will also organize faculty-industry workshops through UTâ€™s Energy
Institutive to reach out to industry stakeholders, policymakers, and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.