* 1952420
* Dynamical Organometallic Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Daniel Ess, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2023
* USD 265,338.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Daniel Ess of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Brigham Young University is developing new
experimentally testable theories about how the dynamic motion of atoms during
the course of chemical reactions impacts how the reactions occur (reaction
mechanisms). The goal of this research is to use the combination of a quantum
mechanical treatment of the energy and forces with classical mechanical
equations of motion to discover new reaction pathways and mechanisms for
organometallic reactions. Quantum mechanics deals with the mathematical
description of the motion and interaction of subatomic particles, incorporating
the concepts of quantization of energy, wave-particle duality, and the
uncertainty of how fast a tiny particle moves and how well we know its position.
Classical mechanical describes the motion of macroscopic objects, from
projectiles to parts of machinery, and astronomical objects, such as spacecraft,
planets, stars and galaxies. This project combines the use of equations of
physics, at both the atomic and macroscopic scales. The research project is a
fruitful training ground to prepare undergraduate and graduate students for the
scientific workforce. Undergraduate students will learn computational techniques
that will be valuable in their future experimental careers. In addition to
mentoring physical science students, this work provide cross disciplinary
training in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work uses quasiclassical
direct molecular dynamics trajectories to discover new dynamical organometallic
reaction mechanisms, and examine major concepts that provide understanding and
prediction of dynamical mechanisms. Many organometallic reactions involve highly
reactive or weakly coordinated intermediates and their calculated energy
landscapes provide an incomplete mechanistic picture. Quasiclassical direct
molecular dynamics trajectories reveal new dynamical mechanisms. In this
project, the focus is on direct dynamics studies of experimentally important
alkane, arene, and alkene oxidative additions and reductive elimination
reactions, which represent one of the largest and most important classes of
organometallic reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.