* 1952022
* SCC-PG: Understanding the most effective ways to engage community members in using technology and data as tools for influencing change in Wisconsin
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Joshua Garoon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 12/31/2021
* USD 149,511.00

Personal and population health are greatly influenced by the environments people
interact with on a daily basis: the communities in which they live, work, learn,
play, and worship. This project aims to improve understanding of how community
members can equitably and effectively use technology and data tools to
characterize their own community environments. Its goal is to aid community
members in taking control of data collection and analysis processes that reveal
determinants of their health. This promises to concomitantly expand their
capacities to act on those data and analyses, contributing to community-level
change. For these purposes, this project will pilot in Brown County, Wisconsin a
smartphone app called Streetwyze that enables real-time data collection and
documentation by community members of the communityâ€™s infrastructures, both
built environment (e.g., transit systems) as well as social, economic and
policy/governance infrastructures (e.g., forms of social capital, social
cohesion, social connectedness, sense of belonging, trust).

The Streetwyze technology makes local knowledge accessible by creating two-way
feedback loops and data connections between cities and counties; neighborhoods
and cities; and patients and providers, so that they can co-produce solutions
that help secure shared benefits. Using the Streetwyze technology, researchers
working together with public health practitioners will engage with community
leaders and stakeholders to address questions including: 1) How can we most
equitably support community member engagement in technology-driven, community-
level data collection and analysis?; 2) How can the Streetwyze app be most
effectively customized for community coalitions in particular communities?; 3)
What information/data can be gathered about place-community relations through
community-member stakeholder utilization of the Streetwyze app?; 4) How could
Streetwyze implementation be scaled for future, additional
communities/coalitions in Wisconsin?; and 5) How can communities use secondary
data sets (e.g., on income, education, occupation, and other social determinants
of health) to complement community-level data and insights on health equity and
health inequality in Wisconsin? By integrating community-generated data with
'Big Data' and predictive data analysis through the app, cities and community
leaders (as well as hospitals and health care providers) can track health equity
indicators; identify hot spots and cool spots for equitable development; and
predict trajectories of vulnerability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.