* 1952225
* SCC-PG: Building an Integrative Community Platform to Alleviate the Workforce Aging Crisis
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Shangping Ren, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 165,999.00

The United States is in the midst of a workforce aging crisis. According to
labor force projections, workers aged 55 and older will not only be the fastest
growing segment of the labor market in the coming decade, but will also make up
25.2% (compared to 13.1% in 2000) of the total workforce by 2020, with
approximately 41 million workers will be over the age of 55 by 2024. Although
automation has become widespread in many industries, some workplaces such as
utility industries still rely heavily on individuals to perform critical tasks.
These individuals have been performing critical tasks over a long period of time
and have accumulated crucial experience and domain knowledge. This intellectual
capital not only improves productivity and efficacy under normal conditions, but
more importantly, it enables quick identification of anomalies and swift action
to unexpected events and situations. We may soon lose the accrued essential
knowledge as skilled workers retire. This planning project will serve as a vital
starting point to build a community platform to alleviate the fast-growing
workforce aging crisis that builds upon integrative research spanning technical
and social dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project
is to form a task force to develop a road map to combat the imminent workforce
aging challenge in collaboration with the San Diego community. In particular, we
will form a team of researchers (both in social sciences and STEM), community
and industry partners (including skilled workers, members of management teams,
industrial and community representatives, human resource representatives, and
policy makers) to develop a set of computer technologies and tools to accurately
capture and retain the critical experiences and non-conventional knowledge. This
team will work to effectively transfer that knowledge to the new workforce, and
develop a set of policies, protocols, and processes to alleviate and/or even
prevent future workforce aging crisis. This project includes multidisciplinary
efforts from computer science and engineering, policy making and social science,
and participation of community agencies, stakeholders, and skilled workers. This
integrative approach will lead to a sustainable technology transfer platform for
the community and stakeholders to address the workforce aging issue, and a
smarter and more connected community where critical experiences and
unconventional knowledge can be accurately retained and effectively transferred
to the next generation workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.