* 1952691
* RUI: Development of Molecular Probes Targeting Neglected Kinases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Scott Eagon, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 165,433.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program is funding Dr. Scott
Eagon of California Polytechnic State University-San Luis Obispo to developing
new chemical probes for kinase enzymes. Kinases are a class of proteins found
throughout human cells and play a central role in regulating cell communication
and growth. Kinases are so critical, in fact, that there are more than 500
different types found in the body. When kinases stop functioning properly, this
leads to a variety of negative effects including inflammation, cardiovascular
disease, and cancer. Despite their critical role in maintaining the health of
cells, most kinases remain poorly understood. These chemical probes are tools
that allow Dr. Eagon and his team of undergraduate researchers to better
understand two key kinases named STK16 (serine/threonine kinase 16) and CK2
(casein kinase 2). These two kinases are thought to be involved in cellular
pathway regulation and may be dysfunctional in some forms of cancer. These
chemical probes allow for the systematic testing of STK16 and CK2 to better
understand their roles in cellular signaling. Undergraduate researchers
participating in this project acquire a broad range of knowledge and skills in
cell biology, biochemistry, and organic chemistry. Moreover, this project has a
two-fold outreach program aimed at both undergraduate courses and local K-12
students. This will provide undergraduates with a chance to learn computational
docking and molecular visualization software, while also providing K-12 students
the opportunity to think like scientists in an effort to stimulate their
scientific curiosity. K-12 students are also exposed to a college experience, to
encourage them to pursue future careers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields. The PI will engage a large and diverse group of
undergraduate and K-12 students in chemical biology topics and, in this way,
contribute to inspiring the next generation of research
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to identify potent
and selective chemical probes targeting poorly understood kinases in order to
interrogate the function of these critical cellular regulators. Specifically,
probes targeting the ATP (adenosine triphosphate)-binding pocket of human
kinases STK16 and CK2 are synthesized based on preliminary lead compound
scaffolds that have already been identified. This project also provides
opportunities for undergraduate students to gain research experience and has the
potential to facilitate our understanding of understudied kinase pathways and
how they influence cell growth and development. Another key aspect of this
proposal is the adoption of an open-source policy by making all probes and
cellular data publicly available and free to the community with no restrictions
on use. Successfully developed probes will be incorporated into the Kinase
Chemogenomic Set (KCGS) and are to be made available to the research community
in order to maximize research impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.