* 1952279
* Improving Human-Exoskeleton Fluency Through an Investigation of Dynamic Control Parameters
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Leia Stirling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 06/30/2024
* USD 818,359.00

Wearable robotic exoskeletons have potential to reduce workplace injuries by
providing assistive forces that decrease the physical loads human workers
experience. The goal of this project is to study the usability and user
psychological comfort of an ankle exoskeleton during its interactions with its
user. The device will be programmed to provide dynamic support as people walk
and change walking speeds. The long term goals are to develop technology that
infers and anticipates its user's intent, and to use that information to adapt
the exoskeleton's behavior to maximize the user's trust in the exoskeletal
system and the human-exoskeletal "fluency", defined as the synchronized meshing
of actions within the human-technology team. Human-exoskeleton fluency results
from the co-adaptation between the human and exoskeleton, driven by the motor
strategies selected by the human when using the system and by the updates in the
control policy based on the human. The goal of this project is to examine how
uncertainty in the timing and presence of assistive force actuations impacts
human-exoskeleton fluency and human trust in the exoskeletal system. This
research will be impactful both for military applications, where high rates of
musculoskeletal overuse injury threaten military readiness, and for industrial
applications, where muscle strains, sprains, and tears cause about one third of
the reported cases of lost work days. By integrating models of user intent,
human trust, and human-exoskeleton fluency with the Dephy Bionic Boot, this
project will advance the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and
advance national health by exploring fundamental relationships human behavior,
motor control, and machine manipulation within the context of exoskeletal gait
assistance. The project supports K-5, undergraduate and graduate education
through outreach, curriculum development, and
mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first step towards developing an
anticipatory assistive exoskeleton controller that co-adapts with its human
user, the specific objective of the proposed research is to test the hypotheses
that human trust and human-exoskeleton fluency are affected by (1) assistive
force transition timing and (2) early, late, or missed actuations within the
gait cycle. This project has three aims. The first seeks to evaluate the effect
of variations in assistive force transition timing on human-exoskeleton fluency.
The second evaluates how uncertainty in the timing and presence of assistive
force actuations impacts human performance and system trust. The third aim
develops a co-adaptive controller that seeks to continuously increase fluency in
real-time. The research team uses the commercially available Dephy Bionic Boot
with custom control algorithms to permit hypothesis evaluation. The study will
be performed within a CAREN virtual reality environment on a split-belt,
instrumented treadmill that permits self-pacing. Subjects will perform speed
changing tasks while also performing dual tasks and responding to questions
designed to probe situation awareness. New measures of human-exoskeleton fluency
and trust are analyzed. This work could lead to significant improvements in the
adaptability, capability, and usability of wearable exoskeletal systems for
human performance enhancement in industrial and military
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.