* 1952528
* IRES: Track 1: Self-Healable Materials Development
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Marek Urban, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,996.00

This IRES project is co-funded by Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) and Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;This program will train a
diverse group of U.S. students in interdisciplinary and global research settings
at the Delft University of Technology (TU-Delft) in the Netherlands to conduct
collaborative experimental and computational research on self-healing materials.
Participating students will gain fundamental knowledge and international
experience on new materials’ developments as well as appreciation of cultural
and social aspects of conducting research abroad. While one objective is to
advance the field of materials from which the entire society will benefit, an
ultimate goal of this project is to enhance diversity and provide students with
unique hands-on educational opportunities through international experience, thus
enhancing future US global competitiveness. Eighteen U.S. students during a
three year period will participate in the program who will gain research
experience while facing challenges and opportunities of international research
collaborations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Part 2: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
projects aim at the development of self-healable materials with enhanced
sustainability and durability in high-tech and commodity applications. The
following cutting edge projects that students will conduct are: self-Healing
ceramic composites and metallo-ceramics materials, the Influence of polymer
molecular structure on self-healing, dynamics of self-healing biopolymer
composites, self-healing construction concrete materials, self-healing of
motorways, and modelling of self-healing of thermal barrier coatings. The
proposed projects will lead to new advances that will guide developments of
future materials in sustainable technologies. The overall goal of the program is
to provide students with a global awareness how new generations of materials may
impact environment and societal needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.