* 1952470
* International Research Experience on Pollinators in a Changing World
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jose Fuentes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Pollinators are critical for plant reproduction and the maintenance of healthy
natural and managed ecosystems. Solutions to the ongoing pollinator population
decline around the globe requires the development of research that involves
cross-countries collaborations among interdisciplinary groups of scientists.
This IRES project will engage five U.S. undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in STEM to spend eight weeks in Colombia or Peru
conducting research on how abiotic stressors impact plant-pollinator
interactions. Students will utilize interdisciplinary approaches in ecology,
physiology, climate science, and ecohydrology to develop projects that will
facilitate the acquisition of new and useful information about timely research
topics on pollinators in a changing world. This program specifically pursues a
training partnership involving mentors and students from Colombia, Peru, and US
universities, while field work will take place in hyperdiverse tropical
countries where plant-pollinator interactions remain understudied. Students will
address biological research questions about pollinator responses to air
pollutants, temperature gradients, crop drought, and flooding while using
cutting-edge technological approaches to address the research questions. Teams
of biology and engineering students will be grouped by their topics of interest.
Students will participate in professional development activities to prepare them
for careers involving convergent research. Research outputs of this program will
have direct implications for the conservation of biological diversity and the
livelihoods of people in Latin American where many crops rely on insect
pollinators that are poorly studied. Last, this IRES research experience will
significantly contribute to the training of the next generation of
interdisciplinary scientists who will lead solutions to global problems such as
those currently experienced by declining populations of insect
pollinators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ten-week undergraduate research program
offers students a unique opportunity to investigate how different abiotic
factors and their interactions impact plant-pollinator interactions in tropical
areas. Students in the program, with guidance from faculty advisers from U.S.,
Colombian, and Peruvian universities, will undertake an interdisciplinary
scientific exploration, generating and testing hypotheses, analyzing data, and
communicating research findings, including scientific and policy-relevant
implications, to other scientists and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
will use emerging technologies and advanced data analysis and visualization
methods to investigate the ecological responses of plants and pollinators in
mountainous regions of Colombia and Peru, areas that are undergoing accelerated
environmental changes related to atmospheric warming. Each project will be led
by a pair of biology and engineering students who will work together with
mentors on multidisciplinary approaches to develop research activities, for
example, tracking bee foraging using mini-transponders and linking it to impacts
of ozone concentration on bee physiology and behavior. The multidisciplinary
nature of projects will push the frontiers of knowledge and methodological
approaches to this topic. Specifically, students will investigate the in situ
movement patterns of foraging pollinators, effects of drought and flood stress
on plant-pollinator interactions, and the latitudinal variation of pollinator
thermal tolerance. Students will communicate their results via oral and written
reports, building their communication skills and disseminating research findings
to scientific and non-scientific audiences. Students can also communicate
research results in videos or podcasts for television broadcast and social media
in both English and Spanish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will recruit US
students from universities and colleges where research opportunities for
undergraduates are limited, exposing them to career opportunities in ecology,
entomology, plant science, electrical and environmental engineering,
ecohydrology, and climate science. We will emphasize recruitment of females and
other groups that are underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields. Students in this program will be working in Latin
American, where local students have different cultural backgrounds and levels of
opportunities to engage in research. Noteworthy elements of this program include
(1) multidisciplinary research approaches combining expertise in life and
physical sciences and engineering, (2) training in the development and use of
audiovisuals to broaden communication of research results, and (3) the
partnering of students and mentors from underrepresented groups in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.