* 1952069
* Collaborative Research: How do publication and funding filters shape the science that we do, and how we learn from it?
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Carl Bergstrom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 74,988.00

Science provides an extraordinarily powerful tool for investigating nature, and
nature supplies an&lt;br/&gt;endless abundance of research topics that are ripe
for scientists to investigate. Faced with such&lt;br/&gt;abundance, scientists
must regularly choose where to place their efforts: which questions to pursue
and&lt;br/&gt;which to leave for another day, which results to prepare for
publication and which to set aside, and so&lt;br/&gt;on. When making these
decisions, researchers face incentives that scientific funders and
scientific&lt;br/&gt;journals create through the peer‐review processes that
funders and journals use to ensure quality and&lt;br/&gt;rigor in the science
they support and publish. Yet we understand very little about how the
incentives&lt;br/&gt;created by peer‐review in scientific funding and
publication shape the scientific activity of individual&lt;br/&gt;investigators,
and how those decisions scale up to impact the aggregate knowledge that science
creates.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will develop new mathematical theory to
understand how incentives created by&lt;br/&gt;scientific funders and journals
affect individual scientific activity and the subsequent production
of&lt;br/&gt;scientific knowledge. This theory will provide a foundation for
evaluating proposed refinements of&lt;br/&gt;funding or publication practices,
and for understanding whether these changes will nudge the
scientific&lt;br/&gt;enterprise towards a more reliable and expansive
understanding of the natural world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will focus on two
questions. First, how do journals' publication decisions shape the ability of
their&lt;br/&gt;readership to learn from the scientific literature? Second, how
do the incentives created by funding and&lt;br/&gt;publication structures
motivate scientists to work on certain projects and shy away from others?
For&lt;br/&gt;each question, we will ask how peer‐review filters function
differently for basic versus applied research.&lt;br/&gt;We will investigate
these questions by building and analyzing mathematical models that
incorporate&lt;br/&gt;elements of information theory, economics, forecasting
assessment, and statistics. In the long run, this&lt;br/&gt;work will deepen our
understanding of science as a social process by revealing how scientific
institutions&lt;br/&gt;generate incentives that shape the direction of
scientific inquiry. More immediately, it will provide a&lt;br/&gt;theoretical
framework to explore how possible changes to the peer‐review process such as
registered&lt;br/&gt;reports or pre‐print servers may change scientists'
collective process of learning and discovery. Finally,&lt;br/&gt;we will develop
an online module to help readers become savvier consumers of the scientific
literature,&lt;br/&gt;and we will share our findings with the editorial board of
a leading biological journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.