* 1952702
* EAR-PF   Discerning the nature of the oceanic lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary through integration of seismological-scale and laboratory-scale observations
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Joshua Russell, Russell, Joshua B
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2022
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Joshua Russell has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education activities under the mentorship of Dr. Colleen Dalton
at Brown University. Plate tectonics describes the motion of Earth’s rigid
plates (the lithosphere) that overlie the actively convecting asthenosphere,
providing a comprehensive framework for understanding the dynamics and evolution
of the planet. The ocean basins comprise approximately 70% of Earth’s surface
and, due to their geologic simplicity, provide a clear window into plate
tectonic processes. Yet, fundamental aspects of plate tectonics remain poorly
understood, such as the chemical and physical characteristics that define the
base of the plate and how they vary with plate age. This project aims to
reconcile competing hypotheses for the origin and evolution of the oceanic
lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary (LAB) by integrating high-resolution seismic
imaging of the mantle beneath the Pacific Ocean with recent experimental
constraints on the physical properties of olivine, the most abundant mineral in
Earth’s mantle. The education plan consists of 1) developing and delivering an
Earth science lesson plan to local elementary school classrooms, 2) mentoring an
undergraduate student through a summer research project, and 3) organizing a
reading seminar at Brown University on plate tectonics and the
LAB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent proliferation of ocean-bottom seismometer (OBS)
arrays in the Pacific offers an unprecedented opportunity to characterize the
large-scale elastic, anelastic, and anisotropic structure of the upper mantle in
detail. This project will utilize surface-wave data from five OBS arrays in the
Pacific, ranging in seafloor age from ~6 Ma to ~120 Ma, to develop models of
shear velocity, shear attenuation, and seismic anisotropy at each site. A new
technique will be developed for recovering velocity structure in the presence of
Love-wave overtone interference that will reconcile conflicting models of radial
anisotropy. Seismic observations of shear velocity and attenuation at each site
will be directly compared with corresponding laboratory predictions via a newly
developed Bayesian framework to yield estimates of mantle temperature, grain
size, and melt fraction and their age dependence in the oceanic upper mantle.
This project represents a first effort to integrate seismological-scale and
laboratory-scale constraints on mantle anelasticity across several high-
resolution OBS arrays in the Pacific basin. In addition to illuminating the
mechanism(s) controlling the LAB and its hypothesized age dependence, this work
will provide new constraints on the thermodynamic state of the oceanic upper
mantle that is key for understanding broader planetary evolution. This
fellowship received partial funding from the Geophysics program in the Earth
Science division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.