* 1952676
* Enigmatic carboxysomes from the marine and hypersaline chemolithoautotrophic bacteria of genus Thiomicrospira
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kathleen Scott, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2023
* USD 503,766.00

Carbon fixation, which is the conversion of carbon dioxide to biomass, is
essential for life. This key step is catalyzed by plants and microbes (which
contribute about a quarter of fixed carbon to the biosphere). In many
microorganisms, carbon fixation happens within intracellular compartments called
carboxysomes. It has been inferred from genome sequences that a key enzyme
(carbonic anhydrase) is either absent from carboxysomes from some bacteria or,
instead, a completely novel form of this enzyme operates in these organisms.
This calls into question the understanding of microbial carbon fixation.
Furthermore, carboxysomes are currently being engineered into crop plants to
increase water use efficiency, and also into microorganisms to facilitate the
biosynthesis of compounds of industrial importance. An understanding of the
components critical for the function of these microcompartments is key to the
success of these efforts and meeting the research goals of this project will
substantially improve our understanding of carboxysomes. Education goals of this
project include its integration to the curriculum of an undergraduate Microbial
Physiology Lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Members of Thiomicrospira are an enigma as
their carboxysomes contain either a completely novel form of carbonic anhydrase
or alternatively these carboxysomes lack carbonic anhydrase activity altogether.
Either possibility indicates the understanding of carboxysome function is
incomplete or misguided. The broad objective of this project is to clarify the
function of carboxysomes in the genus Thiomicrospira. Specifically, the
objectives are to determine the composition of carboxysomes from members of
Thiomicrospira, which will be grown in chemostats, under optimal conditions for
carbosysome activity. The carboxysomes will be purified and subjected to mass
spectrometer analysis to identify constituent proteins. The investigators will
also determine if carbonic anhydrase activity is present in these carboxysomes
using a stopped-flow assay. Proteins present in carboxysomes will be
heterologously expressed in E. coli and carbonic anhydrase activity will be
measured. Genes encoding carboxysome-localized proteins will be knocked out in
Thiomicrospira species and the effects on carboxysome structure and function
will be determined. Lastly, In order to determine the intracellular conditions
favoring carboxysome function the investigators will determine how these novel
carboxysomes facilitate carbon fixation by measuring intracellular dissolved
inorganic carbon concentrations in cells cultivated under conditions where
carboxysome production are highly induced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.