* 1952289
* Microwave Spectroscopy Measurements on the Hydrogen Bonding of Nucleic Acid Base Pairs and Base Pair Analogs
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Stephen Kukolich, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 461,844.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Stephen Kukolich of The
University of Arizona is using sensitive, high-resolution microwave
spectrometers to obtain new data that can be related to the structures and
hydrogen bonding interactions of molecules important in molecular genetics.
Hydrogen bonding is a specific kind of intermolecular interaction where a
partially positively charged hydrogen atom on one molecule is attracted to a
partially negatively charged oxygen atom on another molecule. In living systems,
hydrogen-bonding interactions are the key interactions for making copies of the
genetic information in DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) - the molecules that make up
our genes. Changes in the rotational motions of nucleic acids and their
hydrogen-bonded pairs correspond to energies in the microwave region of the
light spectrum. Microwave absorption by these molecules and complexes are
analyzed to provide detailed structure information. The fundamental principle
that the DNA bases form specific pairs responsible for copying and transcribing
the genetic code was discovered may years ago by Watson and Crick. However, the
details of the structures and hydrogen bonding interactions between the
individual base pairs have not been completely determined. This project involves
the study of individual hydrogen-bonded complexes that have been evaporated into
the gas phase where they are free of the external water-filled biological
environment. The research is thus revealing the intrinsic properties of the
basic hydrogen bonding interactions. Revealing the intrinsic properties and
behaviors of DNA molecules and base pairs has important consequences for our
understanding of biomolecules in general, as well as the fundamental processes
underlying living systems. The students engaged in this research project are
gaining valuable experience in experimental spectroscopy and computer
interfacing and calculations of molecular structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
structures and other properties of the hydrogen-bonded complexes are being
studied using three sensitive, high-resolution microwave spectrometers to
accurately and precisely measure microwave rotational transition frequencies.
The hydrogen-bonded complexes are formed in supersonic expansions so the
rotational spectra can be measured in cold molecular beams or isolated molecules
and complexes. The volatility of these larger molecules is low so higher-
temperature and laser-ablation beam sources must be constructed and tested. The
new moments of inertia and distortion constants obtained can be analyzed, in
combination with theoretical results to yield new structure and hydrogen bonding
parameter information on these important molecules. New data on multiple
structural isomers may be obtained. The use of 15N substituted isotopologues
substantially improves the observed signal strengths and simplify the analysis.
For the smaller complexes this improves the prospects for measuring single 13C
isotopologues in order to obtain more structural information. For some cases,
nitrogen quadrupole coupling strengths can be obtained and provide data on the
local electronic structure. Extensive theoretical calculations are also being
performed along with the experiments to guide the experiments and test
theoretical methods. The results of this research are likely to provide
additional insights into abnormal DNA binding structures which underlie
mutations and errors in transcription; these in turn underpin our understanding
of biological evolution and diseases arising from genetic disorders. The
graduate and undergraduate research students working in our labs can learn
fundamentals of chemistry, quantum mechanics and methods and techniques involved
in computer work, microwave electronics and making physical measurements through
direct involvement in the proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.