* 1952920
* Collaborative Research: Mixed-Autonomy Traffic Networks: Routing Games and Learning Human Choice Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Ramtin Pedarsani, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Autonomous and connected vehicles are soon becoming a significant part of roads
normally used by human drivers. Such vehicles hold the promise of safer streets,
better fuel efficiency, more flexibility in tailoring to specific drivers’
needs, and time savings. However, the appearance of autonomous vehicles driving
on roads shared by human-driven cars introduce many interesting and timely
challenges. The goal of this proposal is to study (i) traffic networks with
mixed autonomy where a fraction of cars are autonomous and the rest are human-
driven, and (ii) how humans choose their routes in a traffic network given
different options of autonomous service and prices. By studying models of
humans’ choices and investigating the characterizations of traffic flow in
networks with mixed autonomy, the project develops routing policies to lead the
network to an efficient equilibrium with low average
latency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to study routing games and
human choice models for traffic networks with mixed autonomy. Many studies have
shown that mobility can be enhanced in traffic networks such as freeways or
signalized intersections when all cars are autonomous; however, such improvement
is far from clear for a network with mixed autonomy. The goal of this project is
to study the game theory of mixed-autonomy traffic networks and control the
autonomous cars’ routing decisions such that the system reaches an optimum
equilibrium. Moreover, a novel approach in learning human choices of prices in
autonomous transportation services versus latency, or travel time, is developed.
Finally, using the well-known fundamental diagram of traffic and cell-
transmission model, a dynamic mixed-autonomy traffic model is introduced. Using
this dynamic model, we will leverage tools from reinforcement learning to route
autonomous cars dynamically and optimally. The proposed research considers both
theoretical study of routing games as well as implementation of the developed
algorithms in traffic simulators, in particular simulation of Urban Mobility
(SUMO). The learned human choice models will also be validated through human
subject studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.