* 1952210
* CDS&amp;E: Multi-scale, many-body simulations of near-field radiative heat transfer between micro/nanostructured materials
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Mathieu Francoeur, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2024
* USD 392,709.00

Efficient conversion of thermal radiation into electrical power has the
potential to drastically reduce wasted energy and associated environmental
impacts, such as greenhouse gas emission. Near-field thermophotovoltaics
generate electrical power by thermal radiation between a hot emitter and a
photovoltaic cell separated by a nanometer gap. This new technology exploits the
properties of near-field radiative heat transfer at the nanoscale, which
surpasses the efficiency limits of macroscopic objects. However, its use in
engineered devices requires designer nanostructured materials to control the
near-field radiative heat transfer, and the design of these materials is limited
by the lack of a reliable, accurate computational models. This project seeks to
advance computational modeling of near-field radiative heat transfer to enable
novel devices for waste heat recovery and energy conversion. To ensure wide
dissemination of the project outcomes, the computational framework will be made
freely available to the public. K-12 outreach will be performed with a kit
demonstrating the importance of thermophotovoltaic energy conversion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to conceive, implement and
validate a comprehensive computational framework enabling multi-scale, many-body
near-field radiative heat transfer simulations between complex
micro/nanostructured materials. The computational framework is based on the
numerically exact thermal discrete dipole approximation. The current
implementation of the thermal discrete dipole approximation is however
computationally expensive, as it requires solution of a large stochastic system
of equations, and is thus limited to simulations involving two or three
micro/nanosized objects and a surface. The project will address this bottleneck
via a novel, computationally efficient version of the thermal discrete dipole
approximation based on system Green’s functions that do not require solving a
stochastic system of equations. Specifically, the goal of this project will be
fulfilled by accomplishing three tasks: (1) Implementation of the thermal
discrete dipole approximation based on system Green’s functions for multi-scale,
many-body simulations of near-field radiative heat transfer; (2) Determination
of the limit of applicability of the effective medium theory; (3) Validation of
the computational framework via near-field radiative heat transfer experiments
with devices made of micro/nanostructured materials. The project will fill a
critical knowledge gap in near-field radiative heat transfer of
micro/nanostructured materials that is heavily based on the effective medium
theory at present. The outcome of the project will potentially accelerate the
implementation of novel energy conversion and waste heat recovery
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.