* 1952698
* EAR-PF: Quartz-in-zircon: An elastic model for quantifying depth and time scales of crystallization and exhumation of Hadean zircon
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Joseph Gonzalez, Gonzalez, Joseph P
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2022
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Joseph Gonzalez has been awarded an NSF EAR postdoctoral fellowship to work
at the University of Pavia developing an elastic model for quartz inclusions
contained in zircon to better understand Hadean (&gt;4 Ga) earth conditions.
Zircon is common in crustal rocks and is the most frequently used mineral to
infer ages and crystallization temperatures attained by rocks. Despite the
extensive use of zircon for time and temperature determinations, there are no
methods for determining the depth of zircon crystallization. The objective of
this project is to develop a method to determine depth of zircon formation by
investigating quartz crystals trapped as inclusions at various stages of growth
in &gt;4 Ga old Hadean zircon. Dr. Gonzalez will achieve these goals by modeling
the elastic interactions between quartz inclusions and their zircon host and
integrating model results with existing zircon geochronologic and thermometric
determinations. The quartz-in-zircon elastic model applied to Hadean zircons
from the Jack Hills province of Australia will give insights into the timing and
evolution of the onset of Earthâ€™s plate tectonics. During his tenure as an NSF
Postdoctoral Fellow, Dr. Gonzalez will organize and participate in educational
events hosted by the University of Pavia to explain ongoing research to the
general public and prospective students. Furthermore, he will co-mentor
undergraduate and graduate students and organize a dedicated website about the
project, where plain language descriptions of ongoing results will be accessible
to anyone interested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elastic models of host-inclusion
mineral pairs have become frequently used tools for investigating the
thermobarometric conditions of inclusion entrapment during host mineral growth.
However, elastic models have only been developed for elastically anisotropic
inclusions (e.g. quartz) contained in elastically isotropic host minerals (e.g.
garnet). In order to understand the elastic interactions between elastically
anisotropic host and inclusion minerals (e.g. quartz inclusions in zircon), the
reciprocal crystallographic orientation (CORs) between the host and inclusion
must be incorporated. At the University of Pavia, a series of finite element
models will be completed to quantify the effect of crystallographic orientation
on the strain and stress between the zircon host and quartz inclusion minerals.
Once the effect of orientation is known, model results can be applied to quartz
inclusions contained within Jack Hills zircons to infer the crystallization
depth. Single crystal X-ray diffraction will be used to obtain the
crystallographic orientation and unit cell parameters of the zircon host and
quartz inclusion, permitting calculation of the remnant pressure within the
inclusion. Remnant pressures and crystallographic orientations can be used in
finite element models and applied to 3-D X-ray tomographic models of targeted
inclusions to determine the possible entrapment conditions of the quartz
inclusion within the zircon host. Quartz-in-zircon results from Jack Hills
zircons will be used to evaluate hypotheses that modern style plate subduction
processes began under relatively cool thermal regimes in the Hadean Eon. More
broadly, the quartz-in-zircon elastic model will be widely applicable to crustal
rocks and can be combined with other petrologic methods to increase
understanding of Earth processes. Broader impacts of this project include
mentoring undergraduates and graduate students and general public outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.