* 1952438
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I:  Materials based innovations for sustainable water treatment and reuse
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Volodymyr Tarabara, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2023
* USD 142,226.00

This collaborative IRES project provides U.S. students with opportunities to
engage in water science and engineering research in collaboration with
colleagues from the University of Montpellier and the European Institute of
Membranes in Montpellier, France as well as partners from extended international
networks. Research projects focus on scientifically meaningful challenges in
order to develop new materials and technologies for water treatment and reuse.
The project leverages the complementary skills and resources of U.S. and
international collaborators; access to unique analytical instrumentation, water
treatment facilities, and materials fabrication technologies at international
locations enables research not possible without the IRES linkages. The thirteen-
week IRES experience includes a 9-week research stay at French laboratories
where each U.S. student is co-supervised by U.S. PIs and an international
mentor. The projects are designed to accentuate questions regarding humanityâ€™s
relationship with water, adding a unique interdisciplinary quality to the IRES.
The ultimate goal of the project is to foster global, technical, and
professional competencies in a diverse group of IRES students. Participants
benefit from the program professionally and personally; their IRES experience
equips them with essential skills for success in the increasingly globalized
world as they engage their knowledge and passions to address critical
environmental challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project is focused on
training the next generation of U.S. water engineers to work collaboratively
with international partners and overcome barriers and challenges that limit
availability of safe and affordable water. Participating institutions include
two U.S. Universities (Louisiana State University and Michigan State University)
and their colleagues from the University of Montpellier and the European
Institute of Membranes in France. Each year of the program, U.S. students will
travel to Montpellier to engage in collaborative projects that bridge and
leverage the unique resources and expertise of the U.S. PIs and their foreign
collaborators. The collaborative effort takes the advantage of the complementary
skill sets in two areas of sustained scientific interest and relevance for
environmental engineering practice: photochemical processes and membrane
separations. Projects focus on these two interlocking themes to yield research
synergies and enrich student experience by illustrating the value of
collaboration and the inherently interdisciplinary nature of modern
environmental engineering. IRES foci include: 1) Photo-catalyzed degradation of
pharmaceuticals in hospital wastewater; 2) Novel UV-LED technology for
photocatalytic wastewater treatment; 3) Photocatalytic membranes for
inactivation of viruses; 4) Natural coagulants for water treatment; and 5) Human
capacity building through global exchange activities. The first four are student
research projects and the fifth is a set of sharing activities focused on
developing global competencies and best practices such as laboratory safety and
research ethics. Summer undergraduate research programs at LSU and MSU are
leveraged to encourage the engagement of underrepresented groups into the IRES
project, initiate students into research topics and provide them with necessary
pre-departure training in our laboratories. The recruitment strategy aims to
remove socio-economic hurdles for students who have not had similar
international experiences in the past. The project leverages the extensive
international network of French colleagues to further broaden international
experiences for U.S. students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.