* 1952085
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Empowering and Enhancing Workers Through Building A Community-Centered Gig Economy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yanhua Li, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,013,764.00

The gig economy is characterized by short-term contract work performed by
independent workers who are paid in return for the "gigs" they perform. Example
gig platforms include Uber, Lyft, Postmates, Instacart, UpWork, and TaskRabbit.
Gig economy platforms bring about more job opportunities, lower barriers to
entry, and improve worker flexibility. However, growing evidence suggests that
worker wellbeing and systematic biases on the gig economy platforms have become
significant societal problems. For example most gig workers lack financial
stability, have low earning efficiency and lack autonomy, and many have health
issues due to long work hours and limited flexibility. Additionally, gig economy
platforms perpetuate biases against already vulnerable populations in society.
To address these problems, this project aims to build a community-centered,
meta-platform to provide decision support and data sharing for gig workers and
policymakers, in order to develop a more vibrant, healthy, and equitable gig
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three major research
activities. (1) Working with gig workers and local policymakers to understand
their concerns, challenges, and considerations related to gig worker wellbeing,
as well as the current practices, problems, and biases of existing gig economy
platforms. (2) Developing a data-driven and human-centered decision-assistance
environment to help gig workers make "smart" decisions in navigating and
selecting gigs,and provide a macrolevel perspective for policymakers working to
balance their diverse set of objectives and constraints. (3) Deploying and
evaluating whether and how the above environment addresses the fundamental
problems of worker wellbeing and systematic biases in the gig
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.