* 1952209
* 3D Characterization of the Alaska-Aleutian Subduction System with Amphibious Array Interferometry
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Michael Ritzwoller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 363,466.00

The Alaska-Aleutian subduction zone is one of the most active plate boundaries
in North America. Large and numerous earthquakes, tsunamis, and volcanic
eruptions typify the region. These natural hazards have both local and far-
reaching impacts. This project focuses on using seismology to image the crust
and upper mantle of the Alaska-Aleutian subduction zone. The data come from the
Alaska Amphibious Community Seismic Experiment, the EarthScope Transportable
Array, and other publicly available data. The resulting image of the Alaskan
margin will include both onshore and offshore areas. These new images will be
used to improve understanding of earthquake processes, including great
megathrust earthquakes that endanger the coastal population centers of the
state. Improving understanding of subduction zones is of interest to a diverse
group of stakeholders including earth scientists, emergency managers, and the
general public. The project includes training in cutting-edge seismology to two
graduate students and one undergraduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
focuses on enhanced understanding and quantification of the Alaska-Aleutian
subduction system through the application of advanced seismic surface wave
methods to data from the Alaska Amphibious Community Seismic Experiment, the
EarthScope Transportable Array, and other seismic networks in Alaska and
northwest Canada. The emphasis of the project will be on anisotropic imaging to
determine mantle flow associated with the subduction system, and quantifying
shallow crustal material properties essential for understanding coseismic slip
distribution at subduction zone thrusts. The anisotropic imaging will be used to
reveal the nature of subduction-driven mantle flow, how it relates to plate-
scale flows, and how it responds to normal and oblique convergence. Variations
in physical properties of the crust will be documented, and whether these
coincide with variations in seismic coupling along the Alaska-Aleutian
subduction zone, with resulting propensity or lack of megathrust earthquakes.
Novel methodologies will be used including three-station direct wave seismic
interferometry, which allows interstation measurements between stations that
were not deployed at the same time; tilted transverse hexagonal anisotropy,
which allows for a more complete description of seismic anisotropy not limited
to azimuthal anisotropy and apparent radial anisotropy; and joint inversion of
seafloor compliance and surface wave dispersion, providing shear velocity
constraints on the uppermost crust which is an important contributor to
seismogenesis. The resulting models will illuminate the isotropic and
anisotropic properties of the lithosphere that is thrusting beneath Alaska and
the overlying crust and mantle wedge, helping to quantify the physical
properties and processes of the subduction zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.