* 1952206
* SCC-PG: Pilot Study and Workshop For Enhancing Rural-to-Urban Disaster Resilience by Integrating Social, Spatial and Digital Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Bala Natarajan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 149,813.00

The social networks that comprise our local communities can be critical for
helping individuals, households, and business respond, overcome, and recover
from natural disasters such as floods. Traditionally these networks are based on
direct and indirect face-to-face interpersonal relationships often clustered
within geographically defined communities. However, in the digital era we have
seen the rapid transformation of social networks challenging traditional notions
of community and our understanding of the roles community-based social networks
play in disaster situations. If digital technologies play a crucial role in
facilitating a new wave of social networking, how might these networks augment
and enhance more community based networks' response to disasters? Will people
and households utilize their traditional community or geographical based vs
digital/virtual networks in disaster contexts? To what extent do these networks
overlap and reinforce each other? And, what kinds of infrastructure can, and
should, be built to create an augmented social-spatial-online network system for
disaster resilience? To study these and related questions this Smart and
Connected Communities (SCC) project will conduct an interdisciplinary
investigation into multi-layer social networking patterns for information
dissemination in disaster situations overlaying social, geographical and digital
networks and organize a multi-state community-engaged workshop that will help
build a framework for evaluating the infrastructure needs and robustness of
augmented social networking for digitally and geographically disconnected
communities. The project will target rural-to-urban communities located within
three Midwest US watershed regions, which have been frequently affected by
natural disasters in Kansas, Missouri and Nebraska. The results of the pilot
study will be shared, evaluated, and refined through a series of community
interactions, including the community workshop and direct research engagements.
Ultimately, this project will catalyze new research collaborations within the
STEM work force in the under-served disaster-prone US communities that can help
develop interdisciplinary technological innovations for building augmented
social networking systems enhancing disaster response and resilience in the
United States.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the project are: (1)
to study statistical models that capture the dissemination of information in
multiple online social networks, and the roles of geographical connectedness of
the communities during the information dissemination; (2) to learn the structure
of traditional community-based social networks, along with statistical models
for information propagation in these networks; and, (3) to investigate how
different types of networks compose for different community-disaster related
scenarios. Much of the current literature on disaster focuses on crowdsourced
social media which shows a lack of localized, spatial and social variations of
community structures. The investigators will develop robust insights into how a
geographical approach contributes to online social network models. Our study
will provide a new and interdisciplinary approach for connecting the current
social network models to the traditional community configurations in different
social and physical circumstances by multifaceted evaluation of modeling with
hybrid statistical, spatial and temporal models. A key element in this project
is to better understand the technological innovations necessary to enhance
spatial and digital social network for disaster resilience. Ultimately, by
addressing the current limitations of information propagation systems, this
project will help increase the robustness of online and physical infrastructure
systems for disaster resilience across a wide range of community
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.