* 1952772
* EAR-PF: Quantifying heterogeneity in stratigraphy across scales
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Andrew Moodie, Moodie, Andrew J
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Andrew J. Moodie has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at The University of Texas at Austin and
Stanford University in collaboration with mentors Dr. Paola Passalacqua and Dr.
Jef Caers respectively. This study aims to investigate the properties of
sedimentary rocks across multiple scales, to draw connections between large
scale geological variability (~10 m) and smaller-scale variability (~10 cm).
Geophysical imaging is unable to resolve small-scale geological variability,
however, Dr. Moodie expects to constrain this variability using statistical
models and observations of larger-scale variability. This research is critical
to the sustainability of coastal river-deltas, because these environments are
impacted by a limited understanding of subsurface geology and flow pathways that
are controlled by small-scale geological variability. Improved understanding of
fluid-flow pathways will influence many fields, in particular, results of this
research will inform pollutant transport modeling, groundwater resource
management, shallow geothermal and carbon sequestration operations, as well as
hydrocarbon production. Dr. Moodieâ€™s education plan includes mentoring students,
organizing a reading seminar about machine learning in the geosciences, and
developing active learning modules for topics in sedimentary rock stratigraphy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sustainability of coastal river-deltas is impacted by
a multitude of natural and anthropogenic factors, including a limited
understanding of subsurface flow patterns. Geological heterogeneity strongly
influences flow pathways and thus rates of contaminant transport and groundwater
aquifer recharge, which limits our ability to sustainably manage water resources
and mitigate health risks in river-delta environments. Smaller-scale subsurface
heterogeneity due to channel and bedform dynamics (of less than 1 m) is
typically under-constrained, because it is below the resolution that can be
imaged by existing geophysical techniques. Theory and some evidence suggest that
stratigraphic sequences may be scale invariant, which opens a pathway to
constrain smaller-scale heterogeneity via observation of larger-scale
heterogeneity. This project directly addresses the question: can patterns and
information gleaned from subsurface heterogeneity at one spatial scale be used
to constrain uncertainty at another scale? The EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship, will
allow Dr. Moodie to 1) rigorously investigate scale invariant properties of
stratigraphy, and 2) integrate these findings into a quantitative method to
constrain subsurface heterogeneity. He will use a combination of approaches,
including field measurement, numerical modeling, statistical data analysis, and
machine learning. Measures from information theory will quantify scale
invariance in stratigraphy, and an existing generative adversarial neural
network method will be modified to map heterogeneity across spatial scales. This
project was co-funded by the Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology program in the
Earth Science division (EAR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.