* 1952568
* Collaborative IRES Track 1: Experimental Linguistics in the Caribbean: Examining the nature, processing and acquisition of Haitian Creole
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Fabiola Henri, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2023
* USD 59,995.00

U.S. students, including students from underrepresented groups, do not enroll in
STEM-related careers in the numbers the U.S. needs, even though STEM career
opportunities are quickly growing. This includes speech-language-hearing-
communication sciences and computational linguistics. High school students
associate the study of language with literature and therefore the Arts; however,
the scientific study of language—linguistics—involves STEM-related skills from
the development of models grounded in logical arguments to the development and
testing of hypotheses and the use of research strategies that involve
technologies, data collection, quantitative analyses and interpretations to
support the confirmation/rejection of hypotheses or models (Denam et al., 2018).
The use of such linguistic knowledge may pave the way for students, especially
speakers of languages other than English, to gain STEM-based skills and
familiarity with STEM-related professional and research fields. The IRES award,
“Experimental Linguistics in the Caribbean,” will train a diverse group of U.S.
students enrolled in communication science, cognitive science, education,
linguistics and psychology programs to conduct STEM-based experimental language
science projects focused on the nature and learnability of Haitian Creole.
Students will participate in a rigorous seven-week program of research involving
six modules that they can subsequently transfer to other cultural and linguistic
contexts in the course of their academic and professional journey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental linguistics emerging from the development of
models in cognitive sciences and technological advances has expanded our
understanding of language acquisition and processing. The program will train
sixteen U.S. students, at least half from groups underrepresented in STEM, to
conduct rigorous experimental protocols on the nature, processing and
acquisition of Haitian Creole in a non-Western socio-cultural context, thanks to
collaboration with the faculty and students in Linguistics at the State
University of Haiti. The project will address the shortcomings of previous
exclusively theoretically-based research and empirically investigate three main
areas in Haitian Creole, namely: (i) Phonological Perception and Production in
Adults and Children; (ii) Morphophonology and Morphosyntax: Nature, Processing
and Acquisition; (iii) Contexts of Acquisition, Learning and Use of Haitian
Creole/L1 and French/English/Spanish/L2/3/4. The program will contribute to the
field in three distinct ways: (i) outcomes of student research projects will
provide shared data and contribute to the resolution of theoretical debates;
(ii) the establishment of experimental linguistic research in a complex
sociolinguistic context that characterizes many developing countries will
provide a model for future programs in other non-Western countries; (iii) it
will equip students from diverse cultural, ethnic, and linguistic backgrounds
under-represented in Higher Education with academic, interpersonal and
collaborative skills required to become successful in their academic and
professional careers. The aim is to foster a new generation of researchers and
practitioners who will perceive their minority status as a professional asset
and who will continue to use transferable general and field-specific STEM-based
skills to work with and on under-represented ethnic, cultural and linguistic
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES Track I award is cofunded by the
Linguistics Program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences,
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.