* 1952549
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: US-Korea Collaboration on Biomimicry and Bio-inspired Fluid Flows (BIOFLOW IRES)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Debbie Jackson, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 194,998.00

The world is facing a wide range of grand challenges, such as the rapid growth
in energy demand and more frequent extreme weather and climate conditions. By
learning from Nature, Biomimicry or bio-inspired engineering innovation has
great potential to address such human challenges. The practice of biomimicry
requires a diverse group of scientists and engineers equipped with technical
knowledge of biomimicry and interdisciplinary, cross-cultural research
experience. To meet this need, the BIOFLOW IRES Track-1 site delivers
international research experience to US students, operated by Cleveland State
University (CSU) and University of Akron (UA) through a long-time partnership
with the Biofluid &amp; Biomimic Research Center (BBRC) at Pohang University of
Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea. As a Korean government-funded
National Creative Research Center, BBRC has excelled at advancing the knowledge
of bio-fluid flow physics in Nature and developing bio-inspired engineering
solutions. The BIOFLOW IRES project leverages the world-class resources of bio-
flow and biomimicry expertise, research facilities, and equipment for a diverse
group of 18 US students to conduct creative bio-inspired research, gain solid
research and communication skills, and build a professional network. This group
of students is well-prepared to embark on their careers as future leading
researchers, scientists, and ambassadors for biomimicry research and innovative
design. The collaborative IRES project opens up new interdisciplinary research
collaboration that bridge biology and engineering, strengthens international
research partnerships, and contributes to enhancing the competitiveness of the
US workforce in the global economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BIOFLOW
IRES project aims to provide future scientists and engineers with a global,
cross-cultural perspective, and professional growth opportunities through
cutting-edge international research training, structured mentoring, and
networking opportunities. Research on bio-fluid flows and biomimicry focuses on
two complementary research themes addressing the Grand challenges: enhanced
energy efficiency and wind resilience of the built environment. The IRES
participants perform wind-tunnel tests to evaluate the effectiveness of a seal-
whisker-inspired turbine blade for vertical axis wind turbines, explore how the
shapes of plant leaves affect energy exchange, and create tree-like flow-control
devices to suppress rooftop vortices in high winds. Research discovers new
knowledge of working principles of bio-fluid flow phenomena in biology and
catalyzes original engineering innovations to achieve enhanced energy efficiency
and wind resilience. IRES students gain authentic research training in advanced
thermal/flow measurements, critical thinking, and career-building skills
benefiting from extraordinary resources at US labs of CSU/UA and the Koerean
host lab BBRC. Along with innovative research, the IRES students participate in
social and cultural exchange activities to enhance student-faculty, student-
mentor, and student-student connection, starting a professional network for
future collaboration and career development, an impact beyond the IRES
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.