* 1952393
* IRES Track I: understanding the global problem of defaunation through field experiments in southern Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert McCleery, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,472.00

The world is facing several global challenges that are transforming natural
environments. The next generation of scientists requires a global perspective
and training to advance science and conservation to solve these challenges. An
increasingly recognized challenge is the decline in abundance and loss of
animals from ecosystems, termed 'defaunation'. Because animals play many
important roles in natural environments, defaunation is a key issue for
sustainable ecosystems. Yet the consequences of defaunation remains poorly
understood. This project will address this issue with research and education
using large-scale field experiments on the loss of large mammals in southern
Africa, where we will train students about science and conservation and provide
them a global perspective on ecological challenges such as
defaunation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, U.S. undergraduate students from
Florida will work with students from South Africa and Eswatini (formerly
Swaziland) and be mentored by scientists from these countries. We will teach
students about the scientific method, ecological concepts, conservation, and
southern Africa culture before departing for eight weeks in southern Africa.
They will conduct research on the loss of large mammals, such as the African
elephant, in South Africa and Eswatini where large experiments are underway to
understand the effects of losing large mammals from environments where they
historically roamed. Each cohort will build upon past research and test
hypotheses about how the loss of large animals may alter natural environments.
Student projects will provide scientific value by comparing results across two
regions that have different histories of large mammal abundance. This work will
provide new insights about how defaunation influences biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning, which is needed for better understanding and for conservation
action that can best limit potential negative impacts. This project will also
provide global training of the next generation of scientists, recruit
underrepresented groups to participate in the program, and communicate the
student research results to local communities in southern Africa and Florida.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our IRES students will spend eight weeks participating in
large-scale field experiments on defaunation in southern Africa while being
mentored by leading and rising scientists from these countries. Prior to
departure, students will learn about southern Africa local culture, ecological
concepts, and experimental design. They will develop independent experimental
projects within the domain of a coordinated experimental network on the loss of
megaherbivores in South Africa’s Kruger National Park and Eswatini’s Mlawula
Game Reserve. This coordinated experimental network will help isolate the short-
term effects of defaunation and provide long-term context of defaunation across
regions. It will provide new information about how defaunation influences
biodiversity and ecosystem functioning; this information is needed for better
understanding human-dominated landscapes and how conservation can best be
applied to limit negative impacts of environmental change. The first cohort will
quantify how remaining biodiversity responds to defaunation through tests of the
megaherbivore loss hypothesis. The second cohort will explore specific
behavioral processes that drive patterns of diversity, focusing on how
megaherbivore loss might alter habitat refugia for other species. The third
cohort will conduct studies on species interactions and ecosystem services,
focusing on the functional redundancy hypothesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will foster discovery and understanding by promoting teaching and
training while immersing students in field-based research in Africa. Students
will advance discovery of ecological processes in rapidly changing landscapes.
We are enhancing infrastructure for both research and education through our
field station-based research and strengthened international relationships with
South Africa and Eswatini scientists, educators, and students. We will also
expand participation of U.S. underrepresented groups via minority recruitment.
Finally, we will provide broad science communication and dissemination to
benefit local communities in the U.S. and southern
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.