* 1952263
* SCC-PG:  Big Island Drink Smart
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Karen Pellegrin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 149,961.00

Individual water systems, most common in rural areas and used by at least 15% of
the US population, are a growing health threat. Rural communities face greater
risk of contaminated drinking water from sources that include agricultural
chemicals and farm animals, but little is known about the extent of the risk or
potential approaches to reduce the risk. Rural Hawaii County (also known as the
“Big Island”) is dependent on unregulated individual water systems (e.g.,
rainwater catchment and wells) and also has the highest rate of cesspool use in
Hawaii, a known risk to nearby individual water systems. This project seeks to
improve the safety of rural drinking water by piloting advanced testing methods
to screen residential samples across the Big Island. Environmental, health, and
data scientists at the University of Hawaii at Hilo, located on the Big Island,
will engage community partners in the pilot research process to identify
potential risks from these individual drinking water systems and to make plans
for more extensive research. These advancements will help rural communities
across the US and around the world improve the safety of their drinking water.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Big Island Drink Smart (BIDS) proposes pilot data
collection to identify potential risks in residential drinking water across
rural Hawaii County, focusing on unregulated individual water systems (e.g.,
rainwater catchment and wells). The long-term objective of BIDS is to reduce
risk from drinking water on the Big Island through development of new consumer-
friendly and cost-effective smart technologies that support risk assessment and
decision-making. In collaboration with community partners, an island-wide survey
of water system practices, smart technology use and attitudes, and community
culture will be conducted. Additionally, drinking water from 20 households from
areas suspected to be at higher risk will be sampled and tested for standard
drinking water parameters, e.g., fecal coliforms, Escherichia coli, and
nitrates, for presence of locally important pathogens (e.g., the parasite
Angiostrongylus cantonensis), and for chemical contaminants using novel suspect
screening and non-targeted analysis methods developed by EPA researchers.
Information regarding the location of each residence, along with water system
type and maintenance will also be documented. UH Hilo faculty experts in spatial
data analysis, computational chemistry, statistics, and artificial intelligence
will use the pilot data to plan more rigorous sampling methods and analyses for
the integrative research grant proposal. The project will make significant
scientific contributions in the identification of biological and chemical risks
in drinking water in this rural, tropical community. BIDS will also expand
opportunities for students to engage in locally relevant problems of science, a
recommended approach to inspiring rural youth into STEM education and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Smart and
Connected Communities program and the Established Program to
Stimulate&lt;br/&gt;Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.