* 1952740
* EAR-PF: Reconstructing land-level change throughout prehistoric megathrust earthquake cycles at the Cascadia subduction zone
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Isabel Hong, Hong, Isabel
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2023
* USD 261,000.00

Dr. Isabel Hong has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out
research and education plans at Simon Fraser University and Central Washington
University to address key knowledge gaps that remain in our spatial and temporal
understanding of the occurance of great earthquakes in the Cascadia subduction
zone. Reconstructions of coastal land-level change using diatoms in new
geographic locations and between great earthquakes will provide crucial
estimates of previously unexplored regions and timescales. Dr. Hong will
reconstruct a history of land-level change through time by identifying and
mapping coastal sites with well-preserved geologic evidence of land-level
change. A novel statistical model using present-day diatoms will be applied to
fossil diatoms to provide quantitative estimates of land-level change with
reduced uncertainty. These estimates will be integrated into datasets spanning
both the United States and Canada to provide improved seismic hazards maps that
span the entirety of the Cascadia subduction zone. The educational plan will
provide opportunities for underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students
to participate in field- and laboratory-based work. Samples collected from this
investigation will be used to develop a coastal hazards
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accurate assessment of regional seismic
hazards along the Cascadia subduction zone requires well-constrained estimates
of tectonic plate deformation both during (coseismic) and in-between
(interseismic) great earthquakes. Estimates of coastal land-level change derived
from microfossil (e.g., diatoms) transfer functions within stratigraphic records
are the most precise means to reconstruct deformation during past megathrust
earthquakes. However, the application of a diatom transfer function has been
limited at Cascadia by the absence of modern analogues for fossil assemblages,
which has led to unreliable estimates of land-level change. To address this
limitation, Dr. Hong uses a new and unique approach of grouping diatom species
with similar distributions across elevation that will reduce the dissimilarity
between fossil and modern samples. The grouped species will be used to develop a
new Bayesian diatom transfer function to reconstruct land-level change through
entire earthquake cycles with reduced uncertainty. Broader impacts of this
project include training undergraduate and graduate students in areas of
Paleoseismology. The results of this work will help improve current seismic
hazard maps in the Pacific Northwest. This project also received funding from
the Tectonics and the Marine Geology and Geophysics
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.