* 1952513
* IRES Track 1: US-Japan study of novel genetic elements regulating seasonal behavior of medaka fish.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mika Munakata, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This IRES project involves a collaboration between Montclair State University
(MSU) and three partners in Japan: the National Institute of Genetics (NIG); the
Institute of Transformative Bio-Molecules (ITbM) at Nagoya University; and the
National Institute of Basic Biology (NIBB). The overarching goal of the project
is to provide a rich international research experience for STEM students with
the expectation that it will serve as a foundation for them to engage in the
global scientific community. The mentors at these three institutes are world-
renowned for their expertise on genetic and behavioral studies using medaka and
have state-of-the-art facilities to support this research. The specific aims are
to have students utilize cutting-edge gene editing techniques as they learn
about the role of genes in behavioral sciences, improve their communication,
teamwork, and cross-cultural skills, and contribute to a publication in a
scientific peer-reviewed journal. The project will engage a total of 18 U.S.
graduate and upper-class undergraduate students over three years. Students will
be recruited nationally, with special consideration for the inclusion of
students who typically do not have access to such research experiences. Each
cohort of six students will participate in pre-program workshops on research
techniques, cultural and language lessons, and professional development for two
weeks before their eight-week research experience. Through its active
recruitment of underrepresented students, the project will provide rich
opportunities for students who typically overlook such experiences while at the
same time contributing to the diversification of the scientific community at the
global level.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Each Japanese Institute will host a pair of
U.S. students, who will work within existing teams to study seasonal,
physiological, and behavioral processes using Japanese medaka fish (Oryzias
latipes) as a model organism. The scientific objective of their work will be to
determine the molecular mechanisms involved in behavioral adaptations of animals
to environmental changes. Each team will be using state-of-the-art CRISPR-Cas9
DNA editing techniques. The students at ITbM and NIBB will be working to
characterize and elucidate the function of selected genetic elements and their
contributions to behavioral and seasonal changes. These genetic elements, that
have been identified through a global screening, have been found to be
differentially expressed in the hypothalamus and pituitary gland of medaka fish
during long- and short-day conditions. The research focus of the two students at
NIG will be to generate and characterize mutant fish either lacking the
expression of a gene termed cAMP Responsive Element Modulator (CREM) or lacking
the expression of a unique isoform of the CREM gene termed Inducible cAMP Early
Repressor (ICER). CREM belongs to a family of CRE-binding genes that code for
activators and repressors of transcription. Most activators and repressors of
the CREM gene have similar and redundant functions with other genes like CREB
and ATF. ICER, however, is unique among the products of other CRE-binding genes
because it is an inducible and dominant transcriptional repressor. CREM has been
found to be involved in many physiological processes but the precise
contribution of ICER has not been elucidated. After the initial year, the two
students working at NIG will be joining the efforts on studying other genes or
genetic elements of the group of possible targets identified by the ITbM and
NIBB researchers. This three-year research project has the potential to inform
new practices in industries that are sensitive to environmental changes such as
farming, agriculture, and aquaculture. More generally, the research will add to
the body of literature on the interactions between genes and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.