* 1952715
* EAR-PF Short- and long-term effects of wildfire and permafrost thaw on mercury cycling and bioavailability across a major northern river delta landscape
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Scott Zolkos, Zolkos, Scott P
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2023
* USD 260,762.00

Dr. Scott Zolkos has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at Harvard University and the Woods Hole
Research Center. The proposed research will investigate the effects of wildfire
and permafrost thaw on mercury and its transformation into the neurotoxicant,
methylmercury, in northern high-latitude ecosystems. Northern soils represent
Earthâ€™s largest natural reservoir of mercury. The stored mercury is vulnerable
to release and transformation as northern warming accelerates permafrost thaw,
intensifies wildfire regimes and hydrological cycles, and strengthens land-
freshwater linkages. In freshwaters like lakes and ponds, the uptake of
methylmercury into food webs has potentially significant implications for
ecosystem and human health. Soils and freshwaters in the Yukon-Kuskokwim (YK)
Delta, Alaska, will be analyzed to better understand mercury release and
methylation across gradients of wildfire and permafrost thaw. By testing the
effects of ecosystem disturbance on mercury cycling in the YK Delta, this work
seeks to advance understanding of rapidly changing northern contaminant cycles,
from a process level to across spatial and temporal scales. Education and
outreach activities include undergraduate mentoring, knowledge co-production and
transfer with local northern residents, and public dissemination of findings
through international early-career polar scientist
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the most significant implications of
northern wildfires and permafrost thaw is the release of mercury (Hg) from soils
into the atmosphere and freshwaters, and the production of methylmercury (MeHg).
Lakes and ponds integrate biogeochemical processes across their watersheds,
providing an ideal setting to test the effects of ecosystem disturbance on Hg
cycling. Working in watersheds within recent and historical burns, the proposed
research will use a space-for-time substitution approach to determine wildfire
and permafrost thaw effects on Hg cycling over short (sub-decadal) and long
(decadal) timescales. Synoptic measurements of soil Hg will be paired with
remote sensing estimates of wildfire severity and a global atmospheric Hg model
to determine the magnitude and fate of Hg released from soil combustion into the
atmosphere. Coupled hydrochemical measurements of Hg concentration (total and
MeHg) and stable isotopes, organic matter, and nutrients will be used to
constrain wildfire effects on the hydrologic transport and methylation of Hg
within freshwaters during the thaw season. Models for scaling these effects
across regional freshwaters will be developed by testing the relationships
between Hg, spectral properties of dissolved organic matter, and remote sensing
measurements of water surface reflectance. In addition to the development of the
next generation of northern Hg cycle models, broader impacts include mentoring
and training of undergraduate students through the Polaris Project and outreach
activities with northern communities in Alaska. This project received co-funding
from the Hydrological Science program in the Earth Science
division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.