* 1952291
* I-Corps: Venturi Vacuum Device for Biological and Particulate Sample Collection
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2023
* DeEtta Mills, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
the capabilities of sample collection in industries where this step is critical
to high quality results. Currently, poor recovery efficiencies, inability to
collect from diverse environments, and no standardization affects this activity.
The proposed technology will improve sample collection systems for better ease
of sampling, an improved range of samples that can be collected, and the quality
of evidence collected for the forensic science industry, expected to be a ~$40 B
industry by 2025. The solution would lead to less failed testing, improved
utilization of time and resources, and improved case-solving opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will explore a venturi-based
technology to generate a vacuum. Through a modular design, many front-end
applicators can be equipped to allow one handheld device to collect a number of
samples. The device is lightweight, portable, field deployable and requires no
electricity. It uses a compressed air tank to power the venturi pump. This
device can collect trace amounts of “touch-DNA” evidence, particulates from
solid and porous surfaces, and pathogens associated with agricultural disease in
infected trees. This technology will allow experts to collect more efficiently
samples and enable new sample collection and testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.