* 1952050
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Understanding the Impact of Social and Physical Environment Factors on Crime Using Urban Sensing and Machine-Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Charles Catlett, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,499,967.00

Understanding the root causes of crime in urban areas is critical to effectively
addressing this serious problem. Variation in crime levels across and within
cities offers important clues. Some heterogeneity may be related to physical and
social characteristics of urban environments, such as social cohesion, physical
disorder, and greenspace. In addition to sociological and economic factors
(e.g., racial tension, job opportunities, etc.), aspects such as the amount and
character of street activity also impact crime. This project proposes new
methods including causal inference modeling and machine learning (ML), combined
with new data sources such as imagery and sound from the NSF-funded Array of
Things (AoT) project, to explore three time-varying neighborhood factors on
crime: 1) the amount and usage of greenspace, 2) the amount and character of
street activity and related social cohesion; 3) the level of visual and auditory
disorder; as extant research suggests their importance in relation to crime and
their potential for intervention. These discoveries could transform social
science research by measuring complex social and physical environment variables
at scales never before investigated. This will also push the boundaries of ML
algorithms embedded in intelligent distributed sensor networks. This project
will develop novel ML algorithms that quantify the quality of social
interactions, which thus far have not been explored. Convergence among
scientists, residents, and organizations that comprise neighborhoods will
increase community understanding and acceptance of "smart" technologies for
connected communities to address social science questions. Further, the project
has direct impacts on increasing diversity in STEM fields through partnerships
with community organizations Colony 5 and MAPSCorps, which provide hands-on
training of minority youth across Chicago to use Internet of Things (IoT) and
urban data to understand and improve their neighborhoods. Results from this
project could lead to new smart city technologies and the ability to map
important social behavioral variables such as social cohesion across entire
cities. This work may then inform interventions that could be used to increase
social cohesion, potentially through urban greenspaces, which could lead to
reductions in crime and overall increased well-being for urban
residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measuring street activity and social cohesion is
difficult, typically requiring human observation or surveys, which are taxing on
observers and limit the number of neighborhoods that can be studied. This
project proposes to use recent technological advances to measure human behavior
and social interactions en masse. Smartphones can provide mobile testing labs,
facilitating new forms of surveys measuring the cognitive impact of a person's
urban exposure over time as well as tracking mobility anonymously. Combined with
advances in ML, this opens new potential for exploring human interactions in
cities. AoT will provide images and sound from some 200 Chicago locations, using
technology that can be readily extended to more fully instrument selected
experimental venues, exploring the use of ML "at the edge" to quantify and
characterize street activity, disorder, and greenspace use across diverse
neighborhoods. This project will relate these measures to crime, using Chicago's
open crime database, to examine the physical and social environmental factors
that may influence crime and its mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.