* 1952614
* IRES Track I: Process Development for Cell and Tissue Biomanufacturing
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Lipke, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,998.00

This IRES program provides U.S. students with a collaborative, international
bioprocess development and cell and tissue biomanufacturing research experience
with a U.S. and German team. Although our nation has made large investments and
achieved great progress in identifying biotechnologies that can be used to
repair the human body following injury or disease, there is a critical need for
engineering expertise to implement these discoveries, bringing them from the lab
bench to commercial products. Knowledge and platforms to enable industrial scale
cell and tissue biomanufacturing are critical for realizing clinical treatments
and maximizing the societal benefits from the long-term research in these
fields. Whereas human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) can now, in principle, be
reliably differentiated into multiple therapeutic cell types, production of
sufficient numbers of cells for clinical therapy is not yet typically feasible.
Establishing the bioprocessing capabilities required to manufacture cells and
tissues for commercial and clinical regenerative applications requires
international and interdisciplinary student researcher training. This IRES
program engages and trains students in applying their engineering and biological
expertise to this problem in a research location, Germany/Hannover Medical
School/LEBAO, which is at the forefront in this area. The overall goal is to
produce scientists and engineers with strong technical communication and
problem-solving skills and who have strong cultural competency and can work
effectively with international partners to further our ability to repair the
human body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project establishes an international
research and education partnership/program in process development for cell and
tissue biomanufacturing between Auburn University (AU) and Hannover Medical
School (MHH, Germany). This collaborative international research program will
train 15 undergraduate and graduate student researchers over the course of three
years in interrelated projects on process development for cell and tissue
biomanufacturing at the MHH in Germany. Students are engaged both in an
individual research project and in cohesive efforts of the integrated research
team. Undergraduate and graduate student researchers are recruited through
existing, strong biomanufacturing research ties with Alabama State University,
an HBCU, and the AU Engineering’s state-wide network on community colleges, in
addition to engaging AU students already working collaboratively with LEBAO
faculty. Reflective writing and ePortfolios are used to guide students learning
experiences. Students will gain subject expertise and practice technical
communication skills through regular individual projects presentations to the
IRES student cohort and PI, culminating a research poster presentation for
members of the host institute and their local home institutions. Through
formation of this diverse team of undergraduate and graduate researchers and
their engagement in an international learning and research environment, the
program facilitates acquisition of intercultural skills and greater global
competency. The objective of this IRES project is to provide students with a
high-quality international research experience, increase student retention and
diversity, advance students’ knowledge of culture and scientific education and
to promote their personal network development and carrier opportunities on a
trans-institutional and trans-Atlantic level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.