* 1952541
* IRES: Track I: Andean-Amazonian Watershed Experience:  Exploring Sustainability of Mountain Ecosystems in Ecuador (AWESOME)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 391,368.00

This IRES project is co-funded by Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) and Hydrologic Sciences programs (GEO/EAR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1: Nontechnical description. &lt;br/&gt;As our world
becomes increasingly globalized and interconnected, providing opportunities for
U.S. students to engage in international research and cultural exchange is
essential to creating a globally aware and skilled workforce capable of tackling
the challenges of the future. This is especially true for global issues related
to water, given that the scarcity of reliable and clean water supplies to
support growing human populations is one of the world’s most pressing
environmental and social issues today. This IRES supports an international
program for U.S. undergraduate and graduate students, the “Andean-Amazonian
Watershed Experience: Exploring Sustainability of Mountain Ecosystems in
Ecuador” (AWESOME). The program takes place in the Andean-Amazonian region of
Ecuador, which is currently experiencing a range of water-related issues along
with a diversity of policy responses aimed at finding solutions, and thus
provides an ideal landscape for engaging students in international research
experiences. AWESOME will support 18 U.S. students over three years to conduct
individual research projects over two months at two sites in the upper Andean-
Amazonian region: alpine paramo in the Paute watershed, and rainforest in the
Napo watershed. Students will be supported by faculty mentors from three
collaborating Ecuadorian institutions, the&lt;br/&gt;University of Cuenca, the
Regional University of Amazonia, and the University of Azuay, and UNH faculty
mentors from diverse disciplines. Two cohort experiences, an orientation
watershed tour and a synthesis workshop (10 days each), will introduce students
to water resource science and policy across diverse natural ecosystems and human
communities, foster their capacity for systems-thinking and interdisciplinary
analysis, and help them to conceptualize their own research as part of a complex
and interconnected world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
description. &lt;br/&gt;Addressing global water-related challenge requires that
future leaders have a strong understanding of the science of watershed
sustainability and complex socioecohydrological systems (SEHS), and the ability
to apply that understanding to developing effective policy solutions using
transdisciplinary approaches. The goals of AWESOME are to, (1) provide an
international research experience that enhances student understanding of the
complex dynamics of coupled SEHS in response to diverse global change drivers,
and (2) investigate science-based policies for improving watershed
sustainability. Student research projects will focus on six themes: 1)
hydrologic regulation–from leaves to watersheds; 2) biogeochemical cycles—water
quality and carbon storage; 3) biodiversity–biotic interactions and watershed
functions; 4) social dynamics andcommunity resilience; 5) economic-ecological
tradeoffs of water funds, and 6) water policy. Themes are unified under a
conceptual framework of watershed sustainability that incorporates the complex
interactions and feedbacks between the human and biophysical systems within
SEHS. This conceptual model is grounded in the theories of coupled natural-human
systems dynamics, watershed sustainability, community resilience, and
inter/transdisciplinary research, providing a strong intellectual framework for
guiding the AWESOME experience. Students will participate in interdisciplinary
and intercultural research teams and engage in transdisciplinary discussions
with diverse watershed actors, which will support their development and
refinement of mental models of watershed sustainability. By leveraging ongoing
research collaborations between Ecuadorian and U.S. faculty and partner academic
institutions, our research team will offer a unique and transformative
international research experience that will have an impact on students’ personal
and professional trajectories. AWESOME will result in an innovative model for
international research and experiential learning around SEHS and watershed
sustainability, with broad impacts on educational programs between the U.S.,
Ecuador, and beyond. Through established partnerships and interactions with
local watershed actors, research results and their implications for water
resource policy will be shared and discussed at a synthesis workshop and in
student reports. A seminar will be organized through the NH International
Seminar Series to highlight the AWESOME experience, with U.S. and Ecuadorian
students and researchers giving presentations and facilitating discussions,
which will be widely disseminated via a webinar. Pedagogical approaches will be
developed for using international research opportunities to enhance student
learning regarding issues of watershed sustainability while cultivating
academic, professional, and personal growth. Finally, this IRES will create
international research collaborations and exchange programs that will be
sustained beyond the tenure of the AWESOME program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.