* 1952090
* SCC-PG: StreetBit: A Bluetooth beacon based System for Alerting Distracted Pedestrians in Urban Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* David Schwebel, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2022
* USD 149,846.00

In 2017 alone, pedestrian injuries killed over 6400 Americans and injured
approximately 200,000. Alarmingly, pedestrian injury and death rates are
currently increasing, raising concern that some set of behavioral and
environmental factors has created increased injury risk. The skyrocketing use of
smartphones by both drivers and pedestrians is hypothesized as a factor. While
stakeholders have attended somewhat to distracted driving behavior, attention to
distracted pedestrian behavior has lagged. Research suggests distracted
pedestrians have markedly increased injury risk compared to undistracted
pedestrians. &lt;br/&gt;We posit interdisciplinary interventions using
technology to alter behavior will reduce distracted pedestrian behavior.
Leveraging previous work on smart mobile and Internet of Things technology, and
on distracted pedestrian behavior, we advocate for a mostly-passive injury
prevention intervention, StreetBit, whereby distracted pedestrians receive
smartphone-based warnings when they reach dangerous street crossings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project specifically proposes to (1) identify and
understand distracted pedestrian behavior through observational studies at
multiple Birmingham, Alabama locations; and (2) extend and evaluate StreetBit,
an app that receives signals from Bluetooth beacons placed at street corners,
causing smartphone screens to warn users to divert attention to street-crossing
rather than the distracting smartphone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish
these goals, we will partner with the City of Birmingham and University of
Alabama at Birmingham Police and Facilities Departments. Our work will prepare
us for an integrative proposal by establishing and strengthening partnerships
with community partners, performing observational studies to identify dangerous
intersections plus the extent and nature of distracted behavior at those
intersections, and augmenting and improving StreetBit for broad
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this planning project, we
will: (a) innovate, improve, and extend the StreetBit app; (b) establish, build
and strengthen community partnerships; and (c) gather detailed observational
data about distracted pedestrian behavior in multiple urban settings.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: We will achieve broader impacts by: (a) conducting
research to improve health through reduced pedestrian injuries and fatalities;
(b) training graduate and undergraduate students, including those from
underrepresented groups; (c) building capacity to serve the community, including
the large local African-American population; and (d) conducting
interdisciplinary collaborative basic scientific research with a clear pathway
to applied translation into practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.